* 1528458
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Electrophysiological responses to violations of verb argument structure in Spanish-English bilinguals' first language
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2017
* Loraine Obler, CUNY Graduate School University Center
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 05/31/2017
* USD 16,297.00

Bilingual speakers make up a large portion of the population, both in the U.S.
and abroad. Their two languages are not completely compartmentalized in the
bilingual brain and mind, but rather the languages interact in dynamic ways. It
is still unclear, however, whether learning a second language can affect one's
native language, and if so, to what extent. Previous research has shown that
certain grammatical constructions are strongly linked in the two languages of
bilingual speakers. What about grammatical constructions that exist in only one
of the two languages? Evidence that a construction which exists only in the
second-learned language can be used to interpret sentences in the native
language would provide strong support for an integrated grammatical system in
bilinguals and one that is affected by new experiences. This project takes
advantage of a grammatical difference between Spanish and English. In English,
manner-of-motion verbs such as 'run' and 'jump' can be used to describe an event
in which someone causes another person (or being) to carry out the action. For
example, in the sentence "The trainer jumped the horse over the fence," the
trainer causes the action to occur, but it is the horse that performs the action
of jumping. In Spanish, these same verbs ('correr' [run] and 'saltar' [jump])
cannot be used to describe causative actions; constructions of this type are
ungrammatical (and uninterpretable in a causative sense). The study will
investigate whether native Spanish speakers who have learned English can
interpret these ungrammatical sentences in Spanish due to their knowledge of
English. To investigate whether age of second language acquisition or language
dominance are important factors, early versus late acquirers of English will be
compared, as well as speakers who are more proficient in Spanish versus those
more proficient in English. Finally, to determine whether processing of these
structures occurs automatically or only after conscious application of
linguistic rules, the study includes electrophysiological measures (event-
related potentials) and judgments of sentence acceptability.