* 1528263
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Cultural and Social Mediation of Diagnostic Genetic Technologies
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2015,02/28/2018
* Sarah Miller-Fellows, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 02/28/2018
* USD 17,081.00

Anthropologists have long been interested in the study of pregnancy and birth.
While both are part of human biology and thus universal among human beings, how
they are understood and experienced turns out to vary considerably from culture
to culture across the globe. Findings from research into this phenomenon have
given rise to a number of new questions, such as whether or not being being a
member of one society rather than another affects how you experience your own
biology and identity as an individual person. The research supported by this
award will explore such questions through the lens of new genetic testing
technologies. Because they are focused on individual genetic identity in the
context of the genetic make-up of a society, genetic technologies afford a
powerful site in which to investigate the relationship between biology, culture,
and identity. Answering such questions is important not only for exploring the
limits of biological determinism but also for designing healthcare programs and
policies that serve the needs of culturally diverse populations.

The research will be undertaken by Case Western Reserve University doctoral
student, Sarah C. Miller-Fellows, under the supervision of Dr. Vanessa M.
Hildebrand. The researcher will focus on how a community of Amish in Ohio have
responded to their high burden of genetic disorders in the context of a distinct
culture. The Old Order Amish have a high burden of genetic disorders due to
founder effects. All 250,000 Amish alive today are descended from fewer than
4000 individuals, creating limited genetic diversity. Several Amish settlements,
including the Ohio community that will be the focus of this research, have
raised funds to create advanced centers for the study and treatment of the
genetic diseases that most affect them. These clinics have transformed the
prognosis of some of the more common Amish genetic disorders. Some diseases that
once resulted in severe disability and early death are now manageable illnesses
that do not seriously interfere with normal functioning. The researcher will
collect data using a mix of social science methods including interviews with
both Amish families and the healthcare providers who serve them; documenting the
history and development of the clinic; and conducting participant observation in
daily life and at community events. She also will conduct a series of repeated
interviews with a sample of 30 Amish mothers who represent a range of
experiences with genetic disorders. This will allow her to understand how both
culture and technology, in the context of genetic disorder potential, influence
the decisions that women and families make during pregnancy and birth. Findings
from this research will improve understanding of how to create successful,
community supported, culturally competent healthcare systems, how communities
respond to genetic disorders, how new technology is mediated by culture, and how
this particular technology influences reproductive behavior and concepts of
self.