* 1528966
* Prototyping a Scalable and Evolvable Urban Sensing Platform for Smart Cities
* CSE,CNS
* 06/15/2015,05/31/2018
* Charles Catlett, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 05/31/2018
* USD 149,978.00

The concept of a "smart city" is ubiquitous with data; however, most urban data
today lacks the spatial and temporal resolution to understand processes that
unfold on timescales of seconds or minutes, such as the dispersion of
pollutants. A better understanding of these dynamics can provide information to
residents, cyclists or pedestrians who may wish to use air quality data as they
navigate urban spaces. This project leverages existing street furniture,
integrating air quality and environmental sensors into commercial solar powered,
networked waste stations. Sensors embedded in BigBelly waste stations in Chicago
and other cities will collect data that will allow researchers to explore
critical questions that must be understood in order to begin to develop and
drive policies, measurement strategies, and predictive computational models
related to the feedback loop between traffic flow and air quality. The
partnership with BigBelly, with nearly 30,000 waste stations in place globally,
provides a channel through which sensors can be deployed in many
cities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project brings together computer science,
cyber-physical systems, distributed systems, and sensor systems expertise to
explore technical and societal challenges and opportunities of urban-scale
embedded systems in the public sphere, initially related to understanding and
ultimately managing urban air quality. Sensors embedded in BigBelly waste
stations in Chicago and other cities will explore (1) the spatial and temporal
dynamics of air quality in urban canyons, informing the sensor network
resolution needed to drive traffic change policies and to provide healthy air
quality routing information to cyclists and pedestrians; and (2) how urban
topology (natural and built) affects these dynamics and associated required
measurement resolutions. These are critical questions that must be understood in
order to begin to develop and drive policies, measurement strategies, and
predictive computational models related to the feedback loop between traffic
flow and air quality. Critical challenges include (1) power management with
respect to sensor sampling, in-situ processing, and transmission; (2) ensuring
data quality; and (3) providing data in forms that are actionable and
understandable to policy makers and the general public. All data will be
published in near-real time with web-based analysis tools for use by scientists,
educators, policy makers, and residents, and with application programming
interfaces (API's) for application development. By developing an open source,
readily deployed urban embedded systems infrastructure leveraging a widely
deployed commercial platform, the project can enable science, education, and
outreach in many cities, national parks, and educational institutions worldwide.