* 1528203
* III: Small: Technologies for Creating Explanatory and Exploratory Animations from Scientific Data
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2020
* Kwan-Liu Ma, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Hector Munoz-Avila
* 09/30/2020
* USD 507,996.00

Animation is a powerful, expressive medium for visual explanations and for
telling stories with data. Scientists make extensive use of animations to
explain their findings and to illustrate complex phenomena. By presenting time
as time, animation is one of the most natural ways to illustrate how objects
evolve and interact, and how they change in shape, size, position, and spatial
relationship to other objects over time. Both commercial and open-source
visualization tools offer a wealth of visualization techniques, enabling
scientists to explore their data and to generate individual images to capture
key aspects of the subject under study. However, most visualization packages
include very limited support for creating explanatory animations. As a result,
scientists who wish to use animations to illustrate their findings must spend
considerable amounts of time learning how to produce animations, often using
external software packages, or turn to professional animators or production
specialists for assistance. This research aims to develop adequate support for
composing animation content and constructing scientific video narratives, and
also extend explanatory animation to exploratory animation and study its
usability. This project will thus have a significant impact on both the
visualization researchers and users in a range of domains, including education.
The new concepts introduced in this project will inspire others to also develop
similar and even better support for scientific storytelling using visualization.
More users will benefit from such advanced visualization technologies leading to
high productivity in their work, or support educational and outreach activities.
The research team will continue collaboration with a science museum to seek the
opportunities to convert explanatory/exploratory animations into interactive
exhibits. Research will be integrated into teaching, in the form of special
topic courses, the establishment of internships with industry and national
laboratories, and the introduction of visualization technology to students from
other disciplines. The project will provide an environment for research training
for graduate and undergraduate students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
will introduce key technologies that can greatly increase scientists' ability to
make visualization animations and video narratives for storytelling. To
facilitate scientific narrations using animations, this project will design a
semi-automatic animation generation system tightly coupled with the interactive
data exploration and visualization process. That is to make the process of
animation and storytelling a first class citizen within exploratory data
visualization tools. This will allow the scientists to focus on gaining insight
from their data, and the visualization tools should assist them in assembling
findings together into a coherent story for presentation. This project will
design methods to choose views, camera paths, lighting, transitions, etc. for
users. Methods for users to interact with animations will also be designed,
instead of passively watching, to achieve new levels of inspection and
apprehension. Explorable images, a powerful and novel concept introduced for
realizing exploratory animation, enables multidimensional data exploration using
a medium comparable to a video in terms of compactness and simplicity. The task
of realizing these novel concepts and designs, and integrating them into
scientists' workflows and tools, will be challenging. This research will conduct
extensive evaluation of the animation support, with the participation of domain
scientists who are prospective users of the new technology. The lessons learned
in this project may establish guidelines for the effective use of animation in
explaining complex phenomena, and suggest a new framework for next-generation
visualization systems. The project web site
(http://vis.cs.ucdavis.edu/NSF/IIS1528203) will provide access to research
results, including data and prototype software.