* 1528719
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Debt, Uncertainty, and Economic Governance
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2018
* Matthew Hull, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 08/31/2018
* USD 16,481.00

Political conflict has been established to have adverse impact on debt repayment
practices and assessments of financial risk. Economic governance practices are
accordingly oriented to establishing a sense of normalcy in the face of fears
about financial and commercial uncertainty. Restoration of this confidence is
essential to creating the stable environments that serve American commercial
interests. This project, which trains a graduate student in how to conduct
rigorous, empirically-grounded scientific fieldwork, will explore the impact of
political conflict, uncertainty, and risk on lending and debt repayment
practices. This project asks how financial stability and investment can be
realized following a period of prolonged political turmoil, where credit and
debt relations suffered from a breakdown in trust and a fundamental uncertainty
about the future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;University of Michigan doctoral student
Nishita Trisal, supervised by Dr. Matthew Hull, will explore the rise of
financial risk and indebtedness in Indian-administered Kashmir. At a time marked
in the region by increased economic activity and an ostensible decline in
violence - what media and public discourse have dubbed a "return to normalcy"
following more than two decades of conflict - this research will investigate the
role of finance, banking, and economic development in the project of
"normalizing" Kashmir. Through eighteen months of ethnographic fieldwork in
Kashmir's capital Srinagar, specifically at the Jammu and Kashmir Bank, the
District Debt Court, as well as at the homes and businesses of borrowers and
defaulters, and in New Delhi, the research will track the life of financial
transactions in Kashmir, from economic policy decisions to the litigation of
bank default. It will do so by following the material artifacts that circulate
within these sites, from loan applications and repayment notices to electronic
banking systems. The research questions include: 1) How has the ongoing
political conflict, and the uncertainties and risks it has produced, transformed
Kashmiris' engagement with economic and legal practices? 2) What does studying
sites of banking, finance, and default litigation - and the technologies that
mediate them - reveal about how Kashmiris experience and conceptualize trust,
risk, as well as the region's financial future and its sovereignty? 3) In what
ways do the state, the judicial system, and the financial policy sector in
Kashmir and in India invest in the political and economic "normalization" of
Kashmir? The research will draw upon social science methods of participant
observation, interviews, and linguistic analysis. It will enhance the public
understanding of the global financial system, as experienced by borrowers,
defaulters, loan officers, and financial policy experts. It will also produce a
more robust understanding of financial risk through ethnographic analysis,
thereby seeking to contribute to policy discussions aimed at ameliorating the
vulnerability of politically and financially disenfranchised groups.