* 1528704
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: An Anthropology of Community Politics in Indigenous Communities
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2015,12/31/2016
* Fred Myers, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 12/31/2016
* USD 12,361.00

Scientific work on indigenous communities has established a clear linkage
between traditional moral values and the claims for sovereign political
organization. What scholars know less about is how indigenous social
organizations develop in culturally diverse ways, and what sovereignty means,
culturally and morally, within an indigenous context. This project, which trains
a graduate student in how to conduct rigorous empirically-grounded scientific
fieldwork, seeks to understand the role of cultural and moral values in
organizational development. As a project which employs a collaborative
ethnographic approach, engaging Navajo in the gathering and archiving of data,
the project would also broaden the participation of an underrepresented group in
the sciences.

Teresa Montoya, under the supervision of Dr. Fred Myers of the New York
University will conduct a 15-month ethnographic project exploring community
political life on the Navajo Nation in two neighboring settlements: Pine
Springs, Arizona (Oak Springs Chapter) and Sanders, Arizona (Nahata Dziil
Chapter). Specifically, this research examines the correlation between political
sovereignty - a legal category established through federal treaty obligations
and subsequent acts of legislation - and the cultural ideal of K'e, a Navajo
term that emphasizes the moral value of kinship and social organization. Based
on preliminary research observing and analyzing local meetings, the researcher
hypothesizes that in each location, community members draw upon both cultural
and political discourses to support and sustain their organizational efforts. An
investigation of the differential employment of these discourses utilizing
methods of participant observation, focus groups, and semi-structured interviews
allows for a comparative analysis of contemporary Navajo community action. This
project brings together insights from current ethnographies addressing kinship
and relatedness, critical Indigenous approaches to sovereignty and Navajo
subjectivity, and the anthropology of representational politics. Taken together
this literature informs the hypothesis that neither the cultural nor the
political frame has adequately helped social scientists understand contemporary
Navajo community organization. The researcher hypothesizes that community
political activity is not limited to official institutional structures and that
cultural understandings of K'e cannot be isolated from political ambitions.
Methods include the use of interviews, focus groups, and participant observation
in the Navajo communities of Pine Springs and Nahata Dziil, as well as targeted
archival research and collaborative ethnographic methods with local community
organizations. By examining the confluence of social and political discourses of
relatedness in everyday Navajo lives, this project offers three major
contributions to the discipline of anthropology: (1) it reframes what is often
presumed to be an oppositional relationship between the expression of so-called
traditional Indigenous values and enactment of political sovereignties; (2) it
examines how Navajo people are reworking idioms of relatedness not to return to
a prior stable past but to creatively engage with and perhaps challenge
unsustainable processes of extraction that target their bodies, histories, and
communities; and (3) it explores new developments in Indian Country around the
increasingly polysemic and multifarious expressions of sovereignty in tribal and
community politics.