* 1528330
* SBP: RUI: Collaborative Research: The Identity Pathways Project - A Longitudinal Study of Narrative Identity Processes, Contexts, and Outcomes
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2022
* Benjamin Le, Haverford College
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 07/31/2022
* USD 254,280.00

What differentiates the individuals from under-represented backgrounds who
persist in STEM-related educational pathways in college from those who opt out?
The proposed research examines whether identity development is key to
understanding these educational and developmental trajectories. Although
research has shown that the establishment of a clear and positive identity
during emerging adulthood is associated with a variety of optimal outcomes, many
questions remain regarding how identity is formed, particularly with regard to
developing a positive science identity and a sense of belonging with one's STEM
field. The overarching goal of the current project is to better understand how
identity forms during college by applying a narrative approach, in which
identity is understood as developing through a subjective process of integrating
life experiences into a personal and self-defining story. Specifically, the
unique vantage point of narratives will be used to better understand why some
students -- especially women, underrepresented minorities, and those with
disadvantaged backgrounds -- disengage from pursuing STEM-related careers while
others persist. By combining objective markers (e.g., gender, ethnicity, SES,
educational background) with coded narratives that emerge in response to
relevant experiences (e.g., in the science classroom), this study may contribute
to solutions for the persistent lack of diversity in the sciences. More broadly,
by examining how students engage in meaning-making about the critical
transitions (e.g., leaving home, choosing a major) and contextualized
experiences (e.g., academic, social, romantic) that are central to college life,
the proposed research will identify the identity pathways that contribute to
increases over time in other important outcomes, including maturity, happiness,
and clarity of career goals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Identity Pathways Project
is a five-year, two-campus longitudinal study that utilizes a quantitative
narrative approach. The longitudinal design involves three surveys annually for
four years and a final survey one year after graduation. The surveys will
include repeated assessments of both narratives (transition to college, academic
and relational high and low points, experiences related to major choice and
future career) and standard scales of the outcomes of interest. With this
design, the proposed research will be able to test the extent to which identity
processes operate as mechanisms of developmental change, and more specifically,
whether narratives reflecting a positive science identity are a key factor in
persistence along a STEM-related career path. The two-campus design, which
includes a private liberal arts college and a state university, increases the
demographic diversity and allows for a more inclusive examination of identity
development, especially as it pertains to career identity and STEM
participation. The narrative approach to career identity has important
implications for designing career counseling programs, especially those
promoting STEM-related career paths among women and minorities.