* 1528539
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: A multi-modal account of turn-taking strategies
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2018
* Erin Franklin, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 06/30/2018
* USD 17,772.00

Interactional linguistics reflects a growing trend in linguistics for data and
analyses gathered from everyday natural speech. Rather than investigating
artificial utterances, linguists today are analyzing how language occurs in
real-world situations, complete with all the disfluencies that this entails. A
casual observation of any conversation quickly reveals that speakers easily
alternate from one to the other with relatively few overlaps or pauses. This
indicates an underlying system for determining how these transitions occur.
While a great deal of research has been done with English data, there is
relatively little that incorporates non-verbal components, which have been shown
to have a significant effect on conversation structure. There is even less data
from other languages. Even within varieties of English, conversation features
can vary enough to cause miscommunication; the lack of research on other
languages is problematic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order to address this lack of
data in regards to Russian, this dissertation research project examines the
strategies, both verbal and gestural, that speakers of contemporary standard
Russian employ in order to negotiate a speaking turn in the course of a
conversation. This is accomplished by analyzing both elicited and natural
conversations of monolingual native speakers and observing physical sound
properties which accompany turn-taking attempts, the syntactic structures
employed, and relevant non-verbal behavior including gaze, gestures, including
nods, posture shift, and gesticulations in order to answer the question: how do
speakers employ syntax, prosody, and gesture to negotiate turn-taking in
Russian? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While the analysis focuses on the particular
mechanisms of exchanging turns, there are a variety of broader applications for
the information this project is gathering. As the first multimodal account of
Russian conversation structure, the results will help advanced learners of
Russian and those members of the diplomatic and national security community who
are required to deal extensively with the Russian language or with English-
speaking Russians. By identifying the relevant conversation structures and
strategies for negotiating turns, this project will help English speakers
understand how and when Russians might be using or expecting a different method
of navigating conversation. In addition, analyzed data and the publicly
available corpus will provide a wealth of new avenues for research, including
automated speech generation and pattern recognition. Given the importance of
conversation as a unit of interaction and Russian's status as a global language,
the potential for other applications are numerous.