* 1528070
* NSFSaTC-BSF: TWC: Small: Using Individual Differences to Personalize Security Mitigations
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Serge Egelman, International Computer Science Institute
* Standard Grant
* Shannon Beck
* 08/31/2019
* USD 515,732.00

Over the past decade, people have realized that failure to account for human
factors has resulted in many software security problems. Yet, when software does
feature user-centric design, it takes into account average user behavior rather
than catering to the individual. Thus, systems designers have gone from
designing for security experts to now appealing to the least common denominator.
The goal of this project is to examine the ways in which security mitigations
can be tailored to individuals, and how this is likely to result in even greater
security compliance than what has been previously achieved through user-centric
design. Specifically, this research focuses on demonstrating how security
mitigations can be tailored to individuals through indirect measurements and
inferences of individual differences. This research could help security and
privacy engineers develop more personalized and salient means to alert users to
security and privacy risks, which could increase users' compliance with security
messaging and therefore reduce threats to users and their
organizations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The challenge to personalizing security
mitigations is to infer the individual differences between users that are
predictive of whether they are likely to respond more favorably to one
mitigation design over another. This approach relies on using well-studied
individual differences in the psychology and decision-making literature that are
predictive of compliance to computer security mitigations. Building on extensive
work on choice architecture and "nudges," this research aims to personalize
security mitigations to specific user traits in order to be able to dynamically
present each user with the security "nudge" that would be most effective for
her. For example, if the target user measures high on decision-making
"dependence" (i.e., looking to others for advice), the system might state the
number of experts who selected the recommended option. Specifically, the
researchers focus on framing the following types of security mitigations based
on users' psychometric traits: smartphone/tablet lock screen enrollment,
password creation instructions, web browser warnings, and software update
notices. Their goal is to implement systems that infer the ways in which users
are likely to respond to particular security mitigation designs and then tailor
security environments accordingly.