* 1528280
* MRI: Acquisition of a 500 MHz NMR Spectrometer to Enhance Undergraduate Research at Wellesley College
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Nancy Kolodny, Wellesley College
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 08/31/2018
* USD 555,000.00

This award from the Major Research Instrumentation Program (MRI) as well as
additional support from the Chemistry Research Instrumentation (CRIF) and the
Chemical Synthesis (SYN) Programs funds the acquisition of a 500 MHz NMR
spectrometer by Wellesley College. Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) spectroscopy
is one of the most powerful tools available to chemists for the elucidation of
the structure of molecules. It is used to identify unknown substances, to
characterize specific arrangements of atoms within molecules, and to study the
dynamics of interactions between molecules in solution or in the solid state.
Access to state-of-the-art NMR spectrometers is essential to chemists who are
carrying out modern research. This instrument is used in research on small
organic molecules with potential anti-cancer and anti-tubercular properties,
mutation of DNA oligonucleotides, and modified nanoparticles for imaging and
medicinal usages. This spectrometer is also an integral component in training
female undergraduate students. It is used by the students in courses and in
their research projects. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal is aimed at
enhancing research and education at all levels, especially in areas such as: (a)
measuring equilibrium constants for base pair opening in DNA duplexes containing
an abasic site lesion; (b) characterizing functionalization and magnetic
properties of multipurpose nanoparticles; (c) determining the structure of novel
coumarin derivatives with anti-tumor properties; (d) characterizing diverse
pyrazolines as potential antitubercular agents; (e) synthesizing photoreactive
small molecules to aid in the understanding of a GCPR transmembrane protein
structure; and (f) using NOE methods to characterize the regiochemistry of
N-substituted pyrazoles.