* 1528731
* Risk Modeling and Cyber Defense Exercise for Critical Infrastructures Security
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2017
* Douglas Jacobson, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 06/30/2017
* USD 149,999.00

Many critical infrastructures, such as the power grid, are complex cyber
physical systems (CPS). Protecting these systems against cyber-attacks is of
paramount importance to national security and economic well-being. Risk
assessment considering cyber-attacks against critical infrastructures is not
well understood due to ever growing, dynamic threat landscape coupled with
complex cyber-physical interactions in these systems. In addition, there is a
compelling need to create environments in which realistic attack-defense
experiments (including risk assessment and risk mitigation) and training
exercises can be safely conducted to advance the science and workforce
development in this important area of national need.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project has two key goals: (1) the short-term goal is to design, develop, and
demonstrate a cyber defense exercise for improving the security of CPS systems
in alignment with the NIST/US Ignite Global Cities Team Challenge; and (2) the
long-term goal is to explore fundamental models and algorithms for cyber risk
assessment and mitigation. The project makes synergistic federation of three
existing security testbeds hosted at Iowa State University and the University of
Southern California to create a realistic environment for conducting CPS
security experimentation and security preparedness and training exercise, like
the North American Reliability Corporation (NERC) GridEx. The intellectual merit
of the project lies in two key contributions: (i) realistic experimentations on
CPS security testbed federation, and (ii) the development of a novel methodology
for cyber risk modeling of CPS systems. The broader impacts of the project lie
in developing realistic attack-defense scenarios and learning/training modules
that enable academic researchers, students, and industry practitioners to
systematically understand, analyze, and improve the security and resiliency of
critical infrastructures.