* 1528400
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Political and Economic Impacts of Land Registration and Titling Efforts
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2015,02/28/2017
* Deborah Poole, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 02/28/2017
* USD 24,035.00

Land grabs, the process through which formerly public assets are privatized an
acquired, particularly in rural areas, have had significant impacts in areas of
the world in which the U.S. has a strategic economic and political interest.
Scientific research has explored the motivations for such speculative
investments at the government level, but there has been significantly less focus
on the process through which property is formalized in land registration and
titling practices. This project, which trains a graduate in methods of rigorous,
empirically-grounded scientific fieldwork, examines a context historically
impacted by varied, and sometimes competing, land registration and titling
practices. In addition to providing funding for the training of a graduate
student in methods of rigorous, empirically-grounded scientific fieldwork,
findings from this case study would be developed and shared with international
scholars and organizations, thereby increasing international scientific
cooperation.

Johns Hopkins University doctoral student Paul Kohlbry, with the direction of
Dr. Deborah Poole, will undertake an ethnographic and historical study of land
registration efforts in the West Bank. He will explore the ways in which
Jordanian, Israeli and Palestinian Authority land registration projects have
instituted private property and transformed political and economic life in rural
areas. This research relies on data from the Jordanian archives, oral histories
in Palestinian villages, interviews with bureaucrats, lawyers, businessmen and
land registration personnel, and observation of an ongoing land registration
project. His hypothesis is that Jordanian and Israeli land registration made
private property central to nationalist political conflicts which revolved
around the ownership of agricultural land. However, the long decline of
agricultural production in Palestine over the past decades has lessened
agriculture's economic and political significance. The research contributes to
understanding how current land titling efforts by the Palestinian Authority
unfold in the context with local and national conflicts around the sale of
agricultural land and transform the relationship between the Palestinian
government and its subjects and between Israelis and Palestinians. By giving
careful attention to the various processes that constitute land registration,
his research seeks to expand current social science literature on land
privatization and agrarian change. This study also deepens our understanding of
Palestine and the Middle East and adopts a methodology that focuses on economic,
rather than cultural or religious factors. Finally, it sheds new light on the
mundane, everyday legal, social and technical aspects of the Israel-Palestine
conflict that are often missed by scholars and policy makers.