* 1528110
* NRI: Development of Autonomous Sub-Gram Flapping-Wing Artificial Flyers Using Novel Combustion-Driven SMA-Based Actuators
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Paul Ronney, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Irina Dolinskaya
* 08/31/2020
* USD 750,000.00

This project addresses power and control questions central to achieving
maneuverable, autonomous, untethered, insect-scale, flying robots. The amount of
energy stored per unit mass in even the best small batteries is low enough that
flight times would be limited to at most a few minutes. Furthermore, when the
high rate at which the battery must supply energy is considered, it is
questionable whether a winged microrobot could even lift its own weight.
Instead, this project emulates flying insects in nature, which use animal fat as
fuel, with an energy density about 100 times greater than state-of-the-art
batteries. Accordingly, this project will demonstrate liquid-fuel catalytic
combustion engines expected to be capable of over 90 minutes of powered flight.
This result will be achieved through innovative integrated modeling, analysis,
design, fabrication, and control of insect-scale aerodynamics, combustion, and
flight. Broader impacts will arise from application of insect-scale flying
robots to, for example, artificial pollination, search-and-rescue operations,
and field biological research. Indirectly, this project will produce new methods
for energy conversion, novel algorithms for control synthesis, and fabrication
techniques, applicable to a wide gamut of wheeled, winged, and legged
microrobots.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To accomplish the project goals, the research
advances knowledge in three specific areas: (i) biologically inspired design and
fabrication of aerodynamically efficient flapping-wing microflyers, where
principles from nature are translated into robotic designs, employing a systems-
and-control conceptual framework. In this framework, the interaction between
aerodynamics, power, design, and controls is analyzed using tools such as input-
output modeling and system identification; (ii) mechanical actuation using fuel-
powered shape-memory-alloys-based mechanisms, where flameless catalytic
combustion generates the heat required to induce material phase transitions,
necessary for the production of mechanical work; (iii) control, which emerges
naturally from the first two areas as new aerodynamically efficient designs
require the invention of novel control strategies for stable flight and new
techniques for controller synthesis. Similarly, new actuation technologies
require the invention of new low-level, physically implementable controllers. In
this case, the dynamics of the combustion-driven actuators and flapping
mechanisms are nonlinear and time-varying, reason for which a significant part
of the research effort is dedicated to the development and real-time
implementation of novel robustly stable nonlinear and adaptive controllers.