* 1528799
* CPS-EAGER- Experiments with Smart City Hubs: Integration Platform for Human Cyber-Physical Systems In Smart Cities
* CSE,CNS
* 06/15/2015,12/31/2017
* Sandeep Neema, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 12/31/2017
* USD 197,556.00

The objective of this research is to understand the complexities associated with
integration between humans and cyber-physical systems (CPS) at large scales. For
this purpose, the team will develop and demonstrate the application of Smart
City Hubs focusing on intelligent transportation services in urban settings.
Ultimately, this project will produce innovative tools and techniques to
configure and deploy large-scale scale experiments enabling the study of how
humans affect the control loops in large CPS such as smart cities. This work
covers several design concerns that are specific to human-CPS such as human
computer interfaces, decision support systems and incentives engineering to keep
humans engaged with the system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technology base will
include a novel integration platform for allowing (1) integration of spatially
and temporally distributed sensor streams; (2) integration of simulation-based
decision support systems, (3) development and execution of experiments to
understand how advanced decision support tools combined with incentive
mechanisms improve the utilization of the transportation infrastructure and user
experience. A key aspect of this research will be development of data-driven
rider models that can be subsequently used by city engineers for planning
purposes. The proposed system will enable a new generation of human-CPS systems
where sensing, wireless communication, and data-driven predictive analytics is
combined with human decision-making and human-driven actuation (driving and
physical infrastructure utilization) to form a control
loop.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Smart City Hub provides a generic platform for a
number of other services beyond traffic and public transportation, including
maps and way finding, municipal communication, emergency management and others.
The tools that will be developed will allow researchers and practitioners to
more quickly prototype, deploy and experiment with these CPS. To ensure these
benefits, the research team will make its research infrastructure freely
available as an open-source project. It will also develop educational materials
focused on modeling, prototyping and evaluating these applications at scale. In
addition, the studies the team will perform will provide new data and new
scientific understanding of large-scale human interaction with CPS, which it
expects will yield long-term benefits in the design and analysis of such
applications.