* 1528496
* Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement Grant: Local Media and Language Revitalization
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2017
* Georgia Ennis, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 07/31/2017
* USD 25,200.00

The diversity of human languages is a testament to the ingenuity and
intellectual complexity of our species. Research throughout the world reveals
that significant knowledge about how the world works, including unique and often
valuable knowledge about the natural environment, is encoded differently in
different languages. The loss of a language, then, is a fundamental loss not
only to the people who speak that language but also to humanity's intellectual
repertoire. Yet, it is widely recognized that in the United States, as well as
worldwide, many languages are endangered. By most estimates, at least half of
the world's approximately 6,000 languages will cease to be spoken by 2100.
Although mass media have frequently been blamed for aggravating language loss,
local communities have begun to develop their own radio and television
programming as a grassroots means to increase the use of endangered languages.
Understanding the effects of these grassroots projects to save endangered
languages is crucial for creating context-sensitive programs and policies that
will protect humanity's collective knowledge. The research funded by this award
will focus on one such grassroots project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;University of
Michigan doctoral student Georgia Ennis, under the supervision of Dr. Bruce
Mannheim, will conduct research among the lowland Quichua in the Ecuadorian
Amazon, where irreplaceable knowledge about the local ecosystem is threatened by
ongoing language shift towards Spanish. She will focus on grassroots language
revitalization programs being carried out by Amazonian Quichua through community
radio stations. This setting is particularly appropriate for the research due to
well-established community radio infrastructure in the region, which is now
being consciously mobilized to increase the use of lowland Quichua. Studying
radio may be especially productive, as it remains one of the most widespread,
easy to use, and inexpensive media technologies. The investigator will assess
whether radio production and broadcasting in an endangered language help
maintain or even increase its use among listeners. She will also explore how
media production may alter the speech of listeners and ultimately the language
itself. The investigator will conduct long-term research at local radio stations
and in Quichua communities in order to track the effects of radio media
production and reception on language use. Data will be collected through
multiple social science methods including surveys and observation of language
use, habits of media consumption, and linguistic attitudes and beliefs. She will
also collect and archive samples of language use by listeners and non-listeners
for comparative analysis. The results of this research will provide insights
into the viability of media production as a strategy for revitalization of
endangered languages. Findings will also contribute to theories of how and why
languages change.