* 1528576
* Determining hillslope-scale material strength from seismically-triggered landslide events
* GEO,EAR
* 06/15/2015,05/31/2019
* Marin Clark, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Richard Yuretich
* 05/31/2019
* USD 294,470.00

A non-technical description of the project, which explains the project's
significance and importance&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Landslides are a continual
threat in many mountainous regions of the world and the danger is increased in
areas prone to large earthquakes. In spite of this association, knowledge
concerning the extent to which seismic events can trigger landslides is
rudimentary. This project will examine data from the 1994 Northridge, California
earthquake in order to evaluate how lithology, tectonics, rock strength, and
fracture density influence the susceptibility of hillslopes to landslides. Data
will be entered into a model that was developed as a pilot test for the 2008
Wenchuan earthquake in China. The more detailed and field-checked results from
the California earthquake will permit refinement of the model and engender a
wider applicability for hazard assessments in other areas. In particular, the
data will be incorporated into a program of the U.S. Geological Survey, which is
developing an automated system that produces estimates of impact and losses for
earthquakes around the world for emergency response, government and aid
agencies, and the media. Advances resulting from this project will aid in their
implementation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A technical description of the
project&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Natural hillslope strength, which is a major
controlling factor for landscape evolution and hazard assessment, is usually
quite different than measurements of rock strength on hand-sized samples done in
the laboratory. Laboratory tests are performed on intact rock, yet it is
fracture density, aperture, and size that determine hillslope-scale rock
strength. The strength of hillslopes can be quantified by using large seismic
events in high relief settings, where an earthquake causes strong ground motion
(peak ground acceleration) and a quantifiable landscape response (landsliding).
This project assesses slope stability as a function of landslide thickness and
shear-strength properties (cohesion and internal angle of friction) for a
particular seismic event using modeled peak ground acceleration. The research
focuses on landslides caused by the 1994 magnitude 6.7 Northridge earthquake,
where it is hypothesized that tectonic deformation causes a strength reduction
of hillslopes that can be isolated from lithologic and climatic factors. The
project will integrate modeling and fieldwork to test this hypothesis and the
results will improve knowledge of tectonic processes as a governor of rock
weakening. The findings are relevant to earth surface processes, landscape
evolution, tectonics, and natural-hazard assessment.