* 1528061
* CHS: Small: Software to Support Diverse Problem Solvers
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2020
* Margaret Burnett, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 09/30/2020
* USD 532,000.00

Even though females are using computers and the Internet at rates similar to
males, they hold only 26% of IT professional positions. Teenage girls are five
times less likely than males to consider a technology-related future, and the
number of first-year undergraduate women interested in majoring in computer
science declined by 64% between 2000 and 2012. Alarmed by these statistics, the
PI notes that evidence suggests many common software features were inadvertently
designed around the way males tend to work, and actually undermine many females'
problem-solving because of the many differences in the ways females and males
tend to approach and solve problems, including for example their motivations for
using software, their information processing styles, their computer self-
efficacy, their attitudes toward risk, and their willingness to tinker. In this
project the PI will exploit findings from gender research to develop and test,
with the help of major industrial partners including IBM, Microsoft, Motorola
and other industry members of the National Center for Women and Information
Technology (NCWIT), a new methodology for software development that she hopes
can make a real difference to the design of future systems so that females in
technical problem-solving professions, such as computer science and other STEM
fields, will gain access to software that no longer drains their capabilities
but rather supports and advances them. If successful this research will, for the
first time, enable software producers to find and remove subtle signposts in
their systems that suggest "no girls allowed" with all the broad societal and
workforce impacts that implies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To these ends, and
especially focusing on problem-solving software, the PI will create a theory-
based and empirically informed "gender lens" called GenderMaP (from GenderHCI
Cognitive Walkthrough + Magnifying Persona) that will enable software designers
and producers, even without a background in gender research, to identify ways in
which their products may not be gender-inclusive. The resulting method will
leverage theoretical and empirical gender difference foundations on motivation,
computer self-efficacy, information processing styles, risk aversion, and
willingness to tinker. The PI will investigate whether such a method can make a
real difference to software's gender inclusiveness, by iteratively informing and
empirically evaluating the method through at least 6 field studies with her
industrial partners, and she will supplement the field studies with small-scale
interviews, diary-like studies, and lab pilots. The investigation will be guided
by, and contribute findings for, four research questions. RQ1 considers
obstacles and remedies to adopting the method. RQ2 investigates how the gendered
personas component of the method can be most effective in real use in industry,
and how the personas interact with organizational needs and even stereotype
bias. RQ3 investigates validity and other aspects of the overall value pay-off
that the industrial partners gain from the method. Finally, RQ4 investigates the
method's generality.