* 1528298
* INSPIRE: A CUAHSI-NCAR Collaboration to Improve Hydrologic Process Representation in Weather, Climate and Earth System Models
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2020
* Richard Hooper, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Laura Lautz
* 07/31/2020
* USD 999,775.00

This INSPIRE project is jointly funded by the (a) Office of Integrative
Activities, (b) Hydrologic Sciences Program in the Earth Sciences Division and
the (c) Physical and Dynamical Meteorology and (d) Climate and Large Scale
Dynamics Programs in Atmospheric and Geospace Sciences Division of the
Geosciences Directorate. The project will advance our knowledge of the
hydrologic cycle (i.e., how water is stored in and moves across the land, in the
soils and plants, in rivers, lakes and wetlands, and in underground aquifers) on
a continental scale. Although hydrologists have quantified local watersheds for
a century, this process data/knowledge has not been fully integrated into
continental scale water cycle models and Earth system models. This project will
bring together the hydrologists (who quantify hydrologic processes and
theories), and modelers (who develop predictive models for large-scale water
cycle research), to assess the most critical physics, and how to best describe
them mathematically in large-scale models. The improved model capability will
allow us to explore questions such as: Will there be an adequate quantity and
distribution of freshwater to meet the growing demands of food, energy and water
security? How will a changing world (land use change, climate variability, sea-
level, population change) affect, and be affected by, the volumes and flows of
water between the atmosphere and soils, streams, lakes, wetlands, and aquifers?
Knowing how much water is available where and when, and how that will change in
the future, constitutes one of society's most basic scientific
quests.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will (1) create a Hydrology Process
Team (HPT) bringing together field hydrologists, theoreticians, process-scale
(e.g., hillslope, channel reach) modelers, and global-scale model developers.
The team will integrate across communities, disciplines, and scales to advance
water cycle science of common interest. The project will convene representatives
of the hydrologic and the atmospheric sciences communities to develop state-of-
science process syntheses and a framework for scaling from columns to large
model grids and meshes, with recommendations for best ways to represent them in
large-scale models. (2) These concepts will be implemented into the Community
Land Model (CLM) to compare these new CLM water cycle capabilities with
observations from the networks of research sites across the country supported by
e.g. USDA, USGS, USFS, NOAA, NASA and NSF. The comparisons will especially focus
on below-ground water stores and fluxes neglected in earlier model tests. The
new process implementation and model evaluation tasks will be guided by the
synthesis team of scientists and implemented by a postdoctoral research
associate and a software engineer. (3) The project will also conduct a series of
model simulations over North America to evaluate new model capabilities derived
from this project, to address the water cycle and its controls at various
resolutions and to define knowledge gaps for future improvement. Key evaluation
criteria will include: how does the new model represent multi-scale stores and
fluxes on the continent, and can it better predict droughts and floods at large
river basin and national levels? How do the new formulations for water stores
and fluxes on land improve the simulation of ecosystem response to environmental
stress and the associated carbon fluxes? How do they improve the simulation of
latent and sensible heat fluxes and hence advance understanding of land-
atmosphere interactions at weather and climate scales? How do they improve the
simulations of snowpack and permafrost dynamics and advance our capabilities to
predict their responses to a warming climate? How do they improve the
simulations of riverine fluxes from the continents to the ocean basins
influencing thermohaline circulation and coastal ecosystem dynamics? A
comprehensive model evaluation framework will be developed to gage model
performance in the Earth System context and document model advances, the latter
slated to be included in the release of CLM version 6 for participation of the
next IPCC projections. (4) A final synthesis meeting will analyze model
deficiencies and causes, and make recommendations for future modeling and
observation priorities. A series of synthesis documents will be produced which
will serve as historic benchmarks of land model development. This project is
expected to achieve significant breakthroughs in large-scale water cycle
research and capacity building, and will establish a mechanism for cross-
community collaboration to advance our knowledge of the water cycle.