* 1528486
* Language Variation Within and Across Speakers: Special Session at the 2016 CUNY Conference on Human Sentence Processing
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2015,12/31/2016
* Edith Kaan, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* William Badecker
* 12/31/2016
* USD 33,033.00

Language variation is a very prominent phenomenon in society. The growing social
and geographical mobility of the world's population had led to an increasing
number of bilinguals and non-native speakers in the US, and subsequently, to an
increased presence and public awareness of different languages, accents, and
registers within communities and the media. In spite of these developments,
research on how humans learn, speak, and understand language has been primarily
concerned with monolingual speakers of a standard language variety. Language
processing models of bilinguals, heritage speakers (in particular, children of
immigrants), and second-language learners have been primarily defined as being
different from the monolingual native, "invariant" case. This however ignores
the fact that speakers who identify as monolingual also need to deal with
language variation on a daily basis, and that a majority of the world's
population is bilingual. Given the importance and ubiquity of language
variation, this phenomenon can therefore no longer be ignored in language
processing research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Language variation is a challenge for
language acquisition and processing models. How do listeners realize that
different utterances are different ways of saying the same thing, rather than
different things? How do speakers/listeners determine which option is more
appropriate or relevant given the context and whom they are talking to? The aim
of the special session of the 2016 CUNY conference is to increase awareness
regarding language variation in general, and its importance for research on
language learning and processing more specifically, by giving an overview of the
state-of-the-art research on language variation, particularly in bilinguals.
Invited speakers will be asked to address the challenges of language variation
for language acquisition and processing, and to provide answers as to how
language variation can be taken into account. The ultimate goal is to create a
more realistic and representative picture of how the human mind represents,
processes and acquires language. This will help provide critical empirical
findings relevant for improving language education, techniques to diagnose and
treat language impairment, and expand research and processing models to
underrepresented groups in the language sciences.