* 1528344
* The Incorporation of Religious Minorities in Canada and the United States
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2020
* Prema Kurien, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 06/30/2020
* USD 198,199.00

SES-1528344&lt;br/&gt;Prema Kurien&lt;br/&gt;Syracuse
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research aims to uncover the factors that
influence the form that mobilization takes, whether it is "ethnic," "racial," or
"religious." It examines how different opportunity structures (both national and
local) and differences in the characteristics of the groups shape how they frame
their grievances and mobilize. Focusing on Hindu and Sikh communities and
advocacy organizations serving these groups in Toronto, Vancouver, New York/New
Jersey, and northern California, this project is being conducted both through
interviews and analysis of available information about the organizations. The PI
will complete interviews with community activists, other members who are closely
involved with the community, and with academic experts. The PI will also conduct
an analysis of newspaper and media articles, materials produced by the advocacy
organizations, and materials discussing differences in opportunity structures
and the characteristics of the two groups in North America. This research will
contribute to a better understanding of why diasporic groups in different
countries might or might not support particular types of long-distance
nationalism. Ethnic nationalism and inter-group tensions can also lead to
violence in host countries and is of concern to Western states, as well. More
broadly, this project will reveal the factors shaping the very different
patterns of civic activism and integration of immigrant groups from religious
minority backgrounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project contributes
to civic incorporation and social movement theories by examining the reasons for
the differential mobilization of two important religious minority groups--
individuals of Hindu and Sikh background. Hindus and Sikhs have broadly similar
patterns of migration to the U.S. and Canada and have close ties with their
compatriots across the border, but manifest divergent political activism
profiles both within and between the two countries. Dominant paradigms of social
incorporation emphasize the opportunity structure of the host country or the
characteristics of groups in explaining differences in involvement. However,
neither paradigm can satisfactorily explain both inter-country differences
between the mobilization of varying religious groups in Canada and the United
States and the intra-country differences between the public visibility and
activism of the two groups. This research aims to uncover the factors that
influence the form that mobilization takes. The study of "negative cases" (the
relative lack of mobilization of Hindus in Canada and Sikhs and Sri Lankan
Tamils in the U.S.) will help to clarify the relationships between the different
factors shaping civic involvement and integration. Some scholars have argued
that there has been a shift in group mobilization patterns over time from class,
to race/ethnicity, to religion, based on research on Muslims in Europe. This
project demonstrates, however, that the global resurgence of religion does not
necessarily mean that individuals from the same religious background with group-
based grievances will mobilize around a public religious identity. The study
examines how different political opportunity structures (both national and
local) and differences in the characteristics of the groups shape how they frame
their grievances and mobilize.