* 1528174
* AF: Small: Algorithms: approximate, combinatorial, and continuous.
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2018
* Satish Rao, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 07/31/2018
* USD 450,000.00

This project will attempt to improve recent breakthroughs in the area of linear
programming. Linear programming is a central tool for optimization that is used
in logistics, factory planning, flight scheduling, and numerous other tasks.
Recently, theorical computer scientists have developed algorithms for linear
programming with provably better performance than previously known. These
algorithms rely on new understanding of basic mathematical objects such as
vectors and measures of their length, and the behavior of functions on such
vectors; the vectors could correspond, for example, to how many flights are
scheduled to leave from a particular airport in a flight scheduling problem. The
project will critically involve graduate students in designing provably better
algorithms and will provide for opportunities for undergraduates in implementing
the algorithms. The PI has consistently worked with undergraduates and this
project, given its possibilities for practical impact, is especially well suited
for the inclusion of undergraduate students. Berkeley Computer Science now
enrolls almost 900 students from the College of Letters and Science (in addition
to its College of Engineering Students) which contains a much larger fraction of
women. The PI is especially interested in involving this population in
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project endeavors to improve the complexity
and simplify recent algorithms for linear programming and, in particular, the
maximum flow problem. The linear programming problem is the problem of finding a
point in space that optimizes a linear function on the coordinates and obeys
linear inequalities. The maximum flow problem is a particular linear programming
problem where one wishes to push as much flow through a network as possible. The
idea of the improvement is to find alternate representations of the networks, in
the case of the maximum flow problem, or the set of feasible vectors, in the
case of linear programming, where traditional optimization methods converge
faster. The methods combine a calculus based minimization approach with methods
for efficiently capturing properties of networks and polytopes.