* 1528181
* CCF: SHF: Small: Collaborative Research: Domain-specific Reconfigurable Processor for Time-Series Data Mining and Monitoring
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2021
* Philip Brisk, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Yuanyuan Yang
* 08/31/2021
* USD 343,247.00

This proposal will investigate techniques to improve performance and reduce the
cost and energy consumption of wearable devices (e.g., Internet-of-Things) that
perform real-time medical monitoring. The objective is to demonstrate how to
construct programmable integrated circuits that can provide monitoring
capabilities while remaining small enough to be convenient and unobtrusive to
the wearer. As a motivating example, such a device could detect and predict
medical problems of fundamental importance such as pericardial tamponade, a
life-threatening emergency where in the pericardium (a sac surrounding the
heart) fills with fluid and prevents the heart from pumping blood, leading
quickly and directly to death. Broader impacts of this effort include: reducing
the cost of medical monitoring and saving lives; introduction of undergraduate
students at both institutions to hardware/software co-design for wearable
computing through a Freshman Discovery Seminar; inclusion of women and
underrepresented minorities in the project; public release of hardware and
software developed in the course of this project; and tutorial dissemination
targeting the database/data mining and design automation research
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical approach will involve
the creation of application-specific integrated circuit hardware that can be
added to embedded processors and microcontrollers to improve the performance of
real-time medical monitoring applications. The research is based on the
observation that real world data sets often exhibit a significant disparity in
the dimensionality (data sampling rate) and cardinality (number of distinct
values) of the data; for example, echocardiograms (ECGs) are often sampled at
1,024 Hz and 64-bits, although reducing the dimensionality to 128 Hz and the
cardinality to 8-bits suffice for real-time monitoring. The fundamental
challenge is that the minimum dimensionality and cardinality may vary from task-
to-task, from individual-to-individual, and possibly even from hour-to-hour for
a given individual. The Minimum Description Length (MDL) principle will be
investigated as a potential solution to find the intrinsic dimensionality and
cardinality of the data source, which can reduce data volume and improve
detection accuracy by noise reduction. This information will then be leveraged
to design domain-specific adaptive architectures that can exploit this reduced
data volume to improve throughput and enhance battery lifetime.