* 1528478
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  The Impact of Land Law on Stabilization and Development Efforts
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2015,02/28/2017
* Annelise Riles, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 02/28/2017
* USD 14,703.00

Since 2008, social scientists have documented a global land rush of
unprecedented scale, with over 80 million hectares changing hands in the last
decade. The vast majority of such land deals are taking place in the global
South, where the impetus for short-term economic development often overshadows
concerns for sustainable peace and development. For this reason, land deals
often lead to dispossession for ethnic, indigenous, and other marginalized
peoples and exacerbate existing conflicts over territory, resources, and power.
This can in turn destabilize entire regions where the U.S. might have strategic
economic and political interests. This project, which trains a graduate student
in methods of rigorous, empirically-grounded scientific fieldwork, examines the
relationship between land law and sustainable peace and development efforts.

Cornell University doctoral student, Emily Hong, under the direction of Dr.
Annelise Riles, will undertake the research in the Burma-China-Thailand
borderlands, with a primary base in Kachin State, Burma. Taking an ethnographic
approach to examining policy in practice, the researcher will examine the
significance of land law for ordinary people often left out of expert-dominated
discussions on development. Burma/Myanmar provides an ideal setting for
understanding these dynamics, due to the centrality of land and ethnic identity
in ongoing peace talks and legal reforms. Through year-long ethnographic
fieldwork with activists, farmers, and intellectuals, the researcher will
investigate two spheres in which Kachin people attempt to shape their political
future: land law and indigenous media through extensive interviews, focus
groups, participant observation, and archival research. On a national level, the
researcher will focus on a current campaign for customary land law, part of a
growing global trend that seeks state recognition of ancestral or indigenous
land use practices; on a local level, she will examine the work of local
activists and farmers who document land-based dispossession, cultivate local
solutions to development problems, and create their own widely-circulating
media. The project seeks to understand not only the impacts of state-led
processes of law and development in the global land rush but how ordinary people
actively shape alternatives for sustainable peace and development. The project
will advance the fields of cultural anthropology and law and social sciences,
particularly in the areas of political anthropology, legal anthropology and the
interdisciplinary study of human rights, studies of indigenous sovereignty and
political change, and collaborative ethnography.