* 1528091
* Integration across episodes and languages: Developmental and educational implications
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2018
* Patricia Bauer, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Chalandra Bryant
* 07/31/2018
* USD 138,293.00

An important goal of development is establishing a rich knowledge base to
support educational and professional achievement. Much of the information that
people have in their knowledge base they learned through direct instruction. Yet
learners also go beyond what they are taught and integrate information across
media (text, video) and across multiple experiences to generate new conclusions.
Self-generation of knowledge is assumed to play an important role in education,
allowing learners to extend the scope of each individual lesson. In spite of its
presumed significance for education, self-generation has not been examined in
the classroom. This research will test self-generation in the classroom and how
it relates to academic achievement. The studies will take place 1) in
traditional single-language classrooms and 2) in an increasing common
educational model in which children learn through two languages (dual-language
instruction). When content is presented in different languages, learners must
integrate not only across media and time, but across languages as well.
Understanding self-generation of knowledge in single- and dual-language
classrooms, and how it relates to academic achievement, are the central goals of
this research. The outcome will benefit society by helping to optimize
educational practice in both traditional and dual-language settings.

The proposed work aims to examine integration and subsequent self-generation of
information acquired in separate episodes in classroom environments. Concurrent
and longitudinal individual difference measures of cognitive ability will be
examined as possible underlying skills supporting knowledge extension in the
classroom. Relations between knowledge generation and measures of academic
performance also will be examined. Second, the study of self-generation will be
extended into dual-language, an increasingly common model of education.
Situations to be examined include information presented through different
languages (English/Spanish) and information presented through the same language
but tested in the alternate language. Finally, the work aims to address the
paradox that in spite of presumed challenges to successful learning and
extension of knowledge across language contexts, dual-language education has
excellent academic outcomes. The expectation is that achievement of second-
language proficiency minimizes the conceptual distance between to-be-integrated
materials, supporting cross-language integration. Ultimately, the research will
inform the underlying mechanisms necessary for self-generation of new knowledge
through integration as well as how different language systems are represented
and interact within an individual. The research has applied implications for
educational practice in both dual-language and traditional education models.