* 1528185
* TWC: Small: System Infrastructure for SMM-based Runtime Integrity Measurement
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Karen Karavanic, Portland State University
* Standard Grant
* Indrajit Ray
* 07/31/2019
* USD 407,568.00

The World Wide Web and computer "clouds" have become widely used, and are
interwoven into many activities of daily life, from shopping to socializing to
education. But the data center servers that are the backbone of this richly
connected world remain vulnerable to malicious software ("malware"). Over the
past decade, attacks have increased in number and sophistication, motivated by
both financial and political goals. The results include consumer concerns about
identify theft and fraudulent charges, corporate concerns about millions of
dollars in losses, and potential defense concerns. At the same time, the servers
and data centers have become more complex, as both the hardware and the software
have grown in capability. Thus protecting servers from attack has become
increasingly urgent yet increasingly difficult. This project is developing a new
approach for server security - monitoring for attacks will be integrated into
the servers in a manner that will avoid unwieldy performance slowdowns.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on detecting rootkits that compromise
operating system kernels and hypervisors. The research targets a specific class
of solutions that make use of widely available hardware support to allow safe
introspection of low-level system state at run time. Rootkit detection checks
are implemented in System Management Mode (SMM), a special x86 processor mode
entered as a result of a System Management Interrupt controlled by the BIOS,
that has a higher priority than any system-level interrupt. Code running in SMM
has access to a protected region of memory, providing protection of the rootkit
detection code. This project is exploring and quantifying the performance
impacts of various SMM-based rootkit detection approaches, and is developing new
approaches in which the detection work can be scheduled adaptively to strike an
appropriate balance between detection capability and performance degradation.