* 1528145
* NRI: Robust and Low-Cost Smart Skin with Active Sensing Network for Enhancing Human-Robot Interaction
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2015,06/30/2020
* Marco Pavone, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* David Miller
* 06/30/2020
* USD 900,000.00

Tactile sensing is ubiquitous in nature - arguably even more essential than
vision. Most animals have thousands of cutaneous sensors over their bodies for
touch, temperature, etc. But even the most sophisticated robots have relatively
few tactile sensors and, after 30 years of research, tactile sensing lags behind
computer vision. This project aims at the development of a novel artificial skin
mimicking the human skin that can be fitted into any robotic hand providing
information-rich "sense of touch." This technology leads to the development of
extremely sensitive robotic skins with unprecedented tactile sensing
capabilities. As such, this work enables a plethora of robotic applications
where tactile sensing is of utmost importance, ranging from robotic caregivers
to medical robotics and autonomous exploration. The methodology in this project
may revolutionize the way future robots are designed enabling their broad
applicability. This effort represents a major milestone in endowing robots with
the sensory information required to carry out tasks in human-centered
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The advent of microprocessors for touch
sensing, spurred by the smart phone industry, has helped to address the wiring
problem with local processing of information and communication. However, there
remain the critical problems of fabricating a multi-functional artificial skin
that can conformally cover arbitrary surfaces, diagnosing in real-time, the
contact state, and gathering a large amount of data for high-resolution tactile
sensing, while minimizing power consumption. Overall, this effort addresses
tactile sensing from a system-level point of view. The approach involves the
development of advanced manufacturing technologies from leveraging nonstandard
CMOS/MEMS/NEMS fabrication processes to produce a low-cost and robust artificial
skin outfitted with multi-modal micro-sensors. The tactile sense of touch is
achieved via an innovative micro-contact sensing technique based on ultrasound
waves generated from embedded sensors to identify local contact/slip conditions.
Finally, the validation and performance evaluation is demonstrated through a
series of graded tactile sensing experiments.