* 1528131
* The International Situations Project
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* David Funder, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 08/31/2020
* USD 486,549.00

As the world is becoming increasingly interconnected through economic ties,
political ties, and the internet, cross-cultural understanding is ever more
important, and the consequences of cross-cultural misunderstanding are ever more
dangerous. On a day-to-day basis, culture is reflected and transmitted through
the experience of ordinary situations; the analysis of such daily experience
provides an important and heretofore underutilized potential route towards
better understanding of the ways in which cultures are similar or different. The
present project seeks to assess the daily experience of people in 40 countries
around the world, associating such experiences with cross-cultural differences
in personality, economics, populations, and values.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
findings of this research will shed new light on an under-researched, but
fundamental issue for cross-cultural psychology and, even more broadly,
psychology as a whole: how situations are related to personality and behavior.
In previous research, the investigator, David Funder (University of California,
Riverside) developed an international, multiple language version of the
Riverside Situational Q-sort (RSQ) in which individuals assess real-world
situations that they encounter by sorting 89 descriptive features along the
degree to which each is characteristic or uncharacteristic. The proposed
research adapts this Q-sort methodology for wide-spread international
collaboration, by creating a freely available, flexible, and multilingual open-
source website for collecting data about situations. Via international
collaborators, participants in 40 countries will be recruited to complete the
RSQ in their own language; they will also describe their behavior in the
situation, and, separately, complete personality assessments. Using this novel
and unique method for the comprehensive cross-cultural comparison of situational
experience, the project will examine whether situations are an important active
ingredient of culture and will test a variety of research questions regarding
cross-cultural similarities and differences in ordinary situations. This project
will have important implications for understanding intercultural relations and
managing cultural diversity in a world where increasing numbers of individuals
with different cultural backgrounds share situations with each
other.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Co-funding from the Office of International Science
and Engineering (OISE) provided support for this award.