* 1528553
* Taphonomic and paleoecological investigation of carbonate-hosted Ediacara-type fossils in the Shibantan Member of Yangtze Gorges area
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2019
* Shuhai Xiao, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Dena Smith
* 07/31/2019
* USD 225,572.00

Revised Title: On the eve of the Cambrian explosion: Fossil preservation and
ecology of Ediacara-type organisms hosted in carbonate rocks of the Shibantan
Member&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Animals
we are familiar with evolved explosively during the early Cambrian Period, about
541-520 million years ago (Ma). However, their evolutionary ancestry before the
Cambrian Period is poorly known. One important way to illuminate the
evolutionary history of animals before the Cambrian explosion is to examine the
fossil record of the Ediacaran Period (653-541 Ma). This project is designed to
investigate the Ediacaran Shibantan Member of China in order to expand our
knowledge about the biology, ecology, and preservation of Ediacaran animals and
related organisms. The Shibantan Member is chosen because it hosts abundant
animal traces (i.e., tracks and burrows made by early animals) and a suite of
macroscopic Ediacara-type fossils that have been variously and controversially
interpreted as animals, fungi, lichens, or even bacterial colonies.
Additionally, unlike most Ediacara-type fossils that are found in sandstones,
the Shibantan fossils are preserved in limestones and thus offer an opportunity
to investigate the full range of environmental distribution of these enigmatic
organisms. In this project, researchers will systematically excavate, describe,
and analyze the Shibantan fossils using a combination of field and laboratory
techniques, to obtain and integrate a suite of interdisciplinary data, to
analyze the biology, ecology, and preservation of the Shibantan fossils, and to
test various hypotheses about their affinities with animals, lichens, and
bacteria. Ultimately, the proposed study will shed new light on the evolutionary
history across the Ediacaran-Cambrian boundary. The proposal provides funding
opportunity for a graduate student and contributes to the Virginia K-12
education and STEM programs. The project is jointly funded by NSF's GEO Frontier
Fund, Section of Surface Earth Processes, and International Science and
Engineering Office.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ediacara-type fossils provide important insights
into the evolution of macroscopic and morphologically complex eukaryotes on the
eve of the Cambrian explosion. The past decade has seen significant progress in
the study of Ediacara-type fossils, with new discoveries and new techniques
sharpening our views about the morphology, taphonomy, ecology, and evolutionary
dynamics of key Ediacara-type fossils. However, significant gaps and
controversies still exist. In particular, Ediacara-type fossils are mostly
preserved in sandstones and siltstones but rarely in black shales and
limestones, and it is uncertain whether their preferential occurrences in
sandstone/siltstone facies represent a potential taphonomic bias or an
environmental preference. To achieve a more complete understanding of the
paleoecological and taphonomic diversity of Ediacara-type fossils, the PI
proposes to systematically excavate, describe, and analyze Ediacara-type fossils
hosted in bituminous limestone of the Shibantan Member in the Yangtze Gorges
area in China, using a combination of field observation techniques, light
microscopy, electron microscopy, and stable isotope mass spectroscopy. The
objective is to obtain and integrate a suite of paleontological,
sedimentological, petrographic, and geochemical data, in order to understand the
taphonomy and paleoecology of these fossils, to test various hypotheses about
the phylogenetic affinities and paleoecology of Ediacara-type fossils, and to
offer insights into the pattern and possible causes of the disappearance of
Ediacara-type fossils at the Ediacaran-Cambrian transition. The proposal
provides funding for a graduate student to be recruited through one of Virginia
Tech's existing programs focusing on under-represented groups, develops new
material for K-12 resource kits to be deployed through Virginia Tech Museum of
Geosciences, and contributes to regional STEM education. The project is jointly
funded by NSF's GEO Frontier Fund, Section of Surface Earth Processes, and
International Science and Engineering Office.