* 1528214
* CHS: Small: A Novel P300 Brain-Computer Interface
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2021
* Virginia de Sa, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 09/30/2021
* USD 504,431.00

Brain computer interfaces (BCIs) translate basic mental commands into computer-
mediated actions, thereby allowing the user to bypass the peripheral motor
system and interact with the world directly via brain activity. These systems
are being developed to aid users with motor deficits stemming from
neurodegenerative disease, injury, or even environmental restrictions which make
movement difficult or impossible. One of the most successful classes of EEG-
driven BCI systems is the P300, which works by detecting user responses to
flashed stimuli. In most P300 systems, a grid of letters and/or other symbols is
presented and rows or columns of the symbols are flashed in random order; the
user attends to the desired symbol (usually by silently counting when it
flashes). A major problem with these grid-based P300 systems is that the user
must ideally look at the flashed target and minimally attend to the tiny
letters, but late-stage ALS and other locked-in patients for whom these systems
are most needed have trouble foveating targets and making controlled eye
movements. The PI's hypothesis is that a BCI that flashes segments of one large
letter can retain the combinatorial efficiency that comes with querying several
letters at once, while having the advantage of one central focus (no gaze shifts
required). This research aims to design and test this new segment speller idea.
Project outcomes have the potential to vastly improve the usability of P300 EEG-
based BCI systems for those with visual, sensory and motor impairments. All
software written for EEG signal processing and analysis will be made available
as add-ons to EEGLAB which is distributed by the Swartz Center for Computational
Neuroscience (SCCN) at UCSD and part of the Temporal Dynamics of Learning
Center. Data will also be made available through the HeadIT data archive that is
also run by the SCCN.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research task can be broken down
into three main objectives: develop and test the response to flashed segments;
improve the single-trial classification of the responses to flashed segments;
and design a logic for selecting segments and interpreting their responses. The
developed system will provide another method for BCI speller control that does
not depend on the ability to shift gaze. The PI argues that this method will
have a higher information transfer rate than other space invariant BCI spellers
due to being able to probe multiple letters at once. Besides being advantageous
for those with impaired eye movements and/or impaired vision, the method should
have other advantages over the standard P300 systems. When errors are made, they
will tend to be to visually similar symbols. Incorporating language priors and
active segment selection is easily accommodated, and this may result in higher
information transfer rates with slower flash rates. In addition the work on
improving recognition of single-trial temporal EEG signals and incorporating
Bayesian language models into spellers could be useful for other types of brain-
computer interfaces.