* 1528234
* III: Small: Exploiting and Extending Integer Linear Programming in Computational Biology
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2015,06/30/2020
* Daniel Gusfield, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 06/30/2020
* USD 405,447.00

Integer Linear Programming (ILP) is a versatile modeling and optimization
technique that has been increasingly used in computational biology in inventive
ways that differ from its traditional uses. Spectacular improvements in the
speed of modern ILP solvers and computers now often allow the solution to
important instances of hard computational problems that lack guaranteed-
efficient solution methods. This project will further the exploitation of
integer programming to solve realistic instances of computational problems in
biology. The broader impact of this project will be through the improved
computational tools that will be created for use in biology and perhaps
medicine. This could have a transformative impact in biology. Broader impact
will also be in the training of graduate and undergraduate students, and in
outreach to biologists involved in computation. This project will also impact
algorithmic computer science, by demonstrating a shift in emphasis from seeking
worst-case efficient solutions or approximations to problem instances of all
sizes and properties, to seeking methods that are effective in finding exact
solutions to realistic problem instances of great importance.

There are intellectual challenges in modeling biological phenomena for integer
programming, non-trivial technical issues, and educational and outreach efforts
needed to make the advances available to a larger biological community. The
research questions are of three broad types: 1) Many research questions concern
how to formulate, and more efficiently implement, a large succession of related
ILP computations. This arises due to the need to evaluate the biological
fidelity, and statistical significance, of a solution, often leading to changes
in the biological model and ILP formulation, and many successive ILP
computations. 2) It is often possible to devise mathematically-equivalent, but
very different, ILP formulations for a computational problem, with large
differences in the time and memory needed to solve the ILP instances. Many
research questions concern how to devise the best ILP formulations for sub-
classes of biological problems, and to identify successful new idioms (or
modeling insights) that are common in these formulations. 3) Many technical
issues come from the use of ILP as a language to express solutions to biological
problems that are not naturally posed in terms of linear constraints. This
exploits the fact that integer programming, being NP-hard, can express any
problem in NP. However, the consequence is that the formulations are often non-
intuitive, and huge in comparison to traditional ILP formulations, with a higher
ratio of variables to equations than is expected by ILP solvers.