* 1528544
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Strategies for Cultural Recognition and Acceptance among Religious Minorities
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2015,02/28/2019
* Webb Keane, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 02/28/2019
* USD 15,309.00

Democratic societies depend on an understanding of the processes that motivate
ethnic and religious minorities to contribute and identify with civil society.
This project examines how religious minorities represent themselves in an effort
to gain acceptance by the larger secular society of which they are a part. This
project, which trains a graduate student in how to conduct rigorous empirically-
grounded scientific fieldwork, asks how minority groups in democratic societies
increasingly identify with, and invoke their religious identities toward their
objectives for recognition and acceptance. Findings from this case study would
be developed and shared with other researchers, building international
scientific collaboration. Funding for this project will also broaden the
participation of a historically underrepresented group in the sciences.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Randeep Hothi, under the supervision of Dr. Webb Keane of
the University of Michigan at Ann Arbor will explore how religious minority
groups strategically represent themselves for the purposes of recognition. The
researcher examines minority-operated media networks in order to examine how
deliberations that occur at the scale of face-to-face interaction produce
publicly circulating religious discourse. This project builds on recent research
in linguistic anthropology and sociolinguistics that pay close attention to
language-use as a resource for positioning and orienting subjects in social
life. The researcher looks at Sikh cultural production, a context that proves to
be important for analyzing language-use and stance in sociolinguistics because
of the processes of self-presentation are driven by recognition-based cultural
politics. By examining how minority cultural producers make complicated
decisions about how Sikhism should be publicly presented, which representations
of Sikhism should be disseminated, and how they will address their audiences,
this research will also explain how multicultural societies produce religious
discourse. The 12-month field research project employs a range of conventional
linguistic and ethnographic methods of data collection and analyses, including
participant observation, interviews, breaching experiments, life history
interviews, media and archival analysis, and discourse analysis. This research
provides an opportunity to examine the wider ramifications of minority cultural
production in secular societies, and how minority identities are articulated and
socially situated in public address.