* 1528969
* An Analysis of the Factors Influencing Human Rights Discourse
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2015,01/31/2017
* Marvin Sterling, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 01/31/2017
* USD 24,055.00

Human rights have been a flashpoint in relations between the U.S. and other
nations. Many scholars of human rights have traditionally used the phrase human
rights regime to refer to a set of norms and procedures that have been
formalized and codified in international law. But the codification of universal
human rights has been far more contested in local contexts, where concepts of
rights are contingent upon widely ranging historical, cultural, and political
economic experiences. This project explores how different notions of human
rights have emerged and have been debated, often in ways that might seem
paradoxical or counterintuitive. Immigration policy and diplomatic practice
could benefit from the improved understanding of these contexts that this
project will afford. This project would also broaden the participation of a
historically underrepresented group in the sciences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr.
Marvin Sterling of Indiana University will explore the factors that influence
the discourse and practice of human rights. With focus on the Jamaican case, the
investigator frames the study as a first systematic effort to identify specific
commonalities in the postcolonial experience, particularly in the Commonwealth
of Nations, that shape or have resulted from human rights debates in these
societies. The project also aims to understand how locally contextual
interpretations of rights have been formed through transnational engagements.
Methods of data collection during this six-month project include gathering
archival data with the aim of historicizing discourses of human rights,
interviewing the members and observing the activities of local human rights
groups, and a content analysis of national and international media. The project
would contribute to advancing anthropological theories of human rights,
particularly within the subfields of legal and political anthropology.
Specifically, the project explores the regime of human rights as something
constituted by historically, economically, and culturally specific notions of
citizenship, freedom, and autonomy.