* 1528262
* The Constituency-Level Elections Archive (CLEA): Transitioning to a Sustainable Public Good
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2017
* David Lublin, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 07/31/2017
* USD 78,013.00

General Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Constituency-Level Elections Archive
(CLEA) is an online repository of detailed data from elections to national
legislative lower houses around the world. This proposal is a request for a
modest one-year grant to implement the transition of CLEA to a new
organizational model. Currently containing results at the electoral district
level of 1,494 elections from 129 countries, this archive helps a sizeable
community of active scholars and policy practitioners who produce research and
findings with important real-world implications. Users of the data work in areas
such as formulating better policies, designing institutions, and allocating
development assistance. For example, this sort of knowledge is essential to
government agencies (both domestic and foreign) when they engage with new and
emerging democracies. These users have a stake in the long-term preservation and
improvement of the data. The grant enables the PIs to design and install a new
structure of governance (with bylaws); develop an appropriate strategic plan for
long-term funding; and augment the archive to a point where it is in the best
possible shape when the transition occurs, by expanding the contents of the
archive with an eye toward maximizing its global and historical
coverage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By
providing extensive, high-quality sub-national data on election results, CLEA
helps increase the breadth and sophistication of political science research,
creates opportunities for novel interdisciplinary inquiry, and facilitates the
use of cutting-edge spatial analytical tools. The result is better, richer
insights with improved validity. CLEA has recently added new products: geo-coded
information on constituencies and summary data on parties and elections. During
the grant year, the co-PIs will oversee the formatting (in the process making
choices about addressing the diversity of electoral systems worldwide),
cleaning, and posting of new elections data, with the aim of maximizing the
global and temporal coverage of the archive, (2) make strategic decisions about
expanding CLEA, including the geocoding of constituency boundaries, (3)
establish links with other social scientific infrastructure projects, including
cross-national datasets with social, economic, and political variables that
could be matched up to CLEA data at the constituency level, and (4) improve the
functionality of the website.