* 1528831
* RUI: An Investigation of Short and Long Term Effects of Cradling on Development
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2015,03/31/2023
* Catherine Tamis-LeMonda, CUNY College of Staten Island
* Standard Grant
* Jorge Valdes Kroff
* 03/31/2023
* USD 706,906.00

Many developmental theories are built on the premise that freedom to move is
necessary for healthy infant development and restricted movement is harmful.
However, these theories were based on studies comparing Western infants whose
caregivers used childrearing practices that encourage movement to children
reared in impoverished environments such as orphanages in which they are
deprived of opportunities to move freely but are also deprived of social
interaction and affection. Infants raised in such impoverished environments
display sweeping developmental delays that are not necessarily tied directly to
restricted movement. This project capitalizes on a rare chance to study long-
term effects of restricted movement on infant development by examining the use
of a "gahvora" cradle in Tajikistan, Central Asia. Infants experience restricted
movement in the gahvora but these infants are immersed in family life and
therefore not otherwise deprived of social interaction.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Investigators Karasik, Adolph, and Tamis-LeMonda build
upon the findings from their NSF-funded cross-sectional study in which they
characterized variation in cradle use in infancy and explored how it relates to
variability in motor development. The current project uses longitudinal sampling
to examine concurrent effects of restricted movement on motor skills in infancy
in 12- to 20-month-olds and long-term consequences after cradle use has ceased,
at three to five years of age. This work will also provide insights into
cascading effects of infant motor skills on development in other domains such as
interactions with objects and people.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study examines
core issues in developmental psychology, including the effects of early motor
experience and restricted movement on infant and child motor development. In
particular, the study addresses whether restriction has immediate and long-
lasting influence on motor development. Data will be shared with the broader
scientific community through the Databrary.org video data-sharing library. This
project will engage undergraduate students and researchers in the U.S. and
abroad by offering training in research methods and developmental science.