* 1528368
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Moral and Ethical Resilience in Response to Institutional Secularization
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2015,02/28/2017
* Robert Weller, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 02/28/2017
* USD 22,276.00

The contestation between secular conditions and religious aspirations is at the
heart of many contemporary political conflicts and disputes. This project
examines how religious identities and practices are influenced by, and adapt to,
new forms of institutional secularization. Ordinarily, researchers have
concluded that secularism entails legal and administrative intervention into
religious life. This project, which trains a graduate student in how to conduct
rigorous empirically-grounded scientific fieldwork, asks whether there are other
forms of institutional and personal resilience in a context where secular
governance is exceptionally strong. It also helps us to understand social and
religious change in a part of the world that is critical politically and
economically to the U.S. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Yang Shen, under the supervision
of Robert Weller of Boston University, will explore the link between
institutional secularization and religious identity, and how those characterized
as renouncers reconcile their monasticism with their religious identities. The
project will identify the cultural assumptions, social structures and relations,
and historical processes that constitute the key points of reference of Buddhist
monasticism as a contemporary phenomenon, and also examine how Buddhist
monasticism provides the public with a vocabulary and a space for constructing
alternate life-worlds. The study is based on ethnographic research in three
different contexts of Chinese Buddhist monasticism at a single site in East
China: ritual-oriented temples, administration-centered Buddhist associations,
and university-fashioned Buddhist academies. The project will analyze and
compare how these three sub-institutions differently meditate, represent, and
sustain a renunciatory way of life, by adopting a combination of ethnographic
methods including participatory observation, semi-structured interviews, and
focused interviews, as well as building on local scholarship. This project
builds on the current debates in the field of anthropology of religion and the
anthropology of ethics to address questions regarding the resilience and
robustness of socio-cultural systems. Aided by rigorous comparative methodology,
it will challenge the current pervasive tendency to essentialize religious
identity, in social theory as well as in public discourses, and instead offers
new approaches to how religious identity forms through the continuous interplay
between religious aspiration and religious institution. The project will help
other researchers to understand how religious actors adapt in the face of
changing social structures and conditions. The project will also advance our
understanding of the institution-building efforts of religious actors in
unfamiliar traditions in a more flexible way, and to understand better the
workings of religious institutions and the ways in which they also transform
themselves.