* 1528550
* CPS EAGER:  Intelligent Agent Incident Command System Augmentation
* CSE,CNS
* 06/15/2015,05/31/2019
* John Gallagher, Wright State University
* Standard Grant
* Ralph Wachter
* 05/31/2019
* USD 175,000.00

Smart Cities are complex cyber-physical systems with large human populations
adding additional complexity. Instrumentation and modeling are components of a
smart city. Regardless, however, of the ubiquity of instrumentation and
precision of models, in the end, humans and human teams will make decisions
about citywide operations and management, especially in crisis. We contend that
the hierarchical nature of contemporary command and control systems can create
virtual blind spots in which opportunities or dangers may be invisible to the
hierarchy because the necessary information is obscured as it moves between
levels of abstraction in the hierarchy. This project will involve teaming with
crisis management experts and researchers to develop intelligent agents designed
to minimize cognitive load on decision makers, exploit semantic relationships in
reports and sensor data to advise of otherwise invisible occurrences, and
sequence the actions of ground-level assets to refine causal relationship models
to better reflect ongoing developments during crisis and/or event management.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses the following technology gap(s) as
it translates from research discovery toward commercial application - a)
demonstration of the effectiveness of information presentation and transparency
in situations where agents can support and enhance human decision-making without
increasing the cognitive workload of the human; b) transfer state-of-the-art
foundational research in semantic data and information integration to the
complex disaster scenario; c) development of model consistency maintenance tools
for automatic update of causal models of various disaster and/or emergency
situations. In addition, personnel involved in this project, e.g., graduate
students, will receive innovation experiences through the design, development
and testing of the model developed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
explore transferability of the research results into tools in other application
areas such as Pararescuer training, AFRL disaster response system RIPPLE, and
Clark County Emergency Management Agency. This project will also have outreach
efforts with mentoring high school and undergraduate students at Discovery Lab,
Tec^Edge through the Summer at the Edge/Year at the Edge Programs (SATE/YATE).