* 1528378
* Doctoral dissertation Research:  Aspect vs. affect in African American Vernacular English
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2018
* Brian Joseph, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 07/31/2018
* USD 15,080.00

This study examines the use of verbal -s (the non-standard application of -s on
present tense verbs) in African-American English (AAE). AAE speakers are asked
to judge when verbal -s is most appropriate, and also to provide information via
rating tasks about their beliefs regarding the frequency of their own use of
verbal -s, the frequency of its use in their surrounding communities, and their
beliefs about who in the African-American AAE-speaking community is more likely
to use verbal -s. In order to gather these data, a survey will be carried out in
which participants read brief scenarios and choose, for each one, whether a
given follow-up sentence presented to them is more appropriate with or without
verbal -s.

Factors to be investigated include those which past research has hinted at being
influential. Grammatical factors include speaker affect, the attitude or emotion
that a speaker brings to an utterance, and habitual aspect, which distinguishes
states and ongoing actions from repetitive actions. Non-grammatical factors
include age and gender of participants, as well as geographical region, which
will be investigated by conducting the survey in four locations: California,
Ohio, New York, and Texas. This study thus provides evidence as to whether
verbal -s can have an affective and/or aspectual connotation in a way that past
production-based studies have struggled to account for. It will also provide a
regional perspective, which has been lacking in AAE studies for some time. The
large number of participants and consideration of other social factors will also
make this a valuable study with reliable results. The results of this study
should help to address the misperceptions about non-standard varieties in
general and African American English in particular.