* 1528614
* Collaborative Research: Signaling Prosociality: Harnessing Impure Motives to Help Others
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2015,04/30/2018
* Gretchen Chapman, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Leland
* 04/30/2018
* USD 312,747.00

The question of how to facilitate pro-social behavior is one of the most
pressing challenges facing behavioral scientists because answers to this
question have far-reaching implications for a myriad causes of unhappiness. In
many domains, such as vaccination, resource conservation, or blood donation, the
outcome that is optimal for the group cannot be achieved unless individuals act
beyond their narrow self-interest. The current research harnesses the principle
of signaling to develop and test interventions that may inspire pro-social
behavior by appealing to agents' desire to appear prosocial. Whereas some people
may be motivated to contribute to the public good simply by altruistic concerns
for others, even absent those purely altruistic motives, nearly everyone likes
to be viewed by others as a prosocial person or to think of themselves as
prosocial. In economic terms, this idea is captured by the concept of signaling
-- engaging in a behavior that signals the type of person one is. Thus, a self-
interested reason to engage in pro-social behavior is to signal (to oneself or
to others) that one is a good person. Five sets of experiments in the current
project test the idea that prosocial behavior can be increased if people are
given the opportunity to use that behavior to signal their prosocial nature.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the proposed research the investigators test the
effects of interventions designed based on signaling theory for their influence
on prosocial behavior in a series of field and lab experiments. First, a field
study in the context of a blood drive tests whether monetary incentives motivate
blood donation more effectively when framed in a way that signals the pro-social
motives of the decision maker to perform the behavior. Second, a study on
framing messages to emphasize the signal value of vaccination examines whether
parents of young children are more likely to receive an influenza vaccination
for themselves after viewing a message presenting vaccination as a signal that
one puts their children first than after seeing a message presenting vaccination
as a signal that one puts self-care first, or after seeing either of two control
messages. Third, in a study on peer recommendation, researchers will test
whether a message advocating blood donation is more effective if it emphasizes
the signal value of this behavior, and whether this signaling effect is more
pronounced when the message comes in the form of a personalized recommendation
from a co-worker as compared to a standard message from a blood drive. Fourth,
three studies on social comparison will investigate whether feedback comparing
one's performance to that of others promotes performance improvement in a pro-
social task because the social comparison feedback serves as a signal,
indicating what the performance says about the agent. Fifth, in a series of
studies using a common pool resource game, researchers will explore the effect
of a partitioning manipulation that signals the equitable amount for each agent
to consume into order to achieve the group optimal outcome, and they will test
whether the partition serves as a coordination signal. This research extends
previous work in economics, social psychology, and decision research, and it
applies signaling theory to the design of interventions to facilitate pro-social
behavior. The body of research combines powerful field experiments with tightly
controlled laboratory experimental designs to test the efficacy of signaling
interventions by assessing actual behavior and examining the decision processes
underlying these effects. The findings will simultaneously shed light on the
nature of both pro-social behavior and signaling mechanisms.