* 1528701
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Psycholinguistic and Neurocognitive Indices of Prediction in Processing Nonliteral and Fixed Expressions
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2017
* Kiel Christianson, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* William Badecker
* 07/31/2017
* USD 19,025.00

In its most successful form, language connects people. Through communication,
people of different backgrounds are able to share ideas and experiences and
ultimately bridge gaps across cultures. A challenge presents itself, however,
when communication is not successful and the inability to understand language
creates a barrier. Idioms are an excellent example of an environment where
misinterpretations can arise. For the average literate adult speaker, a highly
familiar idiom, such as "a slap in the face" or "kick the bucket," is one where,
once a particular ordering of words is recognized and the surrounding context is
informative enough, the nonliteral meaning becomes most probable, and the
nonliteral meaning can easily be retrieved. As these expressions communicate
more than what is explicitly said, they are often difficult for second-language
speakers to master. Further, as many idioms also have a plausible literal
interpretation, it can be rather ambiguous for a learner to determine whether
the literal interpretation was meant, or whether a nonliteral meaning was
intended (e.g. "The man kicked the bucket that was full of water"). While native
speakers benefit from their daily exposure to these expressions in
conversational speech, second-language learners are disadvantaged due to their
lack of exposure, and often interpret idiomatic language literally, or attempt
to translate and use idioms from their native language.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Under the direction of Drs. Darren Tanner and Kiel
Christianson, Nyssa Bulkes will conduct doctoral dissertation research with two
primary goals: 1) to identify in closer detail how idioms are processed in real-
time during reading, and 2) to understand how second-language learners process
formulaic, fixed expressions. This research compares idiomatic expressions to
literal collocations (e.g. "watch a movie" or "walk the dog"), both of which are
familiar types of language to native speakers, due to their frequent co-
occurrence. While more experience with the language facilitates recognition of
these types of expressions in native speakers, no research to date has compared
how these expressions are read during sentence processing, and whether one type
of "chunk-like" expression is processed by the brain any differently. The
current project will use measures of eye movements and real-time neural activity
during native and nonnative reading in an effort to better compare how these
populations process literal and nonliteral language. Specifically, understanding
how highly familiar idiomatic expressions (e.g. idioms, "kick the bucket")
compare to highly familiar literal expressions (e.g. collocations, "watch a
movie") has the potential to illustrate how idiomatic, nonliteral expressions
are represented in the minds of native speakers. Additionally, understanding how
second-language learners process these different types of fixed expressions
during natural reading has the potential to help to inform second-language
instruction. By tying language comprehension processes to the cognitive and
neural mechanisms supporting them, we are afforded a deeper understanding of
what information second-language learners make use of as they comprehend
language in real time. This understanding will ultimately better support the
formulation of effective teaching interventions, working to promote fluency and
successful acquisition in second-language classrooms.