* 1528851
* Identity fusion and inter-group relations
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* William Swann, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 08/31/2019
* USD 407,500.00

Humans share conventional codes of conduct that include disapproval of severely
harming others. Thus a disquieting challenge for society is understanding how
members of groups can murder or harm outsiders in violation of some of
humanity's most basic moral principles. This project will draw on past evidence
that people who are strongly "fused" with their group are especially inclined to
view fellow group members as family. These family ties, in turn, cause them to
sacrifice themselves for the group. When strongly fused persons come into
conflict with another group, they experience an emotionally charged state. This
state compels them to feel intensely that their first, and often only, moral
consideration is their familial duty to protect group members at the expense of
outsiders. This leads to "intergroup moral myopia," a state in which people
abandon conventional standards of moral conduct in favor of a simple rule: Act
on behalf of one's group regardless of the consequences for outsiders. This
research project examines the mechanisms that give rise to intergroup moral
myopia, and determines what amplifies its effects and what might in turn avert
its negative consequences. Ultimately, by understanding such processes, society
may learn how to prevent a variety of violent acts by group members such as
suicide terrorism against civilians, the slaughter of aid workers, and human sex
trafficking. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A series of field and laboratory studies will
illuminate the conscious and non-conscious mechanisms that give rise to the
state of intergroup moral myopia. The empirical research will be conducted in
several regions with long histories of intergroup conflict, including the Middle
East, Spain, and U.S. This research will explore the processes that lead fused
persons to dehumanize outgroup members, make exceptions when judging the
morality of their own group members, endorse the superiority of their group's
moral code over all others, and engage in discriminatory actions that would
otherwise be unthinkable. Studies will test the hypothesis that perception of
threat to the ingroup will amplify these effects. The final wave of studies test
strategies for averting the negative consequences of intergroup moral myopia.
The international component of this research helps foster ongoing collaborations
between researchers in the U.S., Spain, UK, and Mideast. Moreover, by focusing
on intergroup conflict in the U.S. and hotspots across Eurasia and Africa,
including Israel/Palestine, Libya, and Spain, this research has important
implications for the U.S.'s national security, economic well-being, and conflict
resolution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Co-funding from the Office of International
Science and Engineering (OISE) provided support for this award.