* 1528739
* Collaborative Research:  Modeling Unobserved Heterogeneity in Network Formation
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Dino Christenson, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 08/31/2018
* USD 142,533.00

General Summary

The statistical analysis of networks has become increasingly important in the
social and behavioral sciences and has been applied to a diverse range of
problems in recent years. Indeed, the National Science Foundation's agenda
setting statement for the social sciences, "Rebuilding the Mosaic," recognizes
Network Science as one of four critical research frontiers. Yet, while the
statistical analysis of networks continues to attract a great deal of attention
from scholars and the broader public, the quantitative study of networks remains
in the early stages of development. Only recently have the statistical theory
and computational techniques been developed to rigorously analyze various types
of networks. The central aim of the project is to develop a new model for
identifying statistical effects on network formation that explicitly accounts
for unobserved variation.

Technical Summary

The PIs develop an estimator that accurately captures unobserved heterogeneity
in tie formation in network models. They do so by extending the widely applied
Exponential Random Graph Model (ERGM) to include a frailty term that accounts
for unmeasured, unobserved, or unimagined heterogeneity. Unaccounted
heterogeneity is a significant issue in the study of social processes; thus, the
inability to effectively model it is an important gap that limits the
applicability of ERGMs in many areas of potential interest. In fact, one of the
two major assumptions of the ERGM is that the model is correctly specified, and
coefficient bias or model degeneracy may result from violations of this
assumption. The PIs propose to extend the ERGM to account for this problem
through the introduction of a frailty term, thereby creating a Frailty
Exponential Random Graph Model (FERGM). In addition to defining the FERGM and
providing Monte Carlo simulations to demonstrate the model properties and
comparative benefits of the approach, the PIs apply the FERGM to substantive
topics in the social and health sciences and provide related statistical
software for others to do so as well. Advances in network modeling will be
useful across scientific disciplines, including sociology, economics,
statistics, computer science and behavioral health. The focus on social science
applications will aid practitioners in public policy by allowing them to more
accurately evaluate the importance of policy on economic and social outcomes.
Finally, the project directly promotes teaching, training, and learning and
broadens participation of underrepresented groups in scholarly activity.