* 1528394
* Doctoral dissertation research: The interpretation of perspectival expressions in Bulu
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2017
* Craige Roberts, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 06/30/2017
* USD 14,973.00

Language allows speakers to represent their own perspective or some other
perspective. In spatial language, for example, in one context an expression like
"to the left of" can be understood to refer to the left of the speaker, or, in
another context, to the left of the addressee or some other individual whose
perspective is adopted. Recent research has shown that expressions with
perspective-dependent meanings are pervasive in natural language. However, there
is no consensus on what the full range of such expressions is, or how
participants in a conversation use contextual information to determine which
perspective is being adopted. Furthermore, there is very little research on how
perspective-dependent expressions work in languages other than English. However,
these are important topics due to the pervasiveness of perspective-dependent
expressions and because the ability to represent multiple perspectives is a
feature of human language not shared by animal communication systems. Thus,
understanding perspective-dependent expressions across multiple languages is a
key part of understanding what human language itself is and what makes it unique
among communication systems. It is also crucial for developing artificial
language systems that interact more naturally with humans and incorporate
contextual information with greater success.

This research investigates the meanings of perspective-dependent expressions in
Bulu, a Bantu language spoken in Cameroon. The researchers will study classes of
perspective-dependent expressions that they have investigated previously in
English. Specifically, they will investigate the meaning of motion verbs such as
'come' and perspective-dependent spatial expressions, such as 'to the left of'.
Because these expressions are used differently in Bulu than in well-studied
languages like English, investigating their use in Bulu will improve
understanding of the range of variation in the meanings of perspective-dependent
expressions. This, in turn, will facilitate the discovery of general principles
involved in perspective taking across languages. This research also contributes
to the documentation of Bulu and, indirectly, to the development of Bulu
pedagogical materials, due to planned collaboration with researchers in
Cameroon.