* 1528167
* TWC SBE: Small: Establishing market based mechanisms for CYBer security information EXchange (CYBEX)
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Shamik Sengupta, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 08/31/2019
* USD 351,578.00

Robust cybersecurity information sharing infrastructure is required to protect
the firms from future cyber attacks which might be difficult to achieve via
individual effort. The United States federal government clearly encourage the
firms to share their discoveries on cybersecurity breach and patch related
information with other federal and private firms for strengthening the nation's
security infrastructure. The goal of this project is to develop an
interdisciplinary research platform to investigate the framework and benefits of
breach-related vulnerability information sharing and analyze the effect of not
participating in the process of information exchange. The outcome of this
project has a profound impact on the evolution of CYBer security information
EXchange (CYBEX) architecture and the level of interaction desired among firms
(private, public or federal) to defend proactively in the ever-growing
cyberspace. The research has both direct and indirect impact on mentoring,
hands-on learning, education and training. Graduate and Undergraduate students
(including minority and women) participating in this project are involved in
interdisciplinary research and learning problem solving skills taking into
account different viewpoints, namely, cybersecurity, information-exchange,
economics, decision analysis and practical system implementation.

By using micro and macro-economic theory as a substrate, this project
establishes market based mechanisms for enabling cyber security information
exchange (CYBEX) among firms to protect the cyberspace proactively against cyber
attacks. This research investigates how cyberinsurance can be modeled and
thereafter can be augmented with the information sharing format and framework to
encourage firms to participate in CYBEX more effectively. The transformative
nature of the proposed research lies in its potential to identify, model, and
analyze the multi-dimensional robust cybersecurity information sharing
infrastructure along with development of CYBEX emulator environment. The
information sharing framework is also extended to the cloud domain that carries
challenges to model the cloud attackers and incentive mechanisms to motivate the
firms toward such sharing behavior. More Specifically, the outcomes of the
project demonstrate: a) the potential of CYBEX in sharing the burden of
cybersecurity and making the cyberspace more robust; b) multi-layer competitions
and dynamics among CYBEX entities infiltrated with malicious entities; c)
necessity of cyberinsurance and market oriented approach for better
cybersecurity information utilization; and, d) the far-reaching impacts of
interdisciplinary CYBEX research in terms of socio-economic value, technology
and educational outreach programs.