* 1528148
* NeTS:  Small:  Modeling IPv6 Adoption: A Measurement-driven Computational Approach
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2019
* Amogh Dhamdhere, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 09/30/2019
* USD 315,999.00

Broad industry awareness of IPv4 address scarcity has driven widespread support
for IPv6 in most modern operating systems and network equipment, but even with
years of encouragement from regional address registries (RIRs), and government
mandates, the actual uptake of IPv6 has been disappointing. A vast ecosystem of
software applications and devices still do not support IPv6, and many
technologies designed to support the transition add complexity and reduce
performance and reliability. Understandably then, there is a lack of consensus
on whether IPv6 will ever be widely adopted by ISPs, leaving the broader
Internet ecosystem with tremendous uncertainty and risk in planning for the
future. While some companies have avoided IPv6 deployment, others have
undertaken valiant efforts to be early adopters of IPv6, risking loss of their
investment should the transition ultimately fail. Given these daunting
circumstances, even skeptics of the ability to comprehend the dynamics of such a
large and complex network as the Internet must consider the utility of
measurements to characterize factors affecting (and possibly inhibiting) IPv6
deployment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project extensively measures and
characterizes two phenomena in the current IP addressing ecosystem that may
either cause and/or reflect IPv6 deployment decisions: market-based transfers of
IPv4 address blocks and deployment of Carrier Grade NATs (CGNs). This research
analyzes the set of transfers reported to the RIRs to characterize the evolution
of this market, and whether transfers may be inhibiting IPv6 adoption by
promoting hoarding behavior. Address transfers could also be happening without
the approval of the RIRs. This project develops novel methods using BGP and DNS
data and active measurements collected from CAIDA's Archipelago infrastructure
to detect grey market transfers, and active and passive measurement methods to
detect the presence and evolution of Carrier-Grade NAT deployments in ISP
networks. The project also investigates potential performance impairments and
application breakage that may occur due to CGNs. The resulting data and analysis
provides much needed insights to network operators, governments, and Internet
policy makers about the future of the global Internet. Results of this project
will be disseminated via publications at conferences and journals. All data and
tools resulting from this project will be released to the research and
operational community, and accessible educational materials will be provided in
the form of slidesets, animations and videos.