* 1528941
* Conference: Broadening Participation of Deaf Students in Sign Language Research - 2015
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2015,09/30/2016
* Diane Lillo-Martin, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 09/30/2016
* USD 77,465.00

Sign language research has broadened our understanding of human language
processing and languages in general. Since the 1960s, there have been a growing
number of sign language studies, yet the presence of deaf researchers -- users
of signed languages -- is greatly underrepresented in this field. This project
aims to broaden the participation of deaf individuals in disciplines that
conduct sign language research. This project will support eight deaf students to
present and participate in the 12th International Conference on Theoretical
Issues in Sign Language (TISLR12). TISLR is the most significant and well-
attended international sign language research conference. Immediately after the
conference the students will participate in a one-day workshop offered by the
TISLR12 conference committee on applied linguistics and the translational
implications of sign language research. This project will provide American Sign
Language/English interpreting services so these students will have access to
this knowledge and opportunities to interact with sign language researchers from
all over the world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The selected students will each have
three senior mentors who will meet with them prior to the conference, during the
conference, and after the conference. The students' experiences, what they
learned and/or their experiences and/or their research question and plans will
be presented to the group and mentors. The knowledge learned from this program
will impact the selected students with both theoretical and translational issues
related to sign language research. The long-term projected outcome is an
increase in deaf sign language researchers. They will disseminate their
experiences to deaf students at deaf schools, in university publications, Center
and laboratory publications, in ASL online through social media, and at
conferences concerning broadening the participation of deaf researchers in STEM
fields.