* 1528138
* CSR: Small: Efficient and Scalable Systems Support for Mobile Group Formation, Inference, Recommendation and Classification
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2021
* Shivakant Mishra, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2021
* USD 508,000.00

Users of smartphones are increasingly using their mobile devices to organize
activities as mobile groups of friends, family, and colleagues. In order to
improve the richness of interaction within such mobile groups, this research
project investigates the creation of new mobile group services and the
development of a practical framework that will enable such novel capabilities as
providing recommendations to mobile groups of people with diverse interests.
This project proposes to develop novel ways to identify when cyberbullying by a
group of users is occurring in mobile social networks. In addition, since there
are millions of groups of users who use social media every day to communicate,
this project will investigate how recommendation and identification algorithms
for mobile groups of users can be made to scale so they can quickly provide
accurate recommendations to such groups of users, and rapidly identify mobile
group cyberbullying behavior. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project's research and
its intellectual merit focuses on advancing the state of the art in
understanding mobile group dynamics, creating accurate recommendation and
classification algorithms for mobile groups of users, and developing scalable
infrastructure upon which new mobile group applications can be deployed. The
research plan is driven by two novel and representative case studies, namely
mobile group recommendation and cyberbullying detection in mobile groups. The
project will generate an integrated systems framework consisting of six major
components to support mobile group applications: mobile client apps; a set of
core mobile group services including voting, multicast communication, rating,
and role definition; a collection of mobile group information; a mobile group
inference engine; a mobile group recommendation and prediction engine; and a
mobile group classification engine. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Society as a whole may
strongly benefit from new mobile group services and algorithms for mobile group
recommendation and classification developed within this project, thereby
enabling mobile groups of users to more easily and richly interact. Further, the
research community will benefit by the creation of open source infrastructure
that can stimulate further research on mobile groups of users. The project will
produce STEM educational materials for middle/high school students, recruit
undergraduates and underrepresented women and minorities for research, integrate
the results of the research into classes taught by the investigators, and
strengthen interdisciplinary research.