* 1528653
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Cultural Ecology of Muskogee Mound Landscapes
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2016
* Jeffrey Hantman, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 06/30/2016
* USD 15,077.00

Around the globe, ancient monuments represent collective (local, ethnic,
religious, and national) histories and identities. Under the best circumstances,
international, national, and local efforts come together to preserve historical
architecture, landscapes, and artifacts. However, recent events, ranging from
the destruction of antiquities in the Middle East, to UNESCO's offer to moderate
conflicts over the ownership of the Parthenon Marbles, to federal legislation
regulating the treatment and repatriation of ancestral Native American human
remains and artifacts, demonstrate that material heritage can also be the
subject of conflict. Monuments and antiquities, the source and representation of
memory and history, take many forms and convey different meanings to different
audiences: they may analyzed by scientists, visited by tourists, or revered as
sacred places by descendant communities. There are also many ways to write the
history and significance of such monuments. However, Indigenous oral histories
and cultural perspectives on constructions built by their ancestor have been
given little priority or attention in either analysis or interpretation. The
research supported by this award addresses the question of what might be gained
when descendent communities are included in interpreting ancient places and
their meanings. Would it enrich their value for researchers and for the public
-- and if so, how does this come about?

To address these questions, University of Virginia doctoral student, Lee Bloch,
supervised by Dr. Jeffrey L. Hantman, will undertake field research in the
eastern United States. The southern part of this region is notable for the
continuing presence of very visible but also quite ancient earthen temple
mounds, effigy mounds, and burial mounds constructed largely between c. 3500 BCE
and 1600 CE by the ancestors of contemporary Native Americans. Although many
mound sites were destroyed over the past few centuries, a large number are now
protected by federal and state preservation law. The researcher will focus on
the mounds in one Muskogee (Creek) tribal town in northern Florida. Using an
ethnographic methodology, he will collect data on how community members maintain
and interpret histories related to mound sites in five ongoing contexts:
pilgrimages to mound sites, recitations of oral traditions, performances of
ceremonial practices and dances, apprenticeships with ceremonial leaders and
specialists, and community discussions about cosmological knowledge. The
investigator hypothesizes that these expressive performances, which could be
missed by outsider analysis, may in fact be key elements of what the mounds are
and that paying attention to aesthetic principles of these performances may
enhance understanding of mound landscapes and artifacts. Findings from this
research may further scientific and cultural understanding of Native American
history and cultures, as well as how all communities are both affected by and
affect the materiality of their landscapes.