* 1528703
* Distributional Consequences of Economic Globalization
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2017
* Matthew Mahutga, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 07/31/2017
* USD 87,016.00

SES-1528703&lt;br/&gt;Matthew Mahutga&lt;br/&gt;University of California-
Riverside&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The causes of rising income inequality in
advanced capitalist countries are not well understood by social scientists
despite more than two decades of dedicated research. This project synthesizes
literatures on the two most common researched causes of the increase in
inequality: globalization and institutions. It advances both of these
literatures by providing an explanation for the paradoxical findings on the
distributional effects of economic globalization. This explanation identifies
specific mechanisms by which globalization and national institutions interact to
produce distinct distributional outcomes across time and space.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study subjects the arguments to empirical scrutiny, a
multilevel analysis of the Luxembourg Income Study's (LIS) individual wage data
will be conducted. The bulk of NSF funds will support the harmonization of
country-specific occupational categories in order to measure skill and work-
place authority more directly than is currently possible, because both of these
factors are the key mechanisms by which production globalization should affect
inequality. In addition to advancing basic research on the causes of rising
income inequality among advanced industrial democracies, this project will
provide evidence-based assessments of the future implications of production
globalization for income inequality, and of policy options at both the macro and
micro levels. In tandem, these can help to ameliorate the impact of production
globalization on income inequality, low-skill labor, and labor more generally,
in the coming decades.