* 1528122
* TWC: Small: Collaborative: Cellular Network Services in Peril: A Perspective on Control-Plane and Data-Plane Design
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Songwu Lu, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 08/31/2018
* USD 260,941.00

The cellular network is the largest wireless infrastructure deployed today. It
offers users mobile Internet access and carrier-grade voice service. Each such
service (e.g., data or voice) typically involves operations on both data and
control planes. The former transfers service content to users, whereas the
latter performs control functions of service instantiation, maintenance, update,
and termination. Securing control and data planes is thus critical to mobile
network service. Different from the Internet built upon the single best-effort
delivery, the fourth-generation (4G) mobile network supports diversified service
models. It not only provides multiple priorities within the network (e.g., voice
has higher priority than data), but also carries control and data over different
radio channels. Consequently, given a service (e.g., voice, video, or
messaging), its control-plane and data-plane operations open new venues for
security research. This project aims to study both planes in 4G networks from
the security perspective. The success of this research will not only protect the
trillion-dollar market of mobile voice for billions of smartphone users, but
also safeguard the mobile Internet access from attacks initiated by malicious
calls. The proposed activity may influence the upcoming 5G technology
standardization and train a new generation of engineers and
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research has two main thrusts. One
is the insecurity analysis of 4G network services. This project examines the
control and data planes and their coordination. It conducts thorough theoretical
analysis to uncover all potential vulnerabilities, explores novel attacks, and
empirically validates those practical threats. The other is to propose defenses
to secure both planes from such threats. The solution calls for concerted
efforts between the network and the user, and between hardware and software.
This project seeks to make three contributions: (1) Systematic disclosure of
insecurity on the control-plane and data-plane operations: Both incur new
breaches that current defense measures fail to protect; (2) Identification of
diverse root causes: Mobile standards stipulate loose regulations, whereas
device software and hardware assume protection from each other. As both planes
become more accessible to smartphones, no new protection mechanisms are in
place. (3) Solution that secures both control-plane and data-plane operations:
It adds protection at both hardware and software at mobile devices, and inside
the network infrastructure. It further leverages device capabilities while
preserving flexible network services.