* 1528292
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Societal expectations of motherhood and maternal stress during pregnancy
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2015,05/31/2018
* Barbara Piperata, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 05/31/2018
* USD 14,980.00

During pregnancy, American women receive competing messages regarding
appropriate behaviors that reflect society's expectations of mothers. Research
reveals conflicting messages about best practices during pregnancy and
childbirth frequently cause pregnant women anxiety as they try to decide which
expert advice to follow. However, no studies have explored how women's
experiences with making these decisions affect self-perceived stress or the
biological stress response. In addition, few studies have linked society's
expectations to emotional and biological stress levels. Connecting cultural
beliefs to biological responses provides a mechanism for explaining the higher
preterm birth rates in the U.S. (11.6% in 2012) compared to most European
countries, Canada, and Australia (5-9%) even among "white" women of middle to
higher socioeconomic status. This project, which trains a graduate in methods of
rigorous, empirically-grounded scientific fieldwork, examines whether higher
preterm birth rates can be explained by mixed messages and competing societal
expectations during pregnancy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Genevieve Ritchie-Ewing
under the supervision of Dr. Barbara Piperata of the Ohio State University
proposes to investigate the connections between societal expectations, women's
experiences with decision-making and their emotional and biological stress
levels. The objectives of the project are to 1) determine where pregnant women
get messages about behaviors during pregnancy and childbirth and ascertain if
these messages conflict, 2) explore how pregnant women make decisions about
which practices to integrate into their daily lives and birth plans, 3)
investigate links between women's experiences making decisions about which
advice to follow and their emotional stress levels (particularly pregnancy-
specific anxiety or anxiety associated with pregnancy-related concerns), and 4)
establish if there are associations between women's experiences making decisions
about expert advice, increased pregnancy-specific anxiety rates, and higher
biological stress levels (i.e., steeper cortisol trajectories). Based in
Columbus, OH, the researcher will collect qualitative and quantitative data to
address the above objectives with focus groups, surveys, semi-structured
interviews, maternal journaling, and hair samples for cortisol analysis.