* 1528876
* Ti-2015: The 13th World Conference on Titanium; August 16-20, 2015; San Diego, CA
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2016
* George Spanos, Minerals Metals & Materials Society
* Standard Grant
* Diana Farkas
* 06/30/2016
* USD 15,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;This grant is in partial support for the 13th
World Conference on Titanium (Ti-2015), which is being held at the Manchester
Grand Hyatt Hotel in San Diego, California from August 16-20, 2015. It is the
thirteenth conference in a series of meetings on titanium that have been held
since 1968, with the purpose of bringing together the world?s titanium community
to present and discuss progress in titanium science and technology. Titanium and
its alloys are used in applications as varied as jewelry, airplanes,
automobiles, bone implants, and surgical instruments and the technical areas
covered at the conference are equally wide ranging. Participation of the seven
major titanium countries (United Kingdom, United States, Commonwealth of
Independent States, Japan, Germany, France, and China) in the International
Organizing Committee guarantees extensive coverage of new areas in research,
development and application of titanium, as well as broad impact and stimulation
of new ideas and collaboration opportunities among attendees.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;Titanium and its
alloys continue to receive significant attention as structural materials with
desirable properties such as high specific strength, fatigue resistance,
corrosion resistance, and biocompatibility. These properties, along with its
excellent high temperature performance, have enabled titanium and its alloys to
become workhorse materials in numerous applications, further explored at the
13th World Conference on Titanium. The technical program covers a broad range of
topics including: extraction and powder production, wrought processing and
fabrication, melting and casting, intermetallics and metal matrix composites,
additive and near net shape manufacturing, and integrated computational
materials engineering, among others. The format includes 7 plenary speakers, 15
keynotes, more than 450 contributed presentations, and a post-event proceedings
publication. In addition to learning about new research and advances, this
conference helps attendees establish new international contacts and serve as a
platform to catalyze opportunities for cooperation and collaboration among
scientists and engineers working on titanium.