* 1528569
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Population Shifts and Suburban Governance
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2015,10/31/2017
* Elisa Lanari, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 10/31/2017
* USD 19,997.00

Contemporary American suburbs are home to the largest and fastest growing poor
populations in the country. In the first decade of the 21st century, suburbs saw
their poverty populations growing twice as fast as those of central cities
because of both internal population movement and immigration. One result is that
suburban communities across the country face the challenge of building an
adequate social safety net to serve their rapidly diversifying populations. Two
factors have emerged as particularly important in this effort: the presence of a
suburban network of nonprofits and philanthropic donors, and the strengthening
of regional institutional coalitions that can help implement social policies at
a metropolitan scale. However, there are also counter currents, such as the
decisions by residents of some suburbs to seek community incorporation and
thereby separate themselves from the new arrivals. It is still unclear how these
dynamics will play out and what the characteristics of the new American suburb
will be. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To investigate these developments, Northwestern
University doctoral student Elisa Lanari, supervised by Dr. Micaela di Leonardo,
will undertake 16 months of research in one such community in the American
south. The community is an example of a historically white and affluent suburb
that has adopted separatist policies and initiatives in response to the growth
of low-income and immigrant populations around them. At the same time, the
community also has a strong nonprofit sector committed to helping low-income
residents. Therefore, the community constitutes an apt site for investigating
the many interacting and dynamic factors that are currently remaking American
suburbs. The researcher will use a mix of social science methods to gather data,
including: participant observation in nonprofits and at community events and
organizational meetings; semi-structured interviews with local homeowners,
public officials, business leaders, nonprofit activists, and low-income
residents; and analysis of printed and online material produced by media,
governmental and non-governmental sources on issues of poverty, socioeconomic
polarization, and community organizing in the local area. In the last research
phase, she will gather archival and statistical data to provide an overall
context. Findings from this research will help policy makers to understand how
and why communities that have the infrastructural resources needed to build an
adequate suburban safety net do not necessarily deploy them to that end. The
research will also contribute to social scientific understanding of the changing
dynamics and geography of American suburbs.