* 1528190
* RUI: Community Bank and Credit Union Effects on Communities and Local Economies in the US during the Great Recession
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Marc Schneiberg, Reed College
* Standard Grant
* Toby Parcel
* 08/31/2019
* USD 170,824.00

Marc Schneiberg&lt;br/&gt;SES-1528190&lt;br/&gt;Reed
College&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study examines how community banks and credit
unions helped communities and local economies weather the Great Recession. Over
the past three decades, American banking abandoned its traditional roots and
practices. As it shed regulatory oversight, it concentrated assets in a handful
of giant, national or global banking corporations, and shifted away from "boring
banking" practices (taking deposits and making and holding loans) toward market-
based banking involving derivatives trading and the creation and sale of new
financial instruments. With these changes came a growing disconnect between
banks and local economies, and an extraordinary run up in debt and risk within
the financial system, setting the stage for crisis. Yet community banks and
credit unions continued to play vital roles in the US economy, providing
consumers, small business and working families with access to nearly 14,000
smaller, locally owned and operated, and even cooperatively organized banks.
These institutions participated less, if at all, in derivatives and securities
trading. They sustained close ties to their communities, and remained committed
and organized internally to serving clients and those communities rather than
just pursuing shareholder value, and related to local economies differently from
banks like CITI or JP Morgan Chase. Using new data on the American economy from
1994 to 2013, this study will analyze the effects of community banks and credit
unions on communities, local economies, and their capacities to sustain
employment, vibrant small business sectors, new business formation, and
recovery. Through these analyses, this study will contribute new knowledge about
how different kinds of banking and the organization of finance affect community
resilience and local economic performance in the face of crises. It will also
identify new avenues for reform, including supplementing traditional regulation
of "too-big-to-fail" banks with policies that support smaller, more local
community based and cooperative financial institutions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will develop and test hypotheses about the
effects of community banks and credit unions on four key outcomes within local
economies in the United States: new business formations, the size and changes in
the share of the small business sector, income inequality, and the spike and
recovery in unemployment through the Great Recession. The study will mine
economic sociology and the sociology of finance for hypotheses about how the
social structure of finance affects banking practices and local economies,
exploiting theory about two key dimensions of finance. It will focus on: 1) the
organizational structure of banks, developing the insight that small, locally
owned and operated or cooperatively owned banks are less likely to abandon their
communities and clients in the pursuit of shareholder value; and 2) the type of
the exchange relations between banks and clients, developing the insight that
banks that engage in relational lending practices and sustain close, ongoing or
embedded ties with borrowers will relate quite differently to clients and local
economies than banks that rely mainly on abstract risk rating and arm's length,
transactional bank practices. The study will then test these hypotheses using
time series analyses of annual, county- and Metropolitan Statistical Areas-level
data on the banking, organizational, and economic structure of local economies
from 1994 through 2013. The results of these analyses will advance sociological
research on finance by going beyond its focus on money-center banks, trading
rooms in currency and derivatives markets, and the dyadic relations between
banks and clients to document quantitatively and more broadly how relational
banking and the organizational structure of banks affect local economies. The
results will also deepen links between economic and urban sociology by tracing
how social structures of finance and ties between banks and communities shape
community resilience in the face of crisis.