* 1528551
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The effect of dialect contact and social identity on fricative demerger
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2015,06/30/2017
* Brendan Regan, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 06/30/2017
* USD 12,784.00

Societal changes across the world, particularly in Europe, are altering long-
standing traditional dialects. Many such dialects are converging towards
national or regional standards. Varieties of Andalusian Spanish present an
intriguing case study where two sounds that had been merged are now splitting
(or demerging) back into two separate categories, a process known as demerger.
In this case, ceceo, or the neutralization of orthographic &lt;s&gt; and &lt;z,
c(i/e)&gt; to the voiceless predorso-dental fricative [s¦È], in existence since
medieval Spanish, is currently demerging into two separate sounds, [s] and [¦È],
respectively, converging with the Castilian standard known as distinci¨®n. Ceceo
and distinci¨®n each carry social value and the social identities of speakers
are judged depending upon which norm they follow. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
present research documents the demerger in the Andalusian province of Huelva. It
compares two speech communities: (i) the capital city of Huelva, which reflects
the new, more cosmopolitan Europe of expanding social networks; and (ii) Lepe,
an agricultural town of the province, reflecting an older, more provincial,
Europe, but one with stronger social networks. This study seeks to answer the
following: (1) which factors contribute most to the probability that a speaker
will manifest a split rather than a merger (age, sex, local networks, education,
profession, etc.); (2) what are the acoustic profiles of the coronal fricative
consonants corresponding to various orthographic representations produced by
speakers of each region; and (3) does this demerger impact certain words more
than others? The research questions will be investigated through interview data,
drawing on the methods and interpretive frameworks of variationist
sociolinguistics, laboratory phonology, sociophonetics, social dialectology, and
linguistic anthropology. The demerger of ceceo exemplifies the social pressures
placed on speakers of local traditional dialects to converge towards more
standard features, even if contrary to natural processes of language change.