* 1528047
* NRI: Planning, Collaborative Guidance and Navigation in Uncertain Dynamic Environments
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Meeko Oishi, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* James Donlon
* 08/31/2020
* USD 999,998.00

Navigation in dynamic, uncertain environments is a difficult yet ubiquitous
problem in diverse applications such as search and rescue, coordinated movement,
distributed monitoring and surveillance. Collaborative solutions are highly
promising because of their potential to exploit strengths of both the human and
the automation. However, major challenges in collaborative navigation include
not only the ability of the underlying automation to effectively handle novel
scenarios and changing environments that may not have been considered at the
design stage, but also human-automation interaction requirements. The design of
methods and tools that can address these challenges could enable fundamentally
new functionality in collaborative human-robot systems. The novelty of the
proposed research is in the integration of control theory, motion planning, and
human guidance to provide highly effective solutions for navigation in highly
dynamic and uncertain environments. The proposed project will also create
opportunities to involve under-represented minorities in K-12 outreach and in
undergraduate and graduate research, to facilitate interdisciplinary
collaboration, and to develop a new interdisciplinary graduate course.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal aims to develop a generic framework for
collaborative navigation in complex environments that can accommodate hundreds
of moving obstacles (with possibly stochastic dynamics), non-trivial static
obstacles, and humans in the loop. We propose to a) evaluate the tradeoff
between short-term and long-term information for both users and autonomous
systems in highly dynamic environments, b) extend our existing algorithmic
techniques to environments of higher complexity, e.g., multi-robots and non-
planar environments, c) design and test several user-interfaces, which satisfy
pre-determined conditions for user-observability and user-predictability, for
their effectiveness in improving safe navigation, and d) experimentally validate
our existing setup for collaborative navigation in dynamic, uncertain
environments via an Android app. We will develop tightly coupled planning and
control tools, integrate human guidance and decision making with automated
tools, and complete a rigorous analysis of safety in highly dynamic environments
with uncertainty. The developed methods will be validated in multiple
environments, with human subjects, and on a micro robot testbed.