* 1528004
* NeTS: Small: Large-Scale Opportunistic Data Crowdsourcing and Dissemination in Device-to-Device (D2D) Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2016
* Hongyi Wu, University of Louisiana at Lafayette
* Standard Grant
* Wenjing Lou
* 09/30/2016
* USD 385,024.00

The vast majority of today's wireless communication systems operate in the
microwave spectrum below 3 GHz, which is experiencing severe shortage and has
become a crowded resource. To meet the 1000x growth challenge in mobile
broadband traffic, the millimeter wave (mmWave) band, operating at frequencies
between 20 and 300 GHz, has been identified for next-generation (5G) cellular
systems. While the use of mmWave band addresses the pressing needs of more
wireless spectrum, it brings a new set of unique technical challenges such as
severe path loss and undesired coverage holes. To this end, Device-to-Device
(D2D) networks are proposed to employ short-range wireless links to establish
opportunistic connections between mobile users. In this project, the researchers
will explore a diversity of application-oriented problems in D2D, culminating in
the formulation of both new fundamental theories and advanced technologies that
contribute to the development of next-generation mobile communication systems.
This project will effectively stimulate multi-disciplinary collaboration across
a broad spectrum of fields, including anthropology, communications, computer
science, economics, public health, demography, and sociology. It will also
effectively enrich courses by implementation and experimental activities,
providing students with hands-on experience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
research includes two research thrusts to design, implement, evaluate, and
prototype new protocols and algorithms, in support of efficient data gathering
and dissemination in D2D. First, a class of applications involve large-scale
data gathering from mobile devices. Although crowdsourcing has been discussed in
recent years, the marriage of crowdsourcing and D2D creates new, interesting
research problems, due to the unique non-deterministic network paradigm. The
researchers will investigate several dimensions in support of D2D-based
crowdsourcing, including a competition-based participant recruitment scheme for
delay-sensitive applications and an effective quest algorithm to deliver
crowdsourcing requests. Second, efficient data dissemination is indispensable in
many D2D applications. In contrast to the prior work that focuses on classical
multicasting from a source to a given set of receivers, the researchers propose
to investigate a unique and interesting problem where the receivers are not
explicitly known. In such settings, a natural approach is to distribute data at
some depositories, that further deliver the content to interested data consumers
upon requests. Under this framework, the researchers will devise algorithms to
choose optimal depositories for maximizing the total profit and develop new
incentive schemes to enable efficient dissemination. Complementing these
research thrusts is an experimental prototyping and validation track, with
various design choices and alternatives experimentally studied, evaluated and
refined.