* 1528939
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Prosocial Reputation Dynamics in Social Networks
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2016
* Hanne Van der Iest, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 08/31/2016
* USD 24,613.00

Having a reputation for being cooperative, trustworthy, and generous, which
social scientists call a "prosocial reputation," is known to facilitate a
surprisingly wide range of socially important transactions. For example, pro-
social reputations are associated with increased social support, better health,
and more opportunities for mutually beneficial partnerships and economic
relationships. However, reputations may change and when that happens, it is
likely that their effects change, too. This malleability of reputations is
thought to come about when opinions and information about others are exchanged
between individuals and reputations spread through social networks. The research
funded by this awards will investigate when and how such spread occurs; its
consequences for health, well-being, cooperative relationships, and social
status; and whether prosocial reputations spread differently and have different
life consequences for women and for men.

A critical problem in network research is the difficulty of collecting whole
network data that contain all salient social relationships of a particular group
of individuals. For instance, in the United States social networks span large
geographic distances and due to increased mobility and compartmentalization of
various networks to differentiated social realms such as organizations,
neighborhoods, and family, often do not have clearly demarcated boundaries. This
makes the mapping of whole networks very difficult. Therefore, the researcher
will conduct the research in the Orkney archipelago of Scotland. The archipelago
contains multiple islands with small populations (< 160 individuals), for whom
day-to-day social relations are geographically bounded and, because of
infrastructural constraints, relatively isolated. This degree of isolation
implies that most social effects of reputations originate within the community,
making it a near ideal environment to study the overarching implications of
social networks and reputations on individuals' lives. Emory University doctoral
student Hanne van der Iest, supervised by Dr. Paul L. Hooper, will carry out
this research in one island community in Orkney. Within this community, she will
comprehensively map multiple social networks through the collection of six waves
of bimonthly surveys and behavioral observations of cooperation and collective
action over a one year period. Scale development through interviews and
observation will precede survey administration to arrive at locally valid
measurement instruments for study constructs. Findings from this research will
contribute to our understanding of the dynamic spread of prosocial reputations
among women and men, and their changing effects on health, well-being, social
status, and productive exchange. These findings are important for social
scientists who want to understand the role of prosocial behavior in human
societies as well as for those concerned with improving the quality of community
life and individual well-being.