* 1528617
* Collaborative Proposal: Development and calibration of the oxygen isotope systematics of small terrestrial gastropods
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Jeffrey Nekola, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 08/31/2019
* USD 71,177.00

Land snails are one of the most common fossils in the terrestrial geologic
record of North America. Their shells are composed of calcium carbonate and the
oxygen isotopic composition of their shells record climatic conditions during
growth. Therefore, the oxygen isotopic composition of land snails has the
potential to reconstruct past climates on broad spatial and temporal scales. To
date, however, there is a little understanding on the kinds of climatic
information that can be inferred from the snails, and therefore, their current
use as paleoclimatic archives is limited. This proposal will develop, test, and
calibrate the oxygen isotope systematics of small land snails for use as a
paleoclimatic proxy in terrestrial settings across North America. The modern
calibration of this proxy will benefit society through the development of a
terrestrial paleoclimatic proxy that is capable of reconstructing past climate
over broad spatial and temporal scales and also will improve our understanding
of the taxonomic diversity and spatial distribution of land snails, a fauna that
is decreasing at an alarming rate globally. This project will teach and train
future scientists, from high school to PhD candidates, integrate scientists from
multiple fields (paleontology, biology, Quaternary geology), and broaden the
participation of diverse and underrepresented groups. Dissemination of results
will include a diverse audience (specialists and general public), in English and
Spanish to reach the Hispanic community in USA and elsewhere. This project will
establish linkages between underrepresented groups and STEM disciplines at
research-intensive universities.

To calibrate the oxygen isotope systematics of modern land snails in North
America, investigators will analyze the oxygen isotope composition of
approximately 1,000 shell samples from modern snails collected along two
selected transects that cross North America from southern Texas to Canada. They
will identify the primary climatic controls on shell ä18O values by quantifying
the relation between shell ä18O and relevant climatic variables (temperature,
ä18O of precipitation, precipitation amount, relative humidity) using an
evaporative steady-state flux balance-mixing model developed for land snails.
Researchers hypothesize that: (1) the oxygen isotope composition of small land
snails in temperate environments (latitudes of 26 to 48 degrees N) primarily
will reflect the oxygen isotope composition of precipitation, and therefore can
be used to infer past changes in precipitation oxygen isotope values; and (2)
shell oxygen isotope values of snails living in arid to semi-arid environments
will yield higher values than predicted because of low relative humidity values.
After calibration of the oxygen isotope systematics for living specimens,
investigators will conduct two case studies to determine how well the oxygen
isotope values of small snails track the oxygen isotope records of speleothems
or other proxy records. The proposed work will allow better quantification of
past climate change over broad areas of North America, and from many different
types of deposits.