* 1528295
* Hiaki Grammar: Documentation and Analysis
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2015,01/31/2022
* Heidi Harley, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Jorge Valdes Kroff
* 01/31/2022
* USD 260,163.00

This three-pronged project focuses on the grammar of Hiaki (Yaqui), an
endangered Uto-Aztecan language spoken in southern Arizona and northern Mexico.
Investigating understudied languages like Hiaki provides researchers the
opportunity to discover hitherto undocumented diversity in the human capacity
for linguistic expression, and hence to test and improve upon models of human
language and cognition. Basic descriptive research on a broad array of
grammatical areas will be conducted, enabling the drafting of the second volume
of a projected three-volume series on the grammar of Hiaki. A series of
subtitled videos, useful in language teaching as well as serving documentary
purposes, will be produced.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two particularly
intriguing aspects of Hiaki will be the focus of the theoretical component of
this research. The grammar of Hiak''s noun phrases is like that of German or
Russian, with concord for number and case marking on articles, nouns and
adjectives. In contrast, Hiaki's verb phrases resemble those of Japanese,
requiring complex suffixation processes instead of complement clauses in many
contexts. Surprisingly, noun phrase concord becomes dissociated when the noun
phrase mentions a possessor, like 'The dancer's beads', such that number marking
on the article tracks the number of the possessor but the case of the whole noun
phrase. This pattern of dissociation is not expected in many current models of
grammatical agreement. Verb phrases also exhibit an unusual property: They
permit passivization of already non-active verbs. These two very unusual
features of Hiaki will be investigated in detail in consultation with native
speakers of the language, and a model of these grammatical patterns developed.
The implications for our understanding of the structure of human language will
include a new grasp of when and why such variation can arise, and, potentially,
new theories of agreement and passivization, respectively.