* 1528022
* TWC: Small: Middleware for Certificate-Based Authentication
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Daniel Zappala, Brigham Young University
* Standard Grant
* Shannon Beck
* 08/31/2019
* USD 512,740.00

Every time someone uses a phone or computer to connect to an Internet site,
software determines whether the connection is safe or being intercepted by
attackers. Unfortunately, this software is error-prone, leaving users vulnerable
to having their privacy violated or their personal information stolen due to
phishing attacks, identity theft, and unauthorized inspection of their encrypted
traffic. A number of solutions are being proposed, but the software is
fragmented across many platforms and redundantly or incorrectly implemented. The
goal of this research is to develop a trust platform that consolidates the
decision-making process into a single location to provide a correct, consistent,
and usable service for all existing and future applications. The platform is
designed to make it easier for researchers to test and deploy alternative
methods for detecting trustworthy Internet sites. The research emphasizes
usability, so that users are not faced with error messages that are difficult
for them to understand or act on.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project designs and
analyzes middleware that consolidates certificate-based authentication in the
operating system. It is designed for both Linux and Android, and automatically
overrides the broken decision-making process currently found in many existing
applications. Developers are no longer required to provide their own certificate
validation function when building applications. The platform supports a variety
of plugins for certificate authentication, such as dynamic certificate pinning,
crowd-sourced notary services, and a curated root store. Policy configuration
enables users or organizations to define how responses from multiple plugins are
combined to make a final trust decision. Usability studies are focused on all
aspects that require user interaction with the system: installing the system,
configuring security and privacy preferences, choosing authentication providers,
and receiving actionable notifications and warnings. This research benefits
national security by addressing numerous weaknesses in the current trust system
with new authentication services. The project contributes to the security
community by providing an open source platform for easily extending the current
trust system.