* 1528573
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Micro-level Decision Making and Macro-level Policies in the Management of Natural Resources
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2017
* Amanda Stronza, Texas A&M AgriLife Research
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 06/30/2017
* USD 8,063.00

Deforestation and forest fragmentation continue unabated in many parts of the
world, including the United States. This has led to the degradation of
watersheds, reduction in bio-diversity, and the loss of ecosystem services.
Previous research has found that the expansion of the agricultural frontier is a
prime driver of this process and frequently local smallholder farmers are
blamed. In response, Government agencies and non-governmental organizations
(NGOs) often promote agroforestry as a "sustainable development" strategy for
combating deforestation while improving farmer livelihoods. Unfortunately, these
projects frequently are not successful. The goal of the research funded by this
award is to understand why. Evidence to date suggests that the problem may lie
in a clash between prescriptive ideas from outsiders and local understandings of
how forests, fields, and resources should be managed, which will be the focus of
this investigation.

Texas Agriculture and Mining University doctoral student, Katherine Davis, under
the direction of Dr. Amanda Stronza, will target her research on agroforestry
projects in the Santa Maria River watershed and the Santa Fe National Park
buffer zone in Panama. She chose these sites because in the relatively small
area of Panama, numerous agencies are promoting agroforestry projects for
smallholder farmers, which allows comparative sampling in a controlled
framework. Agroforestry promoters include the Panamanian government's National
Environmental Authority, national institutions, and several non-governmental
organizations (NGOs). Davis will gather data with a mixed-methods strategy,
including: semi-structured interviews, participatory mapping, and participant
observation. These data will allow her to compare the views and practices of
farmers, NGOs, and government staff in regard to agroforestry, farmer
associations, and the relationship between agroforestry and forest conservation.
By linking micro-level farmer natural resource management and livelihood
decisions with macro-level projects and agroforestry discourse, findings from
this research will help social scientists better identify the key factors
involved in successfully managing natural resources for conservation outcomes
for all while improving livelihoods of local residents. These findings will be
generalizable to multiple sites in the United States where small-scale farming
and natural resource management frequently come into conflict.