* 1528163
* SHF: Small: Detecting and Repairing Presentation Failures in Web Applications
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2020
* William Halfond, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 07/31/2020
* USD 375,000.00

The user interfaces (UIs) of a web application serve an important
role&lt;br/&gt;in the success of online companies. Studies have shown that
the&lt;br/&gt;aesthetics of an application?s UIs can strongly influence
users?&lt;br/&gt;overall evaluation of a company; in particular impressions
of&lt;br/&gt;trustworthiness and usability. Presentation failures ? a
discrepancy&lt;br/&gt;between the actual appearance of a web site and its
intended&lt;br/&gt;appearance ? can undermine this effort and negatively impact
end&lt;br/&gt;users? perception of the quality of the site, the services
it&lt;br/&gt;delivers, and affect the branding a company is trying to
achieve.&lt;br/&gt;Debugging presentation failures is typically a manual task
where&lt;br/&gt;testers must identify when the layout and style of an app?s
pages is&lt;br/&gt;incorrect and developers must carry out repairs. This process
is both&lt;br/&gt;labor intensive and error prone: testers can easily miss
presentation&lt;br/&gt;failures, since the process is based on the testers?
visual comparison&lt;br/&gt;of a page and an oracle; and it can be difficult for
developers to&lt;br/&gt;identify the responsible HTML elements or properties
once a failure is&lt;br/&gt;detected, since HTML and CSS interact in complex
ways. In this&lt;br/&gt;research effort the PIs will investigate automated
techniques to help&lt;br/&gt;testers more accurately detect presentation
failures and efficiently&lt;br/&gt;identify the faulty code. Given the
widespread deployment of web&lt;br/&gt;applications, this work will impact both
end users and software&lt;br/&gt;developers by reducing errors in these
applications and making the&lt;br/&gt;debugging process more effective and
efficient. The results of this&lt;br/&gt;research will also impact educational
efforts through the training of&lt;br/&gt;future software engineering in new
techniques to improve the quality&lt;br/&gt;of web
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical research will encompass two
general areas. The first&lt;br/&gt;area of research will advance techniques for
detecting presentation&lt;br/&gt;failures. The primary mechanism for doing this
will be to apply&lt;br/&gt;computer vision techniques to automatically identify
discrepancies&lt;br/&gt;between the actual rendered appearance of a UI and its
intended&lt;br/&gt;appearance. The developed techniques will be widely
applicable to a&lt;br/&gt;range of UIs, including those with dynamic content and
those using&lt;br/&gt;different specification mechanisms for UI oracles. The
second area of&lt;br/&gt;research will use the identified differences to
identify the specific&lt;br/&gt;elements in the UI code that are responsible for
the observed&lt;br/&gt;failures. The research efforts will focus on using
artificial&lt;br/&gt;intelligence techniques, such as search-based and
statistical-based&lt;br/&gt;learning, on the UI?s layout models to reason about
the UI?s possible&lt;br/&gt;faults and guide the developers to identify the
faulty HTML elements&lt;br/&gt;and CSS properties.