* 1528095
* NeTS: Small: Realizing Integrated High throughput PLC/VLC networks
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2021
* Srikanth Krishnamurthy, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Murat Torlak
* 09/30/2021
* USD 400,000.00

Power line communications (PLC) is becoming popular for home automation and
indoor communications with data rates of up to 1 Gbps. It can offer an immediate
means of providing high bandwidth connectivity where there is no in-built
network infrastructure. Combined with high speed wireless radio frequency (RF)
access which can be provided by either connecting wireless routers to power
outlets or via Visible Light LED based Communications (VLC), one can envision an
alternate high bandwidth infrastructure for ubiquitous wired/wireless
connectivity indoors. However, PLC research has not received much attention and
is yet to mature. This project will have an immediate impact in realizing
Internet connectivity in homes and enterprises that do not have an in-built
wired network infrastructure. It can be especially useful in business segments
such as healthcare, industrial automation and warehousing. PLC can also find
application in supporting the Internet of Things. A new course on emerging
network technologies will be developed. A close working relationship with NEC
laboratories is expected to result in successful transition of the research into
practice. In this project, the objectives are to: (a) develop a fundamental
understanding of various factors that influence power line communications (such
as turning on/off electrical devices) and (b) based on the understanding
developed, realize the vision of building an integrated PLC/RF/VLC
framework.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;First, a comprehensive measurement study will be
undertaken to understand (a) the factors that hinder achieving high data rates
in PLC and (b) the interactions between PLC and the wireless RF/VLC interface.
Specifically, the measurements are expected to yield an understanding of: (i)
the dynamics of the PLC channel, (ii) the impact of active electrical devices on
the achievable PLC throughput and (iii) the conditions under which either the
PLC or the wireless link become a bottleneck in achieving high throughputs.
Based on the understanding gained, the PIs will design and implement the
integrated framework, towards effectively managing the PLC network by itself,
and the integrated PLC/RF or PLC/VLC network towards realizing high data rates
in practice. This framework will be fully implemented on a integrated PLC/RF
testbed at UC Riverside with additional VLC experimentation as well.