* 1528960
* DDRI:  Challenges of Conducting Forensic Science in Transitional Justice Contexts
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2015,02/28/2017
* Sally Merry, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 02/28/2017
* USD 25,200.00

Transitional justice has come to increasingly rely on forensic anthropology to
provide objective, scientific proof of war-time violence, which can then be
corroborated against witness testimonies. But in the process of assembling and
interpreting data, how are forensic investigations influenced by moral and legal
responsibilities? This project, which trains a graduate in methods of rigorous,
empirically-grounded scientific fieldwork, examines how forensic teams must
juggle their legal obligations to provide material evidence for criminal trials
on the one hand, and their moral responsibilities to the bereaved relatives of
the deceased on the other, meanwhile maintaining standards of scientific
neutrality. Furthermore, findings from this research will contribute to existing
forensic science models within the United States by stressing the importance of
studying patterns of skeletal trauma across individuals in cases with multiple
victims, such as serial murder cases, plane crashes, and natural disasters.

New York University doctoral candidate, Jennifer Trowbridge, under the
supervision of Dr. Sally Engle Merry, will conduct research on forensic
investigations of war crimes' victims in Colombia. Ongoing peace talks between
the Colombian state and the long-standing guerilla organization, the FARC,
suggest Colombia's emergence as a country engaged in transitional justice
processes. As the country moves from war to peace, increasing space is opening
up for relatives of the deceased to demand the exhumation, identification, and
return of their loved ones' remains. The researcher hypothesizes that in order
to understand patterns of mass political violence, forensic investigations
require an interaction with testimonial accounts of violence that address the
complex social transformations brought about by war. The Colombian gravesite
provides an ideal location to examine the interactions between forensic science
investigations, legal mechanisms designed to advance democratic stability, and
shifts in collective identity among communities victimized by mass violence.
Such an understanding takes on particular importance given US diplomatic and
financial commitments to help resolve Colombia's political strife since the
beginning of "Plan Colombia" in 1999. Methods of data collection and analysis
include an ethnographic investigation of forensic investigation practice through
the process of preliminary investigation, exhumation, laboratory analysis, and
repatriation of remains. The researcher will engage in participation observation
and interviews with forensic and other state and legal investigators,
organizations, and families of the deceased, as well as a textual and visual
analysis of forensic case reports. Findings from this study will advance
cultural anthropology and law and social sciences, particularly in the areas of
forensic anthropology, biological anthropology, bioarcheology, and science and
technology studies.