* 1528811
* Collaborative Research: Prices, Peers, and Perceptions: Field Experiments on Technology Adoption in the Context of Improved Cookstoves
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2015,06/30/2018
* Michael Hannigan, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 06/30/2018
* USD 574,911.00

Adoption of potentially welfare-improving technologies remains frustratingly low
in many contexts. Improved cookstoves are a prime example: while cleaner-burning
stove technologies have potential health, environmental, and social benefits,
efforts to disseminate these technologies have fallen short and the practice of
cooking with biomass over open fires remains dominant throughout much of the
developing world. The central aim of this proposal is to study how economic
incentives ("prices"), social learning ("peers"), and subjective beliefs
("perceptions") interact to influence technology adoption dynamics. We do so
through a field experiment that offers new stoves at different price levels to
groups of households with and without social ties to households that have
already received stoves. Our results will inform and future efforts to
disseminate welfare-enhancing technologies to larger population
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our conceptual model of households' technology
adoption and use decisions highlights multiple potential interactions among
prices, peers, and perceptions. Key research questions that will be addressed
through our experiments include how price affects perceived quality of a new
technology, how these perceptions are modified by exposure to peers that have
experience with the technology, and how perceptions change over time based on
one's own experience and (objective and subjective) technology performance. We
implement a novel identification strategy for identifying these effects, using
the preexisting and exogenously controlled distribution of free stoves in
combination with uncorrelated, cluster-randomized assignment to different stove
subsidy levels. By explicitly measuring perceptions in conjunction with other
outcome variables in the experiment (including both surveys and physical
indicators of stove use and impacts on personal exposure to pollutants), the
researchers will be able to test specific models about how prices and peers
(prior adoption interact in belief formation) a key issue in the technology
adoption literature.