* 1528178
* TWC: Small: Oblivious Cloud Storage Systems, from Theory to Practice --- Simpler, More Efficient, More Robust
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Amr El Abbadi, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Shannon Beck
* 08/31/2019
* USD 498,987.00

Outsourcing storage to the cloud has become more widespread in recent years;
however, cloud storage services are constantly exposed to a number of non-
trivial adversarial threats. This work addresses security risks arising from the
leakage of access patterns, which is the ability of an adversary to detect when
the same item is accessed repeatedly on a storage server, which has been shown
to substantially impact data privacy. This project develops CloudORAM, the first
provably-secure fully concurrent and asynchronous oblivious storage system that
relies on simple tree-based Oblivious RAM (ORAM) techniques, the state-of-the-
art cryptographic solution for hiding access patterns.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CloudORAM's system architecture uses a trusted proxy node
processing concurrent accesses, from potentially multiple clients, to an
untrusted server to hide access patterns. CloudORAM also outperforms existing
systems in terms of performance, storage requirements, and scalability, while
being substantially simpler to describe and deploy due to the tree-based ORAM
structure. This project develops better combinatorial techniques to reduce
bandwidth consumption in ORAM-based storage solutions as well as proofs of
concept for new oblivious storage systems without the need of a trusted proxy
node, and presents the first comprehensive formal framework to formalize and
prove security of oblivious storage systems.