* 1528411
* The scope of signed phonological generalizations
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2015,01/31/2020
* Iris Berent, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Tyler Kendall
* 01/31/2020
* USD 297,414.00

Every language includes a phonological system that expresses words as patterns
of meaningless elements. Moreover, people readily generalize these patterns to
novel forms that they have never heard before. For example, upon hearing the
forms "bagogo" and "malulu", people rapidly extract the ABB pattern and they
extend it to "wufifi". These results from spoken languages are significant
because they suggest that human brains encode linguistic phonological patterns
by means of abstract rules. Phonological patterns however, are not limited to
spoken languages. Like their spoken counterparts, every sign language exhibits
(manual) phonological patterns, and signers extend those patterns to novel
forms. Accordingly, one can ask whether rules form part of all languages, or of
spoken systems alone. Similarities (and differences) in the design of signed and
spoken languages are significant because they allow us to determine whether some
features of natural language are core to the human biological capacity for
language, irrespective of the specific modality (speech vs. manual gestures) in
which it is transmitted. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research seeks to
gauge the role of rules in sign language phonology. To this end, this
investigation will examine the scope of generalizations afforded by sign
language phonology to determine whether these generalizations are best captured
by algebraic or non-algebraic (statistical and visual/phonetic) mechanisms. As a
case study, Dr. Berent will investigate the reduplication rule in American Sign
Language. Among the issues to be addressed are: whether signers freely
generalize the reduplication pattern across the board--irrespective of the
similarity of novel items to familiar signed elements; and whether reduplication
relies on linguistic knowledge or visual repetition. For example, experiments
will examine whether reduplication depends on various linguistically-relevant
variables such as the lexical status of the signs; and whether it is dependant
on participants' linguistic experience with ASL. The project also includes a set
of Near Infrared Spectroscopy (NIRS) studies to explore sensitivity to
reduplication in neonates. Results will shed light on the basis of the human
capacity for language. By exploring the structure of typical phonological
systems, the findings from this project are relevant to our understanding of the
host of clinical disorders linked to phonology, ranging from specific language
impairment to dyslexia. This investigation of signed phonological systems may
also help promote reading gains among deaf individuals by informing research-
based educational practices.