* 1528025
* CHS: Small: Deriving and Exploiting Shape Semantics
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Leonidas Guibas, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 08/31/2020
* USD 500,000.00

3D representations are the most faithful digital encoding of physical objects,
allowing us to store and manipulate all kinds of information about the object,
both high-level (e.g., affordances and functionality) and low-level (e.g.,
appearance and material). Furthermore, they do so in a way that is more complete
than 2D images or entirely symbolic representations such as text-based knowledge
graphs. Yet associating semantic information with 3D models is not easy, because
data that directly links 3D models to their function and use, their semantic
parts and attributes, is not widely available. Given the emergence of 3D shape
repositories on the Web supporting a variety of applications (such as 3D
printing), plus the availability of affordable 3D scanners and their
incorporation in computers and mobile devices, the time is ripe to enrich these
repositories with semantic information that will vastly increase their
accessibility and usefulness beyond the specialized applications for which they
were originally developed. The PI's goal in this research is to do just that, by
developing mathematical and algorithmic techniques which extract, encode, and
exploit the semantics of 3D models; these in turn will be combined in a novel
search engine for 3D models that will exploit semantic shape attributes in a
unified way and will allow much broader access to and use of 3D repositories,
thereby ultimately supporting many commercial applications while also proving
useful to other research communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Toward these ends,
the PI will acquire semantic information about shapes by a combination of
geometric analysis and user annotation. The geometric analysis is not only of
shapes in isolation, but instead a joint analysis of collections of related
shapes. The aim is to build networks among 3D models that can transfer
information between them. Through these networks, using novel mathematical
techniques, the PI will enable understanding of the shared structure as well as
the variability of shapes in a collection. Common parts or structures in shapes
invariably have semantic significance, and the role of a shape in a collection
(its relationships to its partner and peer shapes) often defines semantic
attributes of the shape. Since user annotations are expensive to obtain, the
plan is to develop tools that exploit the above-mentioned networks so that only
a modest number of annotations need to be obtained by crowd-sourcing queries.
However, user annotations will be sparse and noisy, so the PI will also develop
techniques for cleaning them up, as well as for propagating and aggregating
them. Understanding how to integrate semantic structure reflected in the
geometry of shapes with semantic structure reflected in language is one of the
deep problems the PI will tackle in this research.