* 1528209
* GLOBE@20 Project
* GEO,RISE
* 02/15/2015,01/31/2017
* Steven Schneider, WestEd
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 01/31/2017
* USD 200,000.00

This RAPID project supports the advancement of STEM education among elementary
and secondary students and the general public through increasing opportunities
to participate in authentic, inquiry-based science investigations of the
environment using scientific protocols and infrastructure offered by the Global
Learning and Observations to Benefit the Environment (GLOBE) program. The GLOBE
program, launched on Earth Day 1995, is a highly successful, science education
program that now operates in more than 110 countries. Over 66,000 teachers and
millions of students have participated in the program. In conjunction with the
upcoming 20th anniversary of the program, GLOBE is launching a new citizen
science campaign that will expand GLOBE beyond its traditional focus on formal
education settings. If successful, this pilot citizen science effort will allow
GLOBE to greatly expand its reach and impact on science literacy worldwide. In
addition, GLOBE will initiate a year-long GLOBE@20 campaign of observations and
collaborative student research projects that will culminate in a new
International Science Fair that will be held during the week of Earth Day 2016.
With its focus on inquiry-based science, use of authentic data, and addressing
real-world environmental problems, GLOBE supports development of the scientific
and critical thinking skills necessary for tomorrow's STEM-literate workforce.
The opportunities offered by GLOBE to engage and collaborate with an
international community of participants also promote global awareness and cross-
cultural understanding, collaboration, and environmental
stewardship.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The GLOBE@20 celebration events are being co-
developed by NASA (primary sponsor of GLOBE operations), the GLOBE
Implementation Office (GIO) based at UCAR, and WestEd, recipient of this award.
WestEd's role in the GLOBE@20 efforts include: 1) developing the strategies,
tools, and resources for communicating with, engaging, and enabling
participation of members of the public who seek to participate in the pilot
GLOBE citizen science campaign; 2) developing the assessment rubrics,
participation protocols and guides, and supporting materials that underpin
implementation of the 2016 International Science Fair for GLOBE students; and,
3) developing the coherent communications strategy and resources to showcase the
outcomes of GLOBE program activities and promote awareness of opportunities to
participate in on-going GLOBE program education and research activities, either
through school-based or citizen science-based activities.