* 1528288
* MRI: Acquisition of an Integrated Atomic Force and Fluorescence Microscope to Enhance Undergraduate Research at Wellesley College
* BIO,DBI
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2018
* Megan Nunez, Wellesley College
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 07/31/2018
* USD 266,200.00

An award is made to Wellesley College for the acquisition of an atomic force
microscope integrated with a fluorescence microscope to enhance the educational
and research experience of undergraduate microbiologists, biochemists, cell
biologists, analytical chemists, and materials scientists. Wellesley College is
an undergraduate college for women whose mission is "to provide an excellent
liberal arts education for women who will make a difference in the world." As a
liberal arts college, Wellesley focuses on educating a culturally diverse group
of young women to be articulate, critical, and well-rounded thinkers and
citizens. Roughly a third of students major in a scientific discipline, where
they are involved in a rich, inquiry-based laboratory curriculum and independent
research with faculty. Encouraged by their laboratory experience, many of them
go on to careers in STEM fields. In the most recent NSF survey, Wellesley ranked
first among all liberal arts colleges in generating female Ph.D.'s in math and
science between 2008 and 2012 (199 Ph.D.s). In addition to supporting
undergraduate education through research, this instrument will encourage
collaboration between biological and physical scientists and between the
Wellesley and Olin College communities, as they combine their disciplinary
experience to investigate new questions or to take a new look at stubborn old
questions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research-grade integrated AFM-fluorescence
microscope will enable students and faculty to sensitively measure very small
and dynamic processes in several research areas. The Núñez lab (Chemistry),
Klepac-Ceraj lab (Biological Sciences), and Huang lab (Olin College of
Engineering) will explore the structure and dynamics of bacterial communities
from diverse systems including predatory soil bacteria, oral biofilms, and green
photosynthetic freshwater bacteria. Students in the Darling lab (Biological
Sciences) will examine protein-protein interactions between cardiac cells. Young
investigators in the Flynn lab (Chemistry) will determine the temporal dynamics
of metal nanoparticle films at the nanometer scale. The Goss lab (Biological
Sciences) will study exocytosis by the fission yeast S. pombe. Furthermore,
undergraduate biology, chemistry, physics, and neuroscience students will use
this instrument to discover the utility and limitations of fluorescence and
scanning probe microscopies in their coursework, and they will measure nanoscale
features and physical properties of polymers, optical components, and alloys in
Olin College's materials science program.