* 1528490
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Influence of Protracted Exposure to Risk and Risk Management on Local Assessment
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2016
* Chloe Ahmann, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 06/30/2016
* USD 19,982.00

This project investigates the conditions under which past experiences of
protracted risk influence local assessments and policy formulation. Risk is a
theme of growing importance both for the sciences and within social and
political life, most typically used to describe an orientation toward the future
as something open to human intervention. Most risk assessment analyses rely on
data from contexts where risk is experienced as a single event from which a set
of costs and benefits are to be assessed. This project, which trains a graduate
student in how to conduct rigorous empirically-grounded scientific fieldwork,
asks how understandings of risk assessment vary in contexts with a long history
of risk management. Findings from this case study will further contribute to
public understandings of risk distribution and its implications for public
health, policy discussions regarding environmental regulation, and ongoing
educational efforts in Baltimore (where the researcher will involve students in
the research process and contribute research materials to local
archives).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;George Washington University graduate student
Chloe Ahmann (under the direction of Dr. Joel Kuipers) will study one Baltimore
City community where residents are debating the construction of a trash-burning
incinerator in order to understand, first, how past exposure to toxins affects
individuals' experience of risk and, second, how such experience can motivate
collective mobilization. South Baltimore City has been a site of risk management
since the 19th century, from quarantining lepers during the "great wave" of
immigration to supporting nuclear deterrence with its Cold War chemical
holdings. These operations have left significant marks on both land and local
health. Today, the region is the planned site of the nation's largest
incinerator. While political representatives have supported the project as an
"acceptable risk" on the path toward energy independence, residents have
responded by invoking their historical exposure to risk. In order to understand
the historical and toxicological motivations for this, the researcher will
conduct both archival and ethnographic research, by (1) tracing histories of
risk management that have affected south Baltimore and interrogating their
cumulative effects and (2) exploring how residents use this history to make
political claims in the present. In doing so, her project will not only
contribute to research on environmental justice movements, but will also
increase understandings of how history influences experiences of risk more
generally (for example, in health, security, and finance). The project will rely
on methodological frameworks grounded in actor network theory and new social
movement, and make use of conventional methods of ethnographic data collection
and analysis, including participant observation within the Baybrook community,
oral history, and semi-structured interviews.