* 1528395
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Masculinity and Fatherhood in Post-trauma and Post-conflict Contexts
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2017
* Kristen McLean, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 07/31/2017
* USD 28,703.00

Social science research on factors that affect family well-being in post-
conflict settings has tended to neglect the caregiving roles of adolescent and
young adult men. Instead, researchers have attended more to male deficits,
recognizing men for the damages they impart via their absence or harmful
behaviors rather than for any positive contributions they might make within the
family. This gap in knowledge is problematic because it impedes the development
of effective and culturally appropriate post-conflict and post-trauma
interventions to promote family well-being, provide for child health and
resilience, and prevent the intergenerational transmission of violence that
might feed future conflicts. Therefore, Yale University doctoral student Kristen
McLean, under the supervision of Dr. Catherine Panter-Brick, will undertake
research to address this issue.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researcher has chosen
the Kono District of Sierra Leone as an appropriate site to investigate the
post-conflict and post-trauma family roles of younger men. This is an
appropriate site because the region was particularly devastated by the country's
1991-2002 civil war and has also been affected by the Ebola epidemic. The
researcher's overarching research question is: does extreme adversity shape
young men's masculinity, fatherhood experiences, and family well-being? She will
gather data using a variety of anthropological methods, including: participant
observation, semi-structured interviews, the administration of standard scales
to assess mental health and resilience, the collection of life history
narratives, and analysis of archival materials. Findings from this research will
deepen understanding of what it means to be a man in a context of debilitating
poverty and public health crisis, identifying key challenges young men face as
well as resources they rely upon as they assume traditional older adult
parenting roles. Study findings also will advance social science theory of
masculinity, fatherhood, and resilience, adding to theoretical debates on
gender, family well-being, and the role of fathers in child development.