* 1528492
* Racemization dating of subsurface microorganisms
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2020
* Tullis Onstott, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 07/31/2020
* USD 293,003.00

This project aims to answer the question regarding how quickly subsurface
microbial communities metabolize and grow. Microbial communities are responsible
for the transformation of organic matter that is deeply buried in marine and
terrestrial sediments and of organic matter generated at depth by hydrothermal
processes and rock/water interactions, such as serpentinization. This organic
matter is either converted to carbon dioxide and methane, which often returns to
the surface and enters the atmosphere, or into more microbial biomass. Heavily
biodegraded petroleum is the residue of these microbial conversions. Subsurface
microbial communities also mediate the concentrations of iron, uranium, arsenic
and other toxic metals and organic contaminants in groundwater. They cause
diagenetic alteration of mineral phases, such as the transformation of feldspar
grains into clay and change the porosity and permeability of aquifers. The rate
at which all of this biogeochemical processing occurs far beneath our feet,
however, is poorly constrained. This project seeks to develop a new method of
more accurately quantifying the in situ rates of subsurface microbial
biogeochemical processes by determining the average age the microorganisms
themselves. If the microorganisms are growing quickly then the biogeochemical
cycling must be equally fast, but if they are very old, then the biogeochemical
processes are occurring at very slow rates. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For the past
20 years geochemical models for carbon transformation have been used to deduce
in situ metabolic rates and anabolic rates of these communities. Depending upon
the assumptions made and measurements used, estimates of these rates vary by
three to four orders of magnitude for any site/sample. The investigator and his
colleagues recently proposed that the analyses of the right and left-hand
configuration (D/L) of aspartic acid (Asp) provides a direct constraint on the
anabolic rate of subsurface microorganisms. These results suggest that the
protein turnover times for thermophilic microorganisms are less than one year
and that the biogeochemical rates required to support this turnover are much
greater than previously guessed from geochemical models. With further
refinements in measurement protocols and testing, the Asp D/L analyses could
provide a far more accurate constraint on the in situ anabolic rate than
previous approaches. When this rate is combined with metaproteomic analyses,
then constraints can also be placed on the rates of the most abundant metabolic
pathways and thus biogeochemical transformations from analysis of a single
sample. This estimate is completely independent of geochemical models or
isotopic assays that have been used in the past. To realize this goal starvation
experiments will be performed over a period of 2 years on spore-forming and non-
spore forming thermophiles and hyperthermophiles for which complete genomes
currently exist. The rate of racemization of aspartic acid as a function of
temperature will then be determined. The principal metabolic pathways will be
mapped using proteomics to determine the rate of ATP production and consumption.
This will then be compared to the measured rates of respiration as a function of
temperature. If the racemization rate and rate of isoaspartate formation
represent the major debilitating process, then estimates of the respiration rate
derived from the D/L of Asp and the metabolic pathway analysis should coincide
with the measured rates. These experiments will also reveal at what point the
D/L of aspartic acid is so high that a microorganism truly dies, never to come
back to life.