* 1528294
* Collaborative Research: The Organizational Production of Earnings Inequalities
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Donald Tomaskovic-Devey, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Toby Parcel
* 08/31/2019
* USD 97,462.00

SES-1528294&lt;br/&gt;Donald Tomaskovic-Devey&lt;br/&gt;University of
Massachusetts Amherst&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SES-1524787 &lt;br/&gt;Dustin Avent-
Holt&lt;br/&gt;University of California-
Irvine&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SES-1524761&lt;br/&gt;Andrew
Penner&lt;br/&gt;Georgia Regents University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Rising income
inequality is a widespread problem in high income countries. While the broad
trajectories of national income and wealth inequalities are apparent, little is
known about the workplace and institutional dynamics that produce these
disturbing trends. This project investigates the dynamics of workplace earnings
distributions, a major component of the overall income distribution. The
researchers will take advantage of available administrative data on nearly all
private sector workplaces and their employees for six countries over fifteen
years to examine workplace level inequality levels and trends. The research
centers on two central questions: What factors drive overall income inequality
in workplaces? How do workplaces exacerbate or mitigate the impact of individual
distinctions, such as education level, gender or immigrant status? The unique
comparative population level data design allows the research team to address
these two questions in both cross- and sub-national temporal contexts, asking:
How do inequality generating mechanisms vary as a function of institutional
context? Policy debates about inequality primarily focus on government
redistribution at the national level, often ignoring that income distributions
have become more unequal because of workplace compensation
shifts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study brings workplaces into the center of the
analysis of national inequality levels and trajectories. Current policy
discussions often ignore the role of national institutions and workplace
practices in encouraging or discouraging inequality outcomes. Building on
Relational Inequality Theory the project examines the generic social mechanisms
that produce both levels and distributions of organizational incomes and the
degree to which they are moderated by institutional context. Combining Linked
Employer-Employee Panel (LEEP) data with local institutional knowledge the
research analyses data on virtually all employees linked to all employers in the
private sector for six countries with high quality LEEP data: Germany, France,
Sweden, Norway, Slovenia and the Czech Republic, from circa 2000 to the present.
This study helps uncover the potential for interventions via educational
investments, equal opportunity enforcement, wage floors and ceilings, and other
institutional interventions that influence organizational variation in
inequalities. Better understanding and documenting why some firms produce less
inequality than others will provide a powerful counter-narrative to the idea
that inequality is a naturally occurring process. Exploring organizational
variation within and between countries will reveal the range of inequality
regimes compatible with contemporary product and labor market constraints.
Further, by linking gender and ethnic/citizenship inequalities to the structure
of workplace inequality dynamics study results may reveal new paths for
increasing social inclusion of historically marginalized groups.