* 1528099
* TWC: TTP Option: Small: Collaborative: SRN: On Establishing Secure and Resilient Networking Services
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Dijiang Huang, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 08/31/2019
* USD 230,000.00

Almost every organization depends on cloud-based services. The backend of cloud-
based services are designed for multiple tenants and reside in data centers
spread across multiple physical locations. Network security and security
management are major hurdles in such a complex, shared environment. This
research investigates mitigating the security challenges by taking a moving
target defense (MTD) approach. Continually adjusting the system resources such
as the topology of the data center, bandwidth allocation and traffic flow
policies makes it difficult for attackers to compromise the system. New
evaluations methods will be developed to ensure that these MTD mechanisms work
properly in practice. The outcome of this research is to have cloud services
that are more secure and resilient to attacks. This research is a collaborative
effort conducted by researchers from three different universities, Arizona State
University, Duke University, and the University of Missouri-Kansas City.
Graduate students will be trained to serve the growing need for educating
professionals in cyber security. The results of the proposed research will be
incorporated into several courses taught at the respective institutions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The MTD approach in a multi-location, multi-tenant data
center environment requires a complex level of coordination. This research
investigates defense mechanisms in the data center's virtual networking
environment based on programmable networking solutions so that proactive attack
countermeasures can be deployed with considerations of the system resource
consumption, software bugs/vulnerabilities, effectiveness of countermeasures,
and impact on consumers running applications. The research outcomes can be
employed for applications that require security situation-awareness variables
accurately predicted at a very fine grain resolution, from a few milliseconds to
a few seconds. This introduces additional challenges, namely, developing new
performance models for networking, data collection, big data-enabled security
processing, and control. To address these challenges, this project has two
interdependent fundamental research thrusts: (a) investigate a dynamic and
adaptive defensive framework at both networking and software levels; and (b)
deploy an adaptive security-enabled traffic engineering approach to select
optimal countermeasures by considering the effectiveness of countermeasures and
network bandwidth allocations while minimizing the intrusiveness to the
applications and the cost of deploying the countermeasures. The outcomes of this
project will include a set of software APIs and tools to integrate the
measurement system and analytical models in a transition to practice effort.