* 1529061
* Explaining Low Crime Rates in Immigrant Communities
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* John Hipp, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Toby Parcel
* 08/31/2018
* USD 268,368.00

The literature has produced several noteworthy findings on the relationship
between immigration and crime. One of the most robust findings is: areas, and
especially neighborhoods, with greater concentrations of immigrants have lower
rates of crime. Yet important areas of inquiry remain. For example, extant
research lumps all immigrants together and neglects important differences across
groups. Moreover, theories on the connection between crime and immigration have
not been sufficiently empirically evaluated, thus there is not a clear
understanding about why immigrant communities are some of the safest places
around. Despite a rapidly expanding cross-sectional literature, research
examining the longitudinal immigration-crime nexus across areas has been scarce,
making it a challenge to determine the proper causal ordering between crime and
immigration. The goal of the proposed project in light of the research evidence
which finds that immigrant concentration typically reduces levels of
neighborhood crime is to better understanding why this occurs. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The research team examines the immigration-crime nexus in
neighborhoods across the Southern California metropolitan region over a decade
(2000-2010). Using data from a variety of sources, the investigators' analyses,
first, will unpack immigration in order to capture the rich diversity that
exists, including grouping immigrants by similar racial/ethnic categories, by
areas or regions of the world they emigrate from, and by where immigrants co-
locate once in the U.S. The investigators will compare these approaches with the
typical approach employed in studies examining just the percent foreign born.
Second, to begin to better understand why immigrant communities are some of the
safest places around, they empirically evaluate several competing theoretical
explanations hypothesized to account for lower crime rates in immigrant
neighborhoods. And finally, in contrast to much of the extant literature, the
research team takes a dynamic approach to the study of crime and immigration by
examining changes in neighborhoods across the cities in the Southern California
region.