* 1529969
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in DRMS: Eating with your Heart on your Fork:  The role of affective processes in nudging dietary behavior.
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2015,06/30/2017
* Gretchen Chapman, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Leland
* 06/30/2017
* USD 23,386.00

Obesity rates continue to rise, despite increased funding for nutrition
education and policies to encourage healthy choices. This project addresses the
question of how to get consumers to make healthier food choices without asking
them to work hard to do so. Finding answers to this question may be the key to
reducing the obesity epidemic. The proposed research harnesses concepts from
behavioral economics to make the healthy option the salient and easy choice. The
filed experiments in this project offer an opportunity to study customers making
decisions with real dietary consequences. The studies focus on consumption of
French fries, soda, and desserts. The results can be extrapolated to other foods
and applied to encouraging or discouraging a variety of dietary choices. From an
economic standpoint, in addition to promoting health, the interventions could
allow for-profit establishments to make more money by offering a smaller portion
of a food item but still garner customer satisfaction. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
objective of this project is to examine the role psychological processes
(affective versus cognitive) play in making food choices. Using novel
methodologies that include acquiring individual level data on customer
transactions, the research will investigate interventions to nudge people toward
making healthy food choices. The project entails two field studies, both to be
conducted within the foodservice operation of a large public university. The two
studies focus on manipulations to decrease portion sizes of indulgent foods by
appealing to emotional (affective processing) or non-emotional (cognitive)
motives. The aim of the first study is to compare a charity/pro-social motive
(tapping a hypothesized emotional mechanism) to a nutrition/self-interest motive
(tapping a hypothesized cognitive mechanism) in their effectiveness in nudging
college students to downsize their French fry portion and/or accept fountain
water instead of soda. The aim of the second study is to examine whether
manipulating menu descriptions can impact satisfaction with food consumed. The
researchers predict that a sensory-rich, detailed (emotional) description of a
dessert can, in effect, substitute for size of the dessert, making diners just
as satisfied with a small portion of dessert as they would with a larger portion
of the same dessert, absent the decadent, emotionally-detailed description. Both
studies will test the "emotion effect" in getting individuals to eat less while
feeling virtuous and satisfied with smaller portions.