* 1529079
* Collaborative Research: Adiabatic Quantum Computing and Statistics
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2017
* Daniel Lidar, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Edward Taylor
* 08/31/2017
* USD 3,300.00

For decades computer power has doubled for constant cost roughly once every two
years according to the so-called Moore's law. This dream run is realized through
technological advances in the fabrication of computer hardware, making
electronic devices smaller and smaller. However, as the sizes of the computer
electronic devices get close to the atomic scale, quantum effects are starting
to interfere in their functioning, and thus conventional computer technology
approaches run up against fundamental difficulties of size limit. This research
project concerns quantum computing, the development of computer technology
dependent on the principles of quantum physics, as opposed to the electronic
devices following laws of classical physics used by classical computers. This
revolutionary field will enable a range of exotic new devices, and in particular
it will likely lead to the creation of powerful quantum computers. The research
project is among the frontier research endeavors where quantum technologies are
being developed and quantum devices are being built with capabilities exceeding
those of classical computational devices. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Quantum
computation and quantum information science more generally concern the
preparation and control of the quantum states of physical systems to manipulate
and transmit information. A quantum system usually has complexity exponentially
increasing with its size. As a result, it takes an exponential number of bits of
memory on a classical computer to store the state of a quantum system, and
simulations of quantum systems via classical computers face great computational
challenge. On the other hand, since quantum systems are able to store and track
an exponential number of complex numbers and perform data manipulations and
calculations as the systems evolve, quantum systems hold great promise as
computational tools. Quantum information science grapples with understanding how
to take advantage of the enormous amount of information hidden in the quantum
systems and to harness the immense potential computational power of atoms and
photons for the purpose of information processing and computation. This cross-
disciplinary research project addresses questions in quantum information science
on the interface between quantum computing and machine learning and between
quantum tomography and compressed sensing. The collaborative research aims to
explore the power of adiabatic quantum computation and its impact on computer
science and statistics in general and machine learning and Monte Carlo sampling
in particular. The work investigates the use of leading techniques from machine
learning in computer science and statistics, compressed sensing in applied
mathematics, statistics, and engineering, and quantum tomography in quantum
physics for adiabatic quantum computing. The research activities promote
collaborations among investigators with different disciplinary backgrounds and
stimulate novel ideas for possible breakthrough, transformative research.