* 1529366
* RAPID: Transferring the Southern Illinois University Fluid Vertebrate Collections to the Illinois Natural History Survey
* BIO,DBI
* 05/15/2015,04/30/2016
* Christopher Phillips, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 04/30/2016
* USD 141,889.00

Natural history collections are irreplaceable libraries of biological
information and specimen-based data is used for basic and applied research in a
multitude of fields. These fields include, but are not limited to conservation
biology, systematics, and biogeography. When natural history collections are
neglected or orphaned, vast amounts of biological information is lost or made
unavailable to the scientific community. This Rapid Research Grant (RAPID)
provides funding for the transfer of ownership and the physical transfer of the
Southern Illinois University at Carbondale (SIUC) fluid vertebrates collections
to the Illinois Natural History Survey (INHS) in Champaign, Illinois. The
project will assist in the long-term preservation of SIUC collections data.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The SIUC fluid vertebrates collections contain over 80,000
lots and 700,000 specimens of fishes and over 6,000 reptile and amphibian
specimens. Both collections contain holdings from across the United States and
around the world. Information received from SIUC indicated that the collections
were to be packed and moved to an off-campus location by untrained staff. The
collections were to be stored indefinitely at that off-campus location and not
curated or monitored. The RAPID team will work with a commercial moving company
to pack and label the SIUC collections in appropriate phylogenetic order and
transport them to the INHS.