* 1529927
* Collaborative Research: Halocarbon Biogeochemistry in Coastal Wetland Ecosystems - Exploring the Transition from Forested Wetland to Salt Marsh
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Alex Chow, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 07/31/2019
* USD 332,654.00

The relatively flat southeastern US coastal plain, from North Carolina to Texas,
is particularly susceptible to sea level rise. As sea level rises, the boundary
between the low-lying coastal freshwater forest and high marsh moves upslope.
Highly productive forested wetlands are replaced successively by degraded
wetlands and eventually by coastal salt marsh. Not only does saltwater intrusion
change vegetation composition, high halide levels (called halogens) can interact
with the large pool of soil organic matter through halogenation processes that
are still poorly understood. These halogenation processes are important to
elucidate as they produce volatile halocarbons that act as ozone-depleting
compounds in the atmosphere. Halogenation of organic matter may also affect the
decomposition rates of organic matter. This interdisciplinary research will
improve our understanding of chlorine and bromine biogeochemistry and
demonstrate the importance of halogens in carbon cycling. This collaborative
research represents a new collaboration between four investigators with
different specialties from universities in the northeast, southeast and western
United States. Graduate and undergraduate students will have opportunities to
interact with citizen scientists in an on-going EarthWatch project and learn how
to disseminate the scientific knowledge to the general public. This study will
also raise the awareness of the impacts of sea level rise on low-lying coastal
areas in the Southeastern US.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Halogens have historically
been treated as inert elements in natural humification processes. However,
numerous recent studies have demonstrated that chlorine and bromine are active
components in C cycles. The overall goal of this research is to assess novel
decomposition process routes of terrestrial organic matter in forested wetlands
with high levels of chloride and bromide. The research project includes both
field investigations and controlled experiments to determine the impacts of sea
level rise on C and halogen biogeochemical cycles along salinity gradients in
Winyah Bay, South Carolina. Fluxes of halogenated ozone depleting C compounds
and greenhouse gases, as well as concentrations of organochlorine and
organobromine in soil and litter and water will be quantified along salinity
transects and within controlled plots. The research team contends that the novel
method of determining X-ray absorption near edge structures (XANES) of
halogenated organic matter in soil and detritus layers, coupled with
measurements of halocarbon emission and composition in water using Fourier
Transform Ion Cyclotron Resonance Mass Spectrometry (FT-ICR MS), will be useful
in understanding the roles of halogens in C cycling. Determining the seasonal
variation of halocarbon in air, soil, and water from freshwater forested
wetland, salt-degraded wetland, and salt marsh sites, representing the
transition of coastal wetland under sea level rise, will be useful in developing
a mechanistic and landscape understanding of how sea level rise affects
decomposition, humification, and halogenation processes of terrestrial organic
matter in coastal wetlands. The controlled field experiments using different
concentrations of chloride and bromide waters would illustrate their roles in
humification and decomposition processes.