* 1529284
* Blocky Hillslopes: From Outcrops to Flatirons
* GEO,EAR
* 06/15/2015,09/30/2018
* Robert Anderson, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Richard Yuretich
* 09/30/2018
* USD 324,997.00

A nontechnical description of the project that explains the signficance and
importance

The majority of earth's land surface consists of hillslopes, but current
mathematical models of hillslope evolution fail to capture many of the key
elements of real landscapes. Most hillslopes, especially in mountainous and arid
terrain, are rough and rocky. The goal of this project is to advance knowledge
of how such common rocky hillslopes evolve through time. The landscape near
Boulder, Colorado, serves as a natural experiment in which several rocky
landforms can be used to test conceptual and quantitative models of rocky
hillslope evolution. This project will test the hypothesis that all hillslope
features can be simulated by numerical model that is based upon the differences
in the density and orientations of the fractures that bound the blocks. This
project will increase knowledge of how common landscapes evolve by acknowledging
the roles played by the type of rock being eroded and the degree of fracturing
of that rock. These qualities are important in evaluating the controls on
landslides and other slope movements and can help in the evaluating risks from
natural hazards. The project has a very strong education and outreach component
that will develop the topic for various audiences, including undergraduate
students, science teachers, and the general public.

A technical description of the project

Current models of landscape evolution fail to capture the key elements of real
landscapes. This project is designed to test to what degree a single model
utilizing the same rule set can reproduce the features of various rock types and
orientations. This new suite of models will illuminate erosional hillslope
processes in rocky terrain, and allow quantitative exploration of how these
patterns arise. Research will include both fieldwork and numerical modeling.
Fracture distributions, geometry of block edges in outcrop, block sizes in
talus, and locations of trees capable of prying out blocks will be documented in
the field and on imagery from digital elevation models. Cosmogenic isotope
analyses will constrain local rates of erosion. A hierarchy of numerical models
will be developed and constrained by the field measurements. The project builds
upon a long-standing partnership with the education outreach program of the
University of Colorado Division of Continuing Education, "Science Discovery." An
existing curriculum that focuses on streams will be augmented by materials that
illustrate local hillslopes and their evolution. These curricular materials will
also be demonstrated to middle school teachers who participate in a week-long
teacher training workshop each summer. Presentations will be also designed for
teenagers interested in science through a monthly evening "Teen Cafe" series
held in Boulder, and for local retirement communities. The broader history of
landscape evolution discovered through this project will be meshed with
evolution of the iconic landforms of the Boulder area that local residents see
out their windows.