* 1529380
* Vibration Control of Tall Buildings Using Electricity Generating Tuned Mass Dampers
* ENG,CMMI
* 12/27/2014,08/31/2015
* Lei Zuo, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Yick Hsuan
* 08/31/2015
* USD 194,821.00

The objective of the research is to develop a structural control approach to
effectively mitigate the wind-induced vibrations of large structures like high-
rise buildings and at the same time efficiently harvest energy at the utility
scale. Tall buildings and slender towers, being susceptible to dynamic wind load
effects, can experience large vibrations. Currently, to reduce these vibrations
in a building, a popular approach is to utilize a large mass at the top as a
tuned mass damper which absorbs some energy in its own motion and dissipates the
rest as wasted heat in a damper. In this project, a unique approach will be
utilized to provide enhanced structural response suppression by converting the
dissipated vibration energy into electricity by using a series of optimally
configured electricity-generating tuned mass dampers. To optimize the
performance of the dampers in energy harvesting and structural control, the
project will conduct a comprehensive study of the dynamics and energy analysis
of structures with tuned mass dampers, will design efficient electromagnetic
energy transducers for harvesting and connecting to the building's or
structure's power grid, and will develop a complete semi-active self-powered
vibration control system. The project will formulate new modeling and simulation
approaches to analyze the integrated dynamics of the electrical, tuned mass
damper and structural systems exposed to wind loads. Deliverables include the
development of an experimentally demonstrated innovative framework for dual-
function vibration control and energy harvesting, including the hardware
required for energy harvesting and grid connection as well as the control
algorithms required to operate the tuned mass dampers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research is multi-disciplinary as it blends concepts of structural, mechanical,
power system, and electrical engineering for designing an optimal system for
controlling structures to enhance their safety and reliability and, for energy
harvesting to enhance sustainability in structural designs. The project results
will be integrated in the newly launched Civil Engineering, Energy Technologies,
and Mechatronics programs at Stony Brook University through course development,
involvement of undergraduate students in project research, advanced training of
graduate students, and summer internship out-reach activities for high-school
students.