* 1529586
* Collaborative Research: Good Booms, Bad Booms
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Guillermo Ordonez, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 08/31/2021
* USD 159,991.00

The recent financial crisis poses challenges for economists: Models that display
financial crises are needed, but these models must be consistent with the robust
finding that credit booms precede crises. However, not all booms end in a
crisis; some do and some do not. Why do only some booms end in a crisis? Are
these different types of booms related to macroeconomic variables, such as labor
productivity or total factor productivity (TFP), differently? This is important
for determining whether one integrated framework can encompass recessions,
financial crises and growth, or whether financial crises are so special that a
completely different model is needed. The PIs use both empirical methods and
formal modeling to answer these questions. In the empirical part they study
macroeconomic and financial panel data. They first identify credit booms and
classify them between good and bad depending on whether they ended in a crisis
or not. Then they analyze the anatomy of good booms and bad booms to understand
their main differences in terms of productivity. They then build a formal
economic model that uses a simple framework to explain their empirical results.
If a credit boom is not sustained by a parallel increase in productivity, at
some point the collateral sustaining the credit triggers information acquisition
in credit markets, less credit is available and there is a financial crisis,
even in the absence of any negative shock to the economy

The intellectual merit of the project is to show that the explanation of
financial crises does not need to rely on contemporaneous shocks, but rather on
the dynamic preceding interaction between productivity and credit in the
economy. An understanding of this link is essential to identify warning signals
that make financial crises more likely. The research can be broadly subdivided
into three components. The first is to expand and refine the theoretical
framework to provide a comprehensive analysis of the evolution of productivity
The second step is to undertake historical and empirical research that documents
how productivity evolves differently during credit booms that end in crises and
those that do not. The third step is to take a policy perspective, with the aim
of assessing how policymakers can distinguish elements of credit booms that make
financial crises more likely to evolve.