* 1529937
* The Geochemical Processes Controlling Vacancy and Mn(III) Concentrations in Birnessite Structure
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Mengqiang Zhu, University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 07/31/2019
* USD 273,721.00

Soils, sediments and natural waters may become contaminated by toxic metals from
anthropogenic sources, such as mining and industrial wastes, vehicle emissions,
lead-acid batteries, paints, etc., threatening public health and ecosystem.
Birnessite, the dominant type of wide-spread manganese (Mn) oxide mineral in the
environment, is a metal scavenger and can hold several percentages of toxic
metals of its body weight, hence acting as an effective detoxifying agent. The
ability of birnessite to scavenge metals, as well as other properties, highly
rely on its structure and chemical composition that are affected by unknown
geochemical processes. The main objective of this funded research is to identify
the geochemical processes and discover how they take place step by step, how
rapidly they happen, as well as whether and how they are affected by common
environmental conditions. Results will benefit not only the fundamental research
on critical geochemical and mineralogical processes, but also industrial
applications of Mn oxides, such as fabricating high-performance birnessite as
sorbents and oxidizers for pollution control and as semiconductor for harvesting
solar energy in the photovoltaic industry. The proposed study will train
students at different levels. The PI and a high school teacher will work
together to develop a curriculum in earth science for high school
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The extraordinary properties of birnessite are
determined by Mn vacancy and Mn(III) concentrations in its structure. There is,
therefore, a critical need to identify those geochemical processes that control
birnessite vacancy and Mn(III) concentrations. In the absence of such knowledge,
assessing contaminant fate and transport particularly in Mn-rich environments
will remain challenging. We hypothesize that the reactions of Mn(II) with
birnessite control the vacancy and Mn(III) concentrations, and that the
reactions are subject to influences of solution chemistry and birnessite
formation rates. Both microbially mediated and chemically-synthetic reaction
systems will be employed. X-ray absorption spectroscopy, diffraction and atomic
pair distribution function analysis, and high resolution transmission electron
microscopy will be used to characterize birnessite samples in addition to wet
chemical analyses. Results are expected to advance the current understanding
while generating new knowledge of Mn oxide mineralogy and geochemistry and their
impact on biogeochemical cycles.