* 1529842
* GOALI/Collaborative Research: Self-powered Dual-mode Piezoelectric Resonant Pressure/Temperature Sensors for Oil and Gas Field Explorations
* ENG,CMMI
* 12/30/2014,08/31/2018
* Lei Zuo, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Irina Dolinskaya
* 08/31/2018
* USD 190,000.00

The objective of this Grant Opportunity for Academic Liaison with Industry
(GOALI) Collaborative Research project is to investigate a novel self-powered
dual-mode piezoelectric resonant pressure/temperature sensor that can operate in
the harsh downhole environments without requiring external electricity as a step
to resolve the critical challenges for downhole sensing and power supply posed
by high temperature, high pressure, large shock environment of oil/gas field
explorations. The material properties of the new high temperature piezoelectric
material will be characterized, and theoretical analysis will be performed to
predict the specific cut angle for dual-mode sensing. A novel torsional
vibration energy harvester and thermoelectric generator will be designed to
harness electricity from downhole drilling with dual function of suppressing the
self-excited torsional vibration of the drill string. The complete self-powered
sensing system will be validated through laboratory and in-field test.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the results will create new knowledge on
high temperature and high pressure sensing and energy harvesting. The data of
material properties and theoretical modeling will not only enable predictable
design of the piezoelectric resonant sensor operating in harsh environments but
also will lay a solid foundation for future piezoelectric resonator design. The
proposed multi-source thermoelectric and electromagnetic energy harvesting
mechanism not only generates useful energy from the intrinsic downhole heat and
drillstring vibrations, but also creates new knowledge of energy harvesting in
harsh environments with broader applications. The self-powered sensing system
will lead the way to drilling deeper and more productive oil &amp; gas wells to
meet the urgent national energy need. Integrated with the research is a
carefully orchestrated educational and outreach plan at the both participating
universities, particularly for minorities, women, undergraduate, and K12
students.