* 1529127
* CompCog: Infant Vocalization as Foraging for Caregiver Responses
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2020
* Christopher Kello, University of California - Merced
* Standard Grant
* Peter Vishton
* 07/31/2020
* USD 385,000.00

During the first year of life, infants begin to vocalize, and their cooing and
babbling become increasingly more sophisticated and complex, paving the way for
speech. Infants' vocalizations often occur in strings or clusters of similar-
sounding vocalizations. Caregivers frequently respond to babies' vocalizations
even before they can talk, and adults vary their responses depending on the
types of vocalization babies produce. These adult responses appear to influence
babies' subsequent vocalizations. This research offers a new explanatory
perspective on infant vocalization by borrowing ideas from what we know about
how animals forage, systematically exploring an environment to find food. When
foraging, animals strike a balance between revisiting familiar locations where
food has been found and trying out new locations that may lead to undiscovered
resources. This project will advance understanding of how infants refine their
vocal abilities by considering prelinguistic infants as foragers who explore the
range of possible vocalizations in search of interesting or useful feedback,
including positive responses from adults.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Daylong home
audio recordings will be collected from English- and Spanish-learning infants at
3, 6, 9, and 18 months of age. Infant vocalizations will be automatically
identified and analyzed acoustically, then situated in an abstract acoustic
information space. For each region of acoustic space, the likelihood of
receiving an adult response will be ascertained. Methods previously developed to
analyze patterns of foraging for resources in physical space will be applied.
Adult vocalization acoustics and their relationship to infant vocal foraging
responses will be similarly analyzed. Computational models of infant and adult
vocal foraging will be employed to explore possible mechanisms that underlie the
observed temporal dynamics of infant and adult vocalizations over the course of
the day. Vocal foraging measures will be tested for changes across age and with
socioeconomic status. Whether foraging patterns during the first year predict
speech-language abilities at 18 months will also be tested. The work has the
potential to unveil new candidates for automatically obtainable markers that
could be useful for early identification of children at risk for speech-language
delays or disorders.