* 1529315
* Workshop: Bringing Digital Data Management Training Into Methods Courses (November 18-22 &amp; January 11-15)
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2016
* Blenda Femenias, American Anthropological Assoc
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 06/30/2016
* USD 42,883.00

Developing appropriate methods of data preservation and sharing is essential for
establishing pathways for public access to the data and findings from federally
funded research. This project trains its research community in appropriate
methods of data management. The modules that the project develops will be freely
available to members of the scientific research community as well as to the
public, and would be instrumental to faculty developing methods curricula.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The American Anthropological Association (AAA) will
produce instructional materials to help a new generation of anthropologists
ensure their digital data are ready for digital deposit and made available for
future use. Protecting personally identifiable data is important, but
anonymizing years of data records after the fact is a lengthy and expensive
process. Incorporating necessary data protections ahead of time shortens the
time to making these data publicly accessible, fulfills researchers? ethical
obligations, and is more cost-effective. By training anthropologists how to
accommodate digital archiving requirements into research design, AAA can help
anthropologists realize wider availability of the data for their own and others?
use. Broader availability of these data can showcase the ways that
anthropological research contributes to advancing scientific knowledge and helps
solve human problems. Materials generated from the grant will be freely
available at the AAA?s website to add to research methods training courses,
professional development seminars, workshops, short-courses or certificate
programs in research methods across the sciences. The grant will also benefit
textbook authors and qualitative software developers, thus maximizing the impact
of the award.