* 1529095
* Measuring the Unequal Gains from Trade
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2015,12/31/2020
* Amit Khandelwal, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 12/31/2020
* USD 459,000.00

This project will use new methods to answer questions about how international
trade affects income inequality. Economists have already examined how
international trade affects the distribution of earnings across individuals; in
other words, how trade affects wages and salaries. However, trade also affects
the prices people pay for everything from food to electronics. These price
differences may be a second 'channel' for how trade affects inequality. For
example, if lowering trade barriers reduce the price of food, low-income
consumers, who typically spend a lot on food, may be better off relative to
high-income consumers. Conversely, if international trade lowers the price of
high-end electronics, this may benefit the rich relatively more than the lower-
income consumers. While economists understand that this expenditure channel is
possible, measuring the effects of the channel is important in its own right.
This project develops a methodology to measure the distribution of welfare
changes through this expenditure channel. Some of the questions the PIs seek to
answer are: How important are the distributional effects of trade through this
expenditure channel? Does trade tend to benefit high- or low-income consumers
within a country? How do these effects vary across countries depending on their
level of development? The answers to these questions will advance science.
Insights from the work may help policy-makers better understand the effects of
trade agreements, which could promote the national
prosperity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project develops a methodology to measure
the distribution of welfare gains from trade across individuals through changes
in the cost of the consumer basket. The methodology is based on aggregate
statistics and is therefore broadly applicable across countries and time
periods. The approach uses the Almost Ideal Demand System (AIDS). Using
properties of this demand system, we demonstrate that the first-order
approximation to the welfare change (i.e., the compensating variation) of a
given consumer caused by an arbitrary change in prices can be recovered using
demand parameters and aggregate statistics. Embedding this demand-side result in
a standard quantitative model of international trade allows us to use aggregate
trade shares and demand-side parameters (the income and price elasticity of
imports by source country and sector) to characterize the welfare change at each
income level in response to a trade shock. In turn, the demand side parameters
can be estimated using aggregate trade and production data from a non-homothetic
gravity equation generated by the model. Preliminary calculations suggest that
the welfare effects of trade through the expenditure channel trade typically
favors the poor, who concentrate spending in more traded sectors. The second
part of this project applies the insights of our methodology to a unique dataset
that tracks barcode-level purchases by households in Argentina. We use the
framework to explore how a large devaluation of the Argentine Peso
differentially affected households across the expenditure distribution. We also
document unequal welfare changes through the expenditure channel during periods
of economic boom and contraction. To our knowledge, this would be the first
project to track extremely detailed consumption data across households during a
devaluation episode and over the business cycle.