* 1529963
* How Geochemistry Provides Habitability: A Case Study of the Microbial Iron Cycle
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2017
* Everett Shock, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 07/31/2017
* USD 235,000.00

The objective of this project is to identify the reasons why microorganisms can
live where they live. The focus is on identifying livable conditions in the
environment, with the goal of explaining how temperatures and geochemical
compositions combine to allow and support microbial life. Two things have to be
true for an environment to be habitable: there have to be sources of energy, and
those sources of energy have to persist long enough for life to take advantage
of them. Things that burst into flame are not good to eat. Habitability can be
quantified by combining methods to calculate the amounts of chemical energy
available to microbes with measurements of the rates that resulting reactions
happen with and without microbes present. The importance of this approach is
that it can be used in diverse environments from soils to deep in the Earth's
crust, allowing an expansion of scientific understanding of how our planet
supports life, and even in biological systems including the human gut where
there could be surprising applications to improve human health. In this study,
environments that support microbes that use iron reactions as their source of
energy will be studied including hot springs, acid mine drainage, and cold
springs fed by snowmelt. By examining the same processes across diverse
environments, this case study of the microbial iron cycle will serve as a
template for future studies of other chemical energy sources. Ultimately these
efforts will allow researchers to explain underlying reasons for the immense
microbial diversity found on Earth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two things have to be
true for microbes to gain chemical energy from the environment. First, there
must be a source of energy. This requires the presence of compounds in differing
oxidation states that are out of thermodynamic equilibrium with one another.
Second, there must be mechanistic difficulties that are keeping those compounds
from reacting, which means that the chemical energy cannot dissipate by itself.
Using this energetic reference frame, geochemical habitability can be defined
and quantified by the combined presence of thermodynamic and kinetic limitations
at diverse environments on and in the Earth. As an example, microorganisms
across the phylogenetic tree of life gain energy by reacting dissolved reduced
iron with oxygen in environments ranging in temperature from freezing to boiling
and pH values between 2 and 7. However, not all combinations of pH and
temperature are habitable. In high-pH environments this reaction occurs rapidly
on its own, which prevents microorganisms from using it, and the pH where this
kinetic barrier occurs decreases with increasing temperature. In acidic
environments, however, the abiotic oxidation reaction rate is significantly
slowed, allowing microorganisms to catalyze iron oxidation and conserve some of
the energy released. However, increasing acidity lowers the energy yield,
ultimately creating an energy boundary to habitability at the lowest values of
pH. Combining such energetic and kinetic boundaries permits habitability to be
mapped for individual reactions using geochemical variables that include pH,
temperature, and concentrations of reactants and products of the reaction. It is
a goal of this research to generate habitability maps for the case study of iron
oxidation and reduction reactions. Geochemical data from fieldwork at hot
springs, acid mine drainage, and cold springs fed by snowmelt will be used to
calculate energy supplies. Field experiments of biotic and abiotic rates of iron
oxidation and reduction will determine kinetic limitations. Complementary lab
experiments will provide abiotic rates. Molecular analyses will reveal the
microbes likely to be responsible for driving the biological iron redox cycle in
these environments. The resulting multi-dimensional habitability maps for
several iron oxidation and reduction reactions will provide a framework for
future studies of many other chemolithotrophic metabolic process throughout
surface and subsurface environments on Earth, which will quantitatively
constrain the discussion of habitability on other planets.