* 1529929
* Group Travel Grant for the Doctoral Consortium of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Adriana Kovashka, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Jie Yang
* 05/31/2016
* USD 15,050.00

This grant partially supports the participation of 20 students from US
institutions in the Doctoral Consortium at the IEEE Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) 2015. CVPR is the premier annual
conference in computer vision with about 2000 senior, junior and student
participants. It is held in North America and attended by members of the
international research community. The goal of the Doctoral Consortium is to
highlight the work of senior PhD students who are within six months of receiving
their degrees (including recent graduates), and to give these students an
opportunity to discuss their research and career options with faculty and
researchers who have relevant expertise. NSF support covers some of the costs
for selected US graduate students to attend the
conference.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this project rests in
the selection of top-quality PhD students whose research is showcased and to
whom feedback is provided by senior researchers. The opportunity to receive
advice on their research work and career plans from experts from different
institutions, and with potentially different perspectives, is often not
available internally at one's own institution. The broader impacts of this
project include supporting the career development of some of the brightest
junior researchers in computer vision, contributing to the research community in
general by drawing attention to an important aspect of graduate student
development, potentially increasing the number of active researchers and
educators in STEM, and ensuring that the computer vision community, through its
recent graduates, makes fast advances in solving problems that will benefit
society as a whole. The Doctoral Consortium aims to have representation from a
diverse group of participants in terms of gender, ethnic background, academic
institution, and geographic location.