* 1529461
* Biological Basis for Methane Synthesis in Oxic Lake Waters
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2018
* Timothy McDermott, Montana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 06/30/2018
* USD 200,001.00

Lakes and rivers are part of the terrestrial landscape, but their contributions
to the terrestrial greenhouse gas (GHG) balance have typically not been
explicitly included in global GHG budgets. CO2 is the dominant GHG, however CH4
is a more potent long-lived atmospheric GHG, and viewed to account for up to
20-30% of the global warming effect. Atmospheric CH4 levels are on the rise
again after a hiatus of several years, yet attributing this rise to specific
changes in sources/sinks has so far proved elusive. Accurately predicting how
freshwater contributions to the global CH4 budget may be altered by changes to
environmental conditions requires a better mechanistic understanding of all the
biological processes that form CH4. Research in this project has the potential
to contribute to a paradigm shift in our understanding of biological CH4
production. To date, this microbiological activity has been known to be a
strictly anaerobic process, yet recent scientific literature has described CH4
synthesis in oxygen saturated aquatic environments. This phenomenon was also
observed in Yellowstone Lake, a pristine lake that is largely protected from
anthropogenic inputs and thus represents an aquatic system that is natural in
composition and function. The research component of this award will focus on
identifying the biological basis for CH4 synthesis in an oxic environment, and
promises to provide novel contributions to the field of microbial ecology as
well as an enhanced understanding of CH4 cycling in the biosphere. This project
is collaborative, where both principal investigators will provide state-of-the-
art technical guidance to a postdoctoral scholar (human resource development)
who will gain experience in both field and lab activities. These students will
be recruited from underrepresented groups from the state of Montana (Native
Americans). The investigators will continue their broader impacts efforts by
reaching out public media and K-12 school teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CH4 is
a biogenic gas that is an important component of global carbon cycling. While
viewed to be produced strictly by methanogens, it nevertheless is found at
supersaturating concentrations in oxic marine and freshwaters. Known as the
"methane paradox" this has been the focus of significant efforts aimed at
understanding its biological basis. Generation by methanogens in benthic
environments and aerobic metabolism of methylated compounds may contribute at
some level, but cannot account for the bulk of this CH4. Rather, recent reports
point to methanogens in oxygen saturated environments, and even more
paradoxically, the involvement of oxygenic phototrophs. The preliminary efforts
by the investigators on Yellowstone Lake are consistent with these novel
observations and imply methanogenesis under oxygen saturating conditions. This
proposed research aims to unveil the biology that underlies the paradoxical
formation of the pelagic methane enriched zone (PMEZ) in O2 saturated water
column of Yellowstone Lake by 1) characterization of methane distribution and
cycling rates, and identification of the C substrate involved in methanogenesis;
and 2) isolation and characterization of the organisms involved. Research funded
by this award promises to shed considerable light on the identity of the
underlying biology, interesting microbial synergistic relations and contribute
to a more complete understanding of carbon cycling in aquatic environments.