* 1529151
* Error-Correction Reinterpretation and Efficient Estimation of Dynamic Stochastic General Equilibrium Models
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2017
* Jean-Francois Richard, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 05/31/2017
* USD 112,284.00

Dynamic Stochastic General Equilibrium (DSGE) models are workhorses of empirical
macroeconomics, and are widely used for policy analysis. The PI's research seeks
to reinterpret DSGE models within a more flexible mathematical framework. The
goal is to provide methods that address some key deficiencies of DSGE models and
provide a more robust framework for understanding business cycle fluctuations
and the effects of government policies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI plans to
develop a method that is in some ways similar to the Bank of England Quarterly
Model, in which steady state core solutions are embedded within Error Correction
Mechanism (ECM) equations using detrended data. There is a key difference;
rather than detrending data and constructing ECM equations for core solutions,
the PI plans to use as ECM targets balanced growth (log) ratios between core
solutions. There are two reasons for proceeding in this way. First, these
rations are obvious candidates for co-integrating relationships, and second, the
advantages of formally accounting for (near) unit roots are well understood.
They robustify inference of key structural parameters and play a key role in
separating persistent from less persistent movements in the data. The PI will
also continue to develop numerically efficient filtering techniques applicable
to ECM/DSGE models.