* 1529277
* Collaborative Research: Testing Cognitive and Affective Interventions to Improve Public Understanding and Affective Reactions to Pandemic Risks
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2017
* Laura Scherer, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 07/31/2017
* USD 91,763.00

When thinking about infectious diseases and making decisions about how to
protect themselves, people often overreact to infectious diseases with low risk
of infection, such as Ebola, and at other times fail to respond to infectious
diseases with higher risk of infection, such as the flu. Both types of responses
can lead to negative outcomes such as stress and anxiety, less productivity at
work, and inefficient use of healthcare resources (either using too much or too
little depending on the disease). We think that one reason that people may
exhibit these responses to infectious diseases is that there may be a conflict
between their beliefs about their risk and their feelings about their risk. This
research will examine areas of misinformation and emotional responses to three
infectious diseases: Ebola, the flu, and MERS. After identifying key areas of
misinformation and excessive or subdued emotional responses to these three
diseases, the research team develops and tests a number of communication
strategies that best correct misinformation and resolve conflicts between
beliefs and feelings of risk to motivate more appropriate responses to
infectious diseases. After determining which strategies are better at doing
those things than others, the research team creates a website to display "best-
practices" in communicating about infectious diseases.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research involves conducting a number of web studies
to investigate when and for whom cognitive- and affective-based communication
strategies work best at modifying cognitions, affect, and behavioral intentions
towards pandemic risks. The research uses the theory of "risk-as-feelings".
These studies will advance our understanding of risk-as-feelings in a number of
ways. First, the research team examines the frequency of simultaneous
contradictory responses (SCRs) - when beliefs and feelings of risk conflict - at
least with these three infectious diseases. Second, the research team tests for
the existence of simultaneous contradictory affective responses. Third, the team
then assesses the relative influence of cognitive and affective sources of
information on cognitions, affective reactions, and behavioral intentions, as
well as in the possible resolution of SCRs. Fourth, the application of risk-as-
feelings to determine optimal communication strategies about these infectious
diseases should serve as a test-case for the utility of incorporating risk-as-
feelings into public health theories of health behavior and communication.
Fifth, due to its foundation in the theory of risk-as-feelings, insights gleaned
from the current studies should help shape the way information is communicated
about other public health issues beyond these disease. And finally, the research
tests whether resolving SCRs is key to inducing appropriate responses to
pandemic risks or whether improving knowledge, acknowledging fears, and/or
improving feelings of efficacy, is sufficient to improve responses, as would be
predicted by standard health behavior theories from public health.