* 1529756
* Understanding Extreme Nearshore Wave Events through Studies of Coastal Boulder Transport
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2015,08/31/2021
* Ronadh Cox, Williams College
* Standard Grant
* Richard Yuretich
* 08/31/2021
* USD 317,248.00

A non-technical description of the project that explains the significance and
importance&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Exceptionally severe storms in 2013-2014
transported very large boulders (50-430 metric tons) on Ireland's Aran Islands.
Some of these boulders were tens of meters above sea level and some were
hundreds of meters inland. This project will analyze these boulders together
with meteorological information, numerical modeling, and physical modeling in a
scaled wave tank, to detail the relationships between wave energy and the
movement of heavy objects.This research will train undergraduate and graduate
earth scientists in analysis of coastal erosion. School groups from the field
locations in Ireland will be involved in the project as citizen scientists, and
the results will be communicated to both professional organizations and local
communities. The project will establish a predictive relationship between storm-
wave power and the inland extent of boulder movement that can serve as an index
of the destructive power of storms, which will be of value to coastal
communities, policy makers, and coastal engineers as part of long-term coastal
hazard assessment. This project is part of the US-Ireland Research and
Development Partnership program and it is co-funded by the NSF Office of
International Science and Engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A technical
description of the project&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has three goals,
which will be carried out via collaboration with researchers in Ireland. The
first goal is to map topography and bathymetry of Ireland's Aran Islands, to
collect pressure data from submerged sensors that will monitor wave heights in
real time, and to continue monitoring year-to-year movement of coastal boulders.
The second is to numerically model wave height augmentation in the coastal zone,
to understand how storm waves are amplified to the point where they can move
very large masses at great heights and distances inland. The third goal is to
create a scaled wave-tank experiment combining the field measurements and
numerical models, to provide additional constraints on physical processes
happening as waves impact the shoreline. This integrated approach will provide
an accurate assessment of near-shore high-energy processes that could be used to
forecast inshore propagation of wave energy for specific sea states and coastal
bathymetry.