* 1529073
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Techniques of Cultural Adaptation among Immigrant Children
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2015,12/31/2016
* Leo Chavez, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 12/31/2016
* USD 25,200.00

Scholars have long focused on the ways immigrant populations in the United
States have adapted to US culture and how maintaining transnational ties to
their sending communities influence this process and shape their identities.
Though it has seldom been studied by immigration scholars, we know religion to
be significant in the formation and transformation of identities. This research
examines the role of religion in the lives and practices of the children of
indigenous immigrants. This project, which trains a graduate student in how to
conduct rigorous empirically-grounded scientific fieldwork, seeks to understand
the role of religion in the cultural adaptation of immigrant children, as they
experience a key period for identity formation process in the United States. The
project would also broaden the participation of an underrepresented group in the
sciences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Daina Sanchez, under the supervision of Dr. Leo
Chavez of the University of California at Irvine will examine the role that
religion and ethnicity play in the formation of immigrant identities and their
adaptation to US culture. The researcher explores an immigrant enclave from San
Andrés Solaga in Oaxaca, Mexico now living in Los Angeles, California. These
young people include both those brought to the US as children, the so-called 1.5
generation, and the US-born second generation. The focus here is the yearlong
religious ritual cycle that these young people engage in both Los Angeles and
Solaga. The questions framing this research are: what role do religious and
cultural practices among the children of immigrants living in the United States
play in the formation of their ethnic, community, national, and transnational
identities? How does their participation in activities and practices that extend
to the Solagueno community in Mexico affect their identities and notions of
belonging to the United States and to their parents' home community? To answer
these questions, ethnographic research will conducted in both Los Angeles and
Solaga over a 12-month period. Participant observation and interviews will be
conducted among participants at three sites. This study will contribute to
scientific scholarly discussions migration, specifically in the areas of
immigrant adaptation and identity, rituals and immigrant religion,
transnationalism (including 1.5 and 2nd generation transnationalism), and
indigenous migration.