* 1529120
* Lipid D/H ratios as a proxy for microbial metabolism
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Alex Sessions, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 08/31/2018
* USD 361,928.00

Variations in the relative abundance of the two stable isotopes of hydrogen,
protium (H) and deuterium (D), are one of the useful natural tracers available
to Earth Scientists. For example, changes in the D/H ratio of polar ice cores
are arguably the best record of past glacial/interglacial cycles. But current
understanding of their behavior in the biosphere is rather limited. It is known
that plants preferentially take up H relative D, and so organic matter is
strongly depleted in D relative to environmental water. However, it is not known
how these isotopes behave in consumers, either animals or microbes, and how
isotopic signals propagate through ecosystems. In turn, it is not well known how
to interpret ancient records of organic matter D/H, of primary importance to the
Earth Science community. Do ancient organic records only record the hydrologic
cycle (i.e. climate), or do they also record changes in ecosystem? This proposal
tackles that fundamental problem from the standpoint of microbial consumers:
bacteria, archaea, and microscopic eukaryotes that live by eating organic
materials. The proposed research seeks to answer the questions of how they alter
D/H ratios in organic matter, and whether such changes are correlated with their
type of metabolism. The problem will be addressed through the use of cultures
under well-defined conditions and then directly measuring the D/H ratios of
lipid molecules that would be representative of the sedimentary organic record.
A number of supporting biochemical measurements will be used to help us
understand the mechanistic basis for why such variations exist. The broader
impacts consist of developing a web-accessible database for archiving and
searching biologic D/H data, involving graduate and undergraduate students, and
incorporating research results into an International Geobiology Course as well
as standard journal publications and conference presentations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Methods for measuring the D/H ratios of individual lipids
have existed for more than a decade, yet almost all such efforts have been
directed exclusively towards plants and phytoplankton, with the goal of
paleoclimate reconstruction. Recent data suggest, however, that there is a much
richer complexity of isotopic fractionations in the world around us, and that it
could also be useful for other types of investigations. Variations in the äD
values of heterotrophic microbial lipids of up to 500? have been observed, and
these signals appear to be controlled by host metabolism, rather than the D/H
ratio of growth substrates. If so, H isotopes in naturally occurring lipids
could potentially be used to trace microbial metabolism, both in modern and
ancient environments, an important scientific goal. The objective of this
proposal is to begin to understand the scope and mechanistic basis of such
variations in organisms other than plants, and to ultimately move the
methodology toward being a useful tool for geobiology. To do this, the PI will
undertake three related lines of research: i) The PI will undertake a broad,
culture-based survey of microbial D/H fractionations, including bacteria,
archaea, and eukaryotes using a range of aerobic and anaerobic metabolisms. The
anticipates studying ~10-15 different organisms, each grown under a range of
conditions and on different substrates. ii) To obtain a deeper mechanistic
understanding of such fractionations, the PI will employ more targeted
biochemical studies using abundance measurements of NAD(P)H and transhydrogenase
enzyme activity to understand key biochemical processes affecting the isotopic
composition of cellular reducing equivalents. iii) The PI will develop compound-
specific measurements for amino acids, which will allow us to examine a class of
compounds more representative of bulk biomass, as well as specific proteins that
are more diagnostic for biotic sources.