* 1529528
* Collaborative Research: Linking landscape evolution and paleoflood hydrology in a megaflood dominated landscape, Channeled Scablands, eastern Washington, USA
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2019
* Isaac Larsen, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Justin Lawrence
* 07/31/2019
* USD 254,229.00

Cataclysmic draining of glacial lakes has generated the largest known floods on
Earth, and these floods in turn have carved dramatic canyon landscapes. The
Channeled Scablands in eastern Washington are an exceptional example of such a
landscape, where the Missoula Floods scoured vast tracts of the Pacific
Northwest at the end of the last Ice Age. Multiple, earlier glacial advances are
known to have occurred in the region, which potentially were associated with
their own phases of mega-flooding. This project will investigate the role these
earlier floods played in carving the Channeled Scablands. Megafloods are
important to understand because, in addition to the local cataclysm, they may
have altered global climate. Similar floods also occurred on Mars, and
understanding their erosive power is key to reconstructing the size of floods on
that planet. The study area is one of the major features of American Geology and
has long captivated people from all backgrounds. It is the site of the proposed
Ice Age Floods National Geologic Trail, hence there will be opportunities to
broadly disseminate the scientific results. The project includes an educational
component that will train graduate students and partner with a nationally
recognized program designed to engage girls 12-18 years of age in the
exploration of science, technology, engineering and mathematics.

Late-Pleistocene glacial outburst floods caused dramatic landscape change in the
Channeled Scablands and many other landscapes. However, little is known about
how the topography of landscapes subjected to mega-floods evolved over time as
it was subjected to repeated floods during multiple glacial advances. To address
this knowledge gap, an interdisciplinary study will be used to reconstruct the
Pleistocene history of Channeled Scablands landscape evolution. Cosmogenic
nuclide surface exposure dating and hydraulic modeling at several sites within
the Channeled Scablands will be used to test multiple hypotheses concerning the
timing of canyon formation and landscape evolution. The expected outcome of this
work is new insight into the topographic evolution of landscapes subject to
repeated cataclysmic floods.