* 1530978
* MRI: Acquisition of a Microwave Vector Network Analyzer to Enhance Research and Student Research Training in Engineering and Physics at SFSU
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Hamid Mahmoodi, San Francisco State University
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 08/31/2018
* USD 268,577.00

The objective of this Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) award is to acquire a
microwave vector network analyzer that will serve to continue building research
capacity in the engineering and physics departments at San Francisco State
University (SFSU) and to expand faculty and student research opportunities. The
requested instrument will be used for high-frequency characterization that is
essential for establishing robust, experimentally-driven research programs at
the forefront of materials, device and circuit research. Combined with the probe
station, it is a key addition to SFSU's Advanced Integrated Circuit (IC) Testing
Center. Specific research programs that will be supported include: wireless
sensing, high-speed integrated circuits and systems, nano-scale devices,
photonic gap structures and nano-materials. The instrument will provide
investigators at SFSU the platform to collaborate on long-awaited research
focused on wireless implant, spin-transfer torch memory, memristor based circuit
and photonic bandgap operating in the microwave range. The instrument will be
used for characterizing wireless sensors and implants for health-centric cyber
physical system development, and spin-transfer torch and memristor based
circuits for the next generation memory and computing systems. It will provide
investigators at SFSU the urgently needed tool to collaborate with industries
that specialize in microwave equipment and components to continue building
nationally-known student training programs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Instrument
acquisition will enhance research capacity at one of the nation's most
ethnically and culturally diverse universities (63% non-white; 32%
underrepresented minorities) that is a vibrant public university of engagement,
opportunity and scholarly activity. It will advance the research careers of
investigators at SFSU by bridging the gap between theoretical modeling and
experimental validation. The instrument will provide a vehicle for reaching out
to the broader scientific community and partner with emerging leaders in the
basic scientific and applied medical research community to enable the
development of innovative technologies driven by new needs. It will add a
research focus to the already strong teaching program, and position the
engineering and physics departments to emerge as leaders in developing premier
national education programs. Enabled by the state-of-the-art microwave
measurement tool, students will engage in cutting-edge research, thereby getting
a head start when applying for competitive positions in industry or Ph.D.
programs. The instrument will be integrated into the existing undergraduate and
graduate engineering and physics curricula. Tutorials and manuals on microwave
measurement theories and practices using the proposed instrument will be shared
with SFSU students as well as the larger community via online publications.
Instrument acquisition will strengthen already-established programs with local
community colleges and provide their students unparalleled opportunities to
conduct summer research. Overall, the instrument will pave the way to increase
diversity while training the next generation of a highly skilled engineering and
physics workforce.