* 1530728
* Collaborative Research: Broadening Participation and Perspectives in the Study of Crime and Justice
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Ruth Peterson, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 08/31/2019
* USD 33,588.00

SES- 1530714 Jody Miller Rod Brunson Rutgers University Newark

SES-1530728 Ruth Peterson Ohio State University

This proposal continues the successful collaboration of a group of scholars from
diverse backgrounds (African American, Asian, Latino, and White), disciplines
(Criminology or Criminal Justice, Family Relations, Law, Public Policy,
Political Science, Social Work, and Sociology), and stages of career
(assistant-, associate-, and full-professors, and graduate students) whose work
is oriented to (1) broadening perspectives and participation in research on
crime and criminal justice, and (2) improving the quality of research on the
interlinkages among race/ethnicity, crime, and criminal justice. These scholars
(the Racial Democracy, Crime and Justice Network, RDCJN) established a Summer
Research Institute (SRI) and annual summer workshops as vehicles for pursuing
these goals. The group has achieved a number of important successes that include
graduating 68 young scholars from the nine SRIs held thus far. These faculty are
publishing and gaining tenure. Indeed, 33 of the 68 have attained tenure, and
many more will join this group over the next few years. Thus, the project is
actively "participation" in STEM fields in an area with significant
underrepresentation of minority scholars. Specifically, the extent of
underrepresentation of scholars of color within criminology and criminal justice
is relatively high. Among American Society of Criminology (ASC) members who
report their race/ethnicity, just 5.6% are Black; 5.1% are Latino/a; 5.8% are
Asian; 1% are American Indian, and 1.4% identify as ?other.?

Besides fostering the academic career success of young faculty from
underrepresented groups, the Racial Democracy, Crime and Justice Network has
undertaken activities to improve research on the interrelationships among
race/ethnicity, crime and criminal justice. The group has developed a
comprehensive research agenda and undertaken collaborative projects to address
the issues posed. Their efforts also include working to publish in mainstream
sources so that the perspectives of underrepresented faculty become integrated
into the mainstream of literature on crime and justice problems. Given their
unique backgrounds, experiences, and vantage points on crime and criminal
justice, members of underrepresented groups bring alternative perspectives,
approaches, and types of data to bear in studying these topics. To the extent
that such alternative approaches shed light on criminal offending and
victimization, the operations of criminal justice agencies, and the treatment of
different groups within the criminal justice system, it is important that they
be included in the mainstream of disciplines. Such inclusion fosters
understanding of the sources and consequences of crime and the criminal justice
processing of suspects, defendants, and offenders, and contributes to the
successful careers among underrepresented scholars..

The RDCJN goals are to continue to (1) advance the research and professional
development of young scholars from underrepresented groups for carrying out
innovative research, and thereby foster democratic inclusion in academe; and (2)
undertake additional collaborative projects that provide a more complete
understanding of the interrelationships among race/ethnicity, crime, and
criminal justice. These goals are interrelated. Improving understanding of crime
and justice requires bringing the unique perspectives and methods of
underrepresented groups to bear by democratizing academe. The annual RDCJN
workshops integrate the SRI faculty into a national network of scholars, while
also: facilitating progress in exploring a national research agenda on the study
of race/ethnicity, crime and justice; yielding volumes of studies (6 so far)
that enhance understanding of this topic and bring the work produced by
underrepresented scholars into mainstream outlets; promoting the development of
collaborative projects by participants; and enhancing the professional
development of diverse young scholars who participate in the RDCJN, but not the
SRI.