* 1530573
* I-Corps:  Multi-Element Scanning Thermal Analysis (MESTA) Technology for Industry, Academic Research and Other Applications
* TIP,TI
* 04/15/2015,07/31/2016
* Yuch-Ping Hsieh, Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 07/31/2016
* USD 50,000.00

Holistic chemical analysis of heterogeneous solid samples in complex matrixes
such as aerosols, soils and sediments is very desirable in research and industry
applications but difficult due to the limited available separation technology.
Currently, academic researchers analyze their heterogeneous mixture of solids
using sophisticated methods such as the solid state NMR, X-ray photoelectron
spectroscopy (XPS) and X-ray absorption near edge structure (XANES) to identify
the forms of the Carbon (C), Nitrogen (N) and Sulfur (S) compounds. Those
sophisticated methods are costly and not available to most researchers. Most
researchers would settle their analytical needs by analyzing their sample with
an elemental analyzer, which provides only the bulk C, N and S concentrations
and little information about the chemical nature of the compounds. This team has
developed the Multi-Element Scanning Thermal Analysis (MESTA) technology to
solve this problem and successfully applied it to the direct analysis of
aerosols with sensitivity, precision and accuracy.

The proposed technology, MESTA can characterize the thermochemical properties of
compounds, in terms of their quantitative C, N, S and H thermograms, in a wide
range of samples with no or little requirement of pretreatment. This relatively
simple and novel technology fills a significant gap in the holistic (non-
partial) chemical analysis of heterogeneous samples that are often encountered
in industrial and academic research applications. For example, MESTA can quickly
and cost-effectively determine the quantity and quality of petroleum end
products from a crude oil sample and assess their polluting impurities to the
environment (contents and forms of S and N compounds) in each product. MESTA can
simplify the analysis of many solid environmental samples necessary for academic
research of geo, soil and environmental sciences. It can do routine analysis of
industrial samples for quality control and assurance. It is valuable in foods
and food products quality control and inspection, in homeland security substance
identification and characterization.