* 1530508
* IDBR:  Development of Ultrasensitive, Superfast, and Microliter-Volume Differential Scanning Nanocalorimeter for Direct Characterization of Biomolecular Interactions
* BIO,DBI
* 12/30/2014,12/31/2017
* Lei Zuo, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 12/31/2017
* USD 299,980.00

Award Abstract: Development of Ultrasensitive, Superfast, and Microliter-Volume
Differential Scanning Nanocalorimeter for Direct Characterization of
Biomolecular Interactions&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed differential
scanning nanocalorimeter will significantly reduce the sample volume and shorten
the measurement time of molecular phenomena, and provide a powerful tool for
comprehensive high-content thermodynamics studies, in the study of membrane
proteins and in the early stage of drug discovery. This multidisciplinary
research will provide excellent opportunities to young scientists and engineers,
especially women and underrepresented minorities. Interaction with national
laboratories and industry at different ends of the application spectrum will
enable accelerated implementation of the developed
knowledge.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;All biological phenomena depend on molecular
interactions, which is either intermolecular, as with ligand binding to a
protein, or intramolecular, as with protein folding. As a label-free and
immobilization-free method, modern calorimetry instrumentation is the gold
standard for directly characterizing the thermodynamic profiles of molecular
interactions, including Gibbs free energy, enthalpy, entropy, specific heat, and
stoichiometry, providing valuable information for investigating biolomolecular
mechanisms and drug design, information that cannot be obtained from structural
or computational methods alone. However, the current state-of-the-art
calorimeters require large-volume, high-concentration proteins and need very
long measurement times, which limits their utility for biological studies. The
objective of this award is to develop an innovative MEMS-based differential
scanning nanocalorimeter and array to reduce the consumption of biological
macromolecules from milliliters to micro liters, and to decrease the measurement
time from hours to minutes, and thus enable direct, precise, and rapid detection
of biomolecular interactions. To achieve this goal, four specific tasks are
planned, including 1) designing and fabricating ultrasensitive low-noise
sensors, 2) minimizing the parasitic heat loss of the nanocalorimeter, 3)
designing and integrating low-noise electronics and feedback controller, and 4)
testing and applying this technology to membrane protein study and
pharmaceutical screening.