* 1530741
* Issues in Estimation of Structural Economic Models
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2020
* Bo Honore, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 07/31/2020
* USD 227,187.00

This project is mostly methodological, and the main contribution will be to
provide tools and insights that will be of use for researchers in many areas of
economics (and related fields). The focus will be on the estimation of
statistical models, which are designed to incorporate and test restrictions
implied by economic theory. Applied researchers face many issues when estimating
such models. The project will focus on two of them. The first issue is that it
can be very time-consuming to produce convincing statistical evidence from these
models. The project will introduce and explore a new statistical method, which
will dramatically reduce this computational burden. The second issue of this
project regards the extent to which it is, even in principle, possible to
estimate some standard economic models without arbitrary and untestable
assumptions. The findings of this project will be useful for researchers in many
areas of applied economics, including labor economics, public finance,
industrial organization and macroeconomics, and therefore advances science.
Because these economic models and statistical methods are now widely used to
measure the effects of business methods and government policies, the research
also contributes to the national prosperity.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The most important new econometric tool is a
bootstrap-like method. The main idea behind the tool is to apply the usual
bootstrap method to a number of one-dimensional estimators. The project will
exploit the fact that the resulting joint distribution contains all the
information that one needs to estimate the standard errors associated with the
parameter-vector of interest. This bootstrap-like method will dramatically lower
the computational burden associated with estimating complicated models such as
structural econometric models. The second intellectual contribution of the
project will be to provide a set of new results about Dynamic Roy Models, which
will be useful for understanding what one can and cannot hope to estimate from
observational data in these models. The project will also deliver a new
statistical test of an independence assumption, which is commonly made by
researchers estimating duration models. Finally, the project will estimate a
dynamic discrete choice model designed to shed light on household retirement
decisions. The empirical focus will be on the extent to which one spouse?s
retirement time affects the retirement timing of the other.