* 1530589
* Learning with Model Uncertainty and Misspecification
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2015,10/31/2019
* In-Koo Cho, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 10/31/2019
* USD 334,724.00

Conventional economic theory and equilibrium concepts do not permit agents to
experience doubts and ambiguity that would lead them to test the way their
models of behavior are specified. Nor do they encompass alternative (sample)
paths to escape from the status quo and switch among different models. These
aepcets are crucial for explaining the dynamics of many types economic
phenomena, particularly hwo we get to equilibrium outcomes. We propose an
alternative approach to investigate the uncertainty and doubt in a dynamic
context, without changing the preference of the decision maker. We aim to make
theoretical and practical contributions, by developing models in which agents
and economists are on an equal footing, in the sense that agents within the
model confront the same doubts and ambiguity about their environment that
confront an outside observer or econometrician anlyzing the data.

This proposal contains three distinct projects designed to serve as laboratories
for exploring the implications of endowing agents with model uncertainty and
misspecification in a dynamic environment. First, the forecast combination is a
way for a policy maker to aggregate dispersed information, and to hedge against
model uncertainty, under the assumption that the data generating process is
exogenous. We demonstrate the potential shortcomings of averaging forecasts, if
the data generating process is endogenous, and develop a sensible way of
combining different forecasts. Second, we investigate how how doubts can sow the
seeds of financial crises. We first endogenize the heterogeneous beliefs by
showing that doubts about the process generating fundamentals can produce
heterogeneous beliefs and asset market bubbles. We then impose discipline on the
degree of belief heterogeneity, to understand the source of recurrent bubbles.
Third, a formal investigation of events generated by the presence of model
uncertainty calls for a new solution concept. We plan to extend and then refine
the notion of self-confirming equilibrium by focusing on the set of stochastic
processes that satisfy a given bound on detection error probability rates.