* 1530306
* Theoretical study of 238Uranium/235Uranium fractionation in nature
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Edwin Schauble, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 08/31/2020
* USD 250,003.00

The behavior of uranium (U) in the environment is of central importance to many
branches of Earth Science. Decay of the radioactive uranium isotopes 238U and
235U forms the basis for the most accurate dating techniques suitable for
studying events in deep time. The rarer, shorter-lived 234U isotope is also used
for measuring the ages of events within the past million years. Uranium is also
a significant environmental pollutant, and a useful trace element for studying
chemical processes in the Earth. Recently, geochemists have begun to study the
ways that natural chemical reactions (as opposed to radioactivity and other
nuclear reactions) act to separate uranium isotopes from each other. These
separations are subtle, changing 238U/235U ratios by roughly one part in a
thousand, but they may provide a way to study the history of environmental
oxygen, life, rock melting, and other natural processes through their effects on
the uranium isotope compositions of ancient samples. The goal of the study is to
use methods from theoretical chemistry to try to predict how chemical reactions
in nature and in the laboratory might preferentially affect different uranium
isotopes. Theoretical studies of this type have been important in the
development of other isotopic techniques, such as the use of oxygen 18 to 16
ratio measurements in carbonate shells to infer ancient environmental
temperatures. However, the very high atomic number of uranium makes its isotopes
susceptible to a different type of chemical separation than most other elements,
for which isotope separation is almost always driven by differences in mass
between different isotopes. For uranium, isotope separations driven by
differences in the physical size (i.e., the volume) of the uranium nuclei must
also be accounted for, in order for theoretical calculations to be accurate.
Including this nuclear volume effect will be a focus of the technical effort.
The proposed research will support the training of a female doctoral student,
undergraduate research, a scientific computing facility used for both research
and classroom instruction, and outreach through the creation and improvement of
Wikipedia articles on topics in geochemistry and environmental science.

The project will investigate equilibrium isotope fractionation of uranium in a
variety of crystalline and aqueous species using electronic structure theory,
taking advantage of recently developed methods for predicting mass-independent
isotope fractionations driven by the volume component of the nuclear field shift
effect in crystalline materials. The present theoretical understanding of
uranium isotope fractionation is limited to a few simple gas-phase molecules and
analogues of dissolved species, despite a rapidly growing interest in 238U/235U
measurements, and researchers hope to greatly expand the set of studied
compounds. -Uranium is a redox-sensitive metal in the surface environment, and
the basis of the most precise geochronometers. Its isotopic behavior is
therefore of broad interest to Earth Scientists, but is poorly understood.
Uranium is a strong candidate for theoretical study of mass-independent
fractionation because it has the highest atomic number of any element with more
than one long-lived, nonradiogenic isotope. It is thus expected to show the
largest nuclear field shift effect of any element. This hypothesis is supported
by theoretical and empirical evidence that the field shift effect on isotope
fractionation between oxidized U(VI) and reduced U(IV) species overwhelms a
mass-dependent fractionation in the opposite direction, leading to high
238U/235U in chemically reduced phases such as black shales. Uranium is also a
good target for investigation because its elemental neighbor neptunium (Np)has
the best-studied Mössbauer isotope among the actinide elements, 237Np. Isomer
shifts measured by Mössbauer spectroscopy directly probe the chemical and
geochemical parameters that control nuclear field shift isotope fractionation,
so study of analogous Np- and U-bearing species provides a robust check on the
accuracy of the theoretical method. -This project aims to establish theoretical
methods to predict isotope signatures in all elements suspected to display mass-
independent nuclear field shift isotope fractionations, without being restricted
to very time consuming calculations on small gas-phase molecules. The
integration of electronic structure modeling with Mössbauer spectroscopy could
allow investigators to leverage the existing literature, and may stimulate
interdisciplinary studies via targeted Mössbauer or near-resonant synchotron
X-ray studies of phases where measurements are presently lacking.