* 1530833
* DIP: Digital Studios for Social Innovation Networks
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Elizabeth Gerber, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Amy Baylor
* 08/31/2019
* USD 1,344,278.00

The Cyberlearning and Future Learning Technologies Program funds efforts that
will help envision the next generation of learning technologies and advance what
we know about how people learn in technology-rich environments. Development and
Implementation (DIP) Projects build on proof-of-concept work that showed the
possibilities of the proposed new type of learning technology, and project teams
build and refine a minimally-viable example of their proposed innovation that
allows them to understand how such technology should be designed and used in the
future and that allows them to answer questions about how people learn, how to
foster or assess learning, and/or how to design for learning. One important
learning problem is helping people learn how to innovate and apply
multidisciplinary approaches to complex, real-world problems. This proposal
studies how virtual design studios can be used to support networks of people
learning how to become the civic innovators of the future. Supporting learning
from design and complex problem solving activities includes providing support
for successfully solving problems and achieving goals as well as providing
support for reflecting on those experiences to grasp the collaboration and
communication skills and begin to learn strategies and tactics for innovating.
This proposal is studying several strategies for how technology can help people
learn to innovate: in setting common goals, developing problem solving
strategies, developing action plans, getting help or feedback on their ideas,
and developing leadership skills. The project will work with two national
networks of civic innovators: one, the Design For America organization, which
the researchers have previously collaborated with, applies engineering methods
to solve civic problems. The second, the Roosevelt Institute Campus Network,
works on policy innovations to civic problems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual merit of this project comes from iterative refinement of the Loft
digital studio learning platform, and design-based research examining six design
propositions related to scaffolding networked innovation communities. The
research will use participant observation, interviews, and document analysis to
examine how the tools are scaffolding learning processes, and pre-post
assessment of a subset of learners and their design skills. The work plans to
use a set of embedded cycles of investigation at a macro-level of 2-3 month
cycles and a micro-level of 1-2 week cycles in responding to the implementation
of the Loft in the two pilot audiences, DFA and RICN, including intensive
analysis of use of the platform in four Chicago area chapters of these two
organizations. The broader impacts of the work are in characterizing how
networked innovation communities can be supported, and in providing tools that
such communities could use (all software being developed by the project is being
released under an open-source license.)