* 1530547
* SNM: Physical Nano-Engineering Approaches to Surface Coloration and their Industrial Scale Implementation in Anodized Aluminum
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Jimmy Xu, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 08/31/2020
* USD 1,499,998.00

Currently the color of aluminum surfaces is achieved via dye- and pigment-based
coating methods that have limited functionality, are vulnerable to scratching,
and subject to color degradation when exposed to ultra-violet, heat, and the
elements. This award supports fundamental research to investigate a novel method
based on physical rather than chemical processes that will expand the range of
color, function, and therefore, application of surface treatment. Chemical
coloration methods rely on mostly absorption of light by dyes and pigments
deposited on the surface, whereas physical coloration creates color by
controlling the interaction of light with nano-engineered surfaces, coatings,
and materials. The researched "color-by-design" method draws inspiration from
brilliant examples of bio-physical color found in nature, such as peacock tail
feathers, butterfly wings, and the iridescent scales of a jewel beetle. Anodized
aluminum is a commonly used material in many industries, including automotive,
aerospace, and consumer products. The reseached physical coloration method,
which will enhance the appearance, durability, scalability, and functionality of
anodized aluminum, has the potential to be broadly applied across many areas of
manufacturing. Efforts will be made to involve under-represented groups in the
research, train students at various levels and include the research results in
curricula and outreach. The impact on device technology is expected to be
significant.

The goal of the research project is to develop an industry-scalable method for
the physical, rather than chemical coloration of aluminum surfaces. The
resultant colors will have higher hue, saturation, and brightness values, as
well as improved functionality, ease of maintenance, and resistance to the
elements. The method will control optical properties, interference and
diffraction in materials at the nano- and micro-scales. Key physical phenomena
to be investigated and utilized include local electronic processes and quantized
plasmonic resonances in metal nanoparticles, long-range optical diffraction in
periodic, or random and quasi-periodic nano-patterned dielectrics, as well as
wave-phase modulations in ultra-thin (less than 10 nm) absorbing layers. These
processes will be implemented via inherently scalable manufacturing techniques,
including sputtering thin-film deposition, spray and dip coating,
electrochemical baths, electroless deposition, and nano-stamping. The
combination of these approaches is expected to expand the colors and finishes
currently available in industry catalogs, enable the control of opacity, luster,
brightness, and iridescence via purely physical means, and yield actionable and
test-backed approaches for transitioning physical coloration techniques to a
manufacturing setting.