* 1530734
* SNM: Robust Scalable Nanomanufacturing of Photonic Structures
* ENG,EEC
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2020
* Ting Xu, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 07/31/2020
* USD 1,467,239.00

This project addresses the fundamental challenges in developing the low-cost and
highly scalable nanomanufacturing solutions. The mainstream nanofabrication
technologies often require the precise placement of materials at nanometer scale
accuracy and thus, can be rather slow and expensive. On the other hand, self-
assembly process of nanoparticles allows for spontaneous formation of large-
scale nanostructures into certain patterns of configurations to achieve desired
functions at very fast speed and low cost. In fact, this is the strategy being
adopted by the nature in creating the fascinating structural coloration in many
living creatures, such as one found in the birds' feathers. Taking the
inspiration from the Nature, we will develop a new design methodology in
enabling scalable nanomanufacturing process using the low-cost self-assembly
process while simultaneously develop the strategy to control and mitigate the
manufacturing defects. The success of this project will improve the robustness
of scalable nanomanufacturing process and products and therefore accelerate the
transformation from nanotechnology to a broad range of profitable commercial
products. The emphasis on the solar energy will have a notable positive impact
on developing green, alternative energy suppliers. This project will also
establish a wide range of dissemination and outreach programs, with particular
focus on the new hands-on teaching module to attract the attention of students
from underrepresented groups to engineering careers and research opportunities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual significance of this project to develop a
novel robust scalable nanomanufacturing methodology that integrates: 1) non-
deterministic design representations that exploit the stochastic nature of
bottom-up nanomanufacturing processes; 2) a manufacturing-aware physical
modeling strategy that facilitates a direct process-structure-performance data
pipeline; 3) a concurrent and robust design framework that allows simultaneous
optimization of the structure and process variables; and ultimately 4)
nanometrology assisted defect detection and control that combines statistical
process control, stochastic model correction, and robust design for a complete
suite of cost-effective and robust scalable nanomanufacturing solutions. The
methodology will be validated using two testbeds: a) low-cost self-assembled
block-copolymer light-trapping coating for thin film solar cells, and b) smart-
window coating through hierarchical assembly of nanocomposite materials. A wide
range of dissemination and outreach programs will be established, with
particular focus on the new hands-on teaching module to attract the attention of
students from under-represented groups to engineering careers and research
opportunities. The work offers unique research and educational experiences for
researchers across the fields of design, nano-engineering, and industrial
statistics, and will train students in an interdisciplinary learning
environment.