* 1530560
* MRI: ACQUISITION OF A SHALLOW-WATER AUTONOMOUS MULTIBEAM HYDROGRAPHIC SURVEYING SYSTEM
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2018
* Daniel Shugar, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 07/31/2018
* USD 250,990.00

1530560 Shugar

Funding from this Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) Program grant will enable
an early career investigator to acquire and deploy a novel remotely
operated/autonomous shallow water bathymetric mapping system for hydrographic
surveying in rivers, lakes and remote locations inaccessible to traditional
survey vessels. The unmanned surface vessel (USV) is manufactured by Teledyne,
is 1.8 m long, has twin props and will be outfitted with a multibeam sonar, a
real-time kinematic (RTK) Global Navigation Satellite System (GNSS) receiver and
an inertial measurement unit (IMU). The operating system will include survey
planning and data analysis software.

The USV as equipped offers the capability to map bathymetry with cm-scale
resolution especially in shallow water systems where traditional survey vessels
cannot operate (e.g. proglacial lakes, shallow inlets, estuaries and proglacial
rivers). By using repeat mapping over time the investigator will gain an
advanced understanding of fluvial sediment transport, bedform and delta
evolution in environments that impact human populations. Many of the
investigators mapping targets have never before been surveyed so the knowledge
gained has the potential to be transformative and therefore supports NSF mission
of promoting the progress of science. Undergraduates at this predominantly
undergraduate university will be engaged in experiential field mapping using the
USV, increasing employability in fields that routinely engage in hydrographic
surveying and thus promoting the national welfare.