* 1530594
* Collaborative Research: NanoFARM (Fate and Effects of Agriculturally Relevant Materials)
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2019
* Olga Tsyusko, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 08/31/2019
* USD 257,097.00

1530563(Lowry)/1530594(Unrine)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The development of nano-
enabled agricultural chemicals is proceeding rapidly. Nano-enabled agricultural
fertilizers and pesticides have a greater potential for direct, massive
introduction of manmade nanomaterials (MNMs) into the environment than any other
use of MNMs. However, the effects of nano-enhanced agricultural chemicals on
terrestrial ecosystems are inadequately studied and largely unknown. Moreover,
the properties of these MNMs, and their complex behaviour in soils makes
predicting their fate in soils difficult using the risk assessment framework for
traditional chemicals. This international interdisciplinary project addresses
essential gaps in knowledge about how soil properties, MNM properties, MNM
concentration, and transformations affect the spatial and temporal behaviour of
agriculturally relevant metal (hydr)oxide MNMs in soils and their uptake by
important crop plants including wheat and tomato. In addition, the toxicity
potential, uptake into soil organisms, and potential for long-term ecological
impacts will be assessed. New methods to track and characterize MNMs in soil at
realistic concentrations will be also developed. This new knowledge will help to
understand the risks associated with MNMs used in agricultural products, but
also help to design safer and more effective nano-enabled pesticides and
fertilizers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;MNMs are constantly changing size,
composition, and distribution as they age in soils. The particulate nature and
inherent instability of NMNs in soils makes many of the test methods for
assessing environmental fate unsuitable for MNMs without modification. These
features also make MNM fate likely to be concentration dependent in ways that
traditional chemicals are not. Information about the rates of change of MNMs in
soils, and how these changes affect the distribution of NMNs between soil and
pore water, and bioavailability and toxicity of MNMs over time is acutely needed
to accurately assess fate and toxicity potential, and to be able to develop
realistic and site-specific models for NMN fate and effects. This project
addresses essential gaps in knowledge about how soil properties, MNM properties,
MNM concentration, and reaction kinetics affect the spatial and temporal
behaviour of metal-oxide MNM-enabled pesticides and fertilizers in soils.
Specifically, the PIs will assess how these variables influence transformation
and distribution in soils, toxicity and multigenerational effects on soil
organisms, bioaccumulation/trophic transfer, phytoavailability, and therefore
the potential for ecological impacts or human exposures from consumption of key
food crops. This project will also develop novel methods to track MNMs in soils
and will provide guidance for new assays for assessing fate, bioavailability,
and toxicity potential of agriculturally relevant MNMs. The PIs focus on Cu- and
Zn-based metal (hydr)oxides that are used commercially as pesticides or are
marketed as micronutrient fertilizer additives. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
proposed study will provide a more comprehensive understanding of the fate and
risks of MNMs used in agricultural products, facilitate efficient and safe
design of nanomaterial-based agriculture products through increasing
understanding of how the risks and benefits of these products relate to the MNM
properties, and provide simple screening tests that can be applied to MNM-based
agriculture products to predict their fate and toxicity risks. Overall, this
project will create robust models and validated assays for the evaluation of
environmental impacts of MNM-enhanced pesticides and fertilizers, and provide a
science-based approach to safe design of agriculture products and their
management. The project?s findings will facilitate development of consistent
science-based regulations and promote uninterrupted trade of agricultural
products (both agrochemicals and food) between the US and the EU. Educational
activities will include providing internship opportunities with their industry
partners, lab rotations at their international partners, and hosting two
undergraduate students per year as part of the CEINT REU program.