* 1530788
* Measuring Substitution Patterns and Firm Conduct in Differentiated Product Industries
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2015,05/31/2017
* Amit Kumar Gandhi, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 05/31/2017
* USD 410,832.00

In this project, the PIs propose a new set of tools useful to detect and measure
the importance of market power in industries. This question is central to many
economic problems. It is particularly relevant for a vast array of antitrust
questions ranging from the approval of mergers to the detection of price fixing
cases, as well as to help guide regulatory institutions in markets such as
financial services, energy, and telecommunication. In most of these cases,
measuring market power hinges on two key elements: (i) identification of the
degree of substitution between products, and (ii) quantification of its impact
on market prices. The key contribution of the proposed work to this literature
is that it will provide a new set of empirical techniques to both measure degree
of substitutability between products, and help better identify firms' pricing
conduct in differentiated product industries.

On the first point, the PIs build on an important literature in the field of
Industrial Organization, devoted to the identification of substitution patterns
in markets for differentiated products. The main contribution of this work is to
show the existence of a source of variation in the data that drives the
identification of the degree of substitutability between products in standard
demand models. They exploit this variation to construct parametric and non-
parametric estimators of models commonly used in the literature (e.g. Berry et
al. (1995), Nevo (2001)). This addresses important reserves raised by
practitioners regarding the robustness of the predictions offered by existing
methods (e.g. Angrist and Pischke (2010)). On the second point, the PIs propose
a novel approach to empirically estimate the supply relationship between prices
and demand factors, without imposing strong and often untested assumptions.
Early efforts to identify firms' conduct have relied on contrasting observed
measures of pass-through of demand or cost shocks on prices and quantities, with
fairly general theoretical predictions from models of competition or collusion
(Bresnahan, 1989). This empirical strategy can bound the degree of market power
in homogenous good industries, but cannot easily be extended to settings in
which sellers supply differentiated goods and services. In contrast, researchers
studying the extent of market power in differentiated product industries
typically rely on more restrictive models of competition, which often eliminates
entirely the possibility of testing for alternative conduct assumptions; such as
perfect competition or collusion. To get around this problem the PIs generalize
Bresnahan's (1987) strategy for testing for the presence of coordinated pricing
to an environment with potentially rich product differentiation, allowing for a
larger class of possible supply relations to determine firm conduct. This allows
in turn to directly examine how firms exploit market power when setting prices,
rather than assuming it in the form of stylized game theoretic models.