* 1530627
* Preliminary investigation of a social cognitive intervention in early courses
* ENG,EEC
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2021
* Jennifer Blue, Miami University
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 08/31/2021
* USD 367,563.00

Currently, about a third of the students enrolled in a required pre-engineering
class do not earn the required minimum grade for the engineering major, creating
an obstacle to their timely completion of an engineering degree. The proposed
research examines whether a self-reflection exercise in which students consider
how they might have done better on the first exam in the class helps students
perform better and increases their likelihood of successfully completing the
course by helping them understand their performance and form strategies for
self-improvement. The proposed intervention builds on recent research that finds
that thinking about "what might have been" can change behavior and improve
future outcomes, as well as an emphasis in engineering education to promote
reflection and develop skills for lifelong learning among engineering majors. If
successful, this intervention would offer a new, brief, virtually free new tool
that instructors could use to boost student success. The project also includes
workshops and symposia presented at conferences and universities nationwide in
order to train engineering educators in the intervention approach. The research
further improves engineering and STEM education by increasing student
participation in research through the involvement of undergraduate and graduate
students, including students from under-represented groups, in data collection
and analysis of the proposed studies.

The project leverages cutting-edge theory in social cognitive psychology to
explore a novel brief intervention aimed at helping students respond adaptively
to challenges. In three studies, the project examines how students' thoughts
about "what might have been," (counterfactual thoughts, or CFs), connect to
course performance. The first study examines whether students who have CFs are
more successful at improving their performance, and the second tests whether
instructing students to list CFs improves performance. A third study compares
outcomes for course sections using a newly-developed counterfactual reflection
intervention to traditional course sections. Following validation of the
intervention, workshops for engineering and cognate faculty will promote broader
adoption on campus, at universities nationwide, and as part of national
engineering and cognate conferences. This research thus translates the most
recent models of regret (Summerville, 2011) to educational applications to
identify potential boundary conditions for the effects of CFs on STEM
performance, and also offers meaningful contributions to basic research in
social psychology and engineering education. The proposal targets broader
impacts goals of improving STEM education by boosting student success in
engineering, eventually improving primary STEM education through inclusion in
curriculum aimed at K-12 teachers, and increasing student participation in
research through the involvement of undergraduate and graduate students in data
collection and analysis of the proposed studies. The proposal also targets goals
of improving participation of underrepresented groups. Two of the three PIs are
female, the majority of undergraduate researchers involved in the project are
female, and the undergraduate and graduate student researchers include members
of underrepresented racial groups, first-generation college students, and
recently separated military veterans. Finally, this research will be
disseminated to both the research community and to society at large through
workshops, conference presentations, publications in engineering education, STEM
education, and psychology journals, and contacts in the popular media.