* 1530798
* Dynamic Matching: Experimentation, and Cross-Subsidization
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2018
* Alessandro Pavan, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 07/31/2018
* USD 114,387.00

The proposed research aims at investigating dynamic aspects of markets in which
the interactions among the relevant sides (e.g., workers and firms, or consumers
and vendors) are mediated by one or multiple platforms. Such mediated
interactions typically occur under dispersed information. For example, only
consumers know about their preferences for the products and services of
different vendors meaning this information is private. Similarly workers and
firms have private information for their values for potential partners. Most
matching markets are also intrinsically dynamic, due to the gradual resolution
of uncertainty about matching values, as well as shocks that alter the
desirability of the existing matching allocations. For example, a worker may
find out that her productivity in a given relationship is not as good as
expected and seek the assistance of an employment agency to find a new employer.
A key question is then how such gradual and endogenous resolution of uncertainty
affects the dynamics of the matching allocations both under profit-maximization
and under welfare maximization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To study the joint effects
of experimentation and cross-subsidization on the dynamics of the matching
allocations, the PI plans to develop a model that combines elements of matching
theory with elements of dynamic mechanism design. The platform's problem can be
seen as designing a dynamic (many-to-many) matching mechanism specifying how the
links among individuals evolve over time as a function of the evolution of the
matching values. There are two key difficulties: (i) the agents' values are
endogenous, as they reflect the outcomes of past interactions; (ii) the agents'
values are multidimensional, as they specify the utilities each agent derives
from each potential partner. The model thus defines a dynamic mechanism design
problem with multidimensional and endogenous types. Alternatively, the
platform's problem can be seen a bandit problem in which, in each period, the
decision maker (the platform) must pull multiple arms whose rewards are the
agents' private information. Solving for the optimal matching allocations then
requires combining techniques from the recent literature on dynamic mechanism
design (e.g., Pavan, Segal, and Toikka, Econometrica, 2014) with techniques from
the Operation Research literature (e.g., Gittins, Wiley, 1989).