* 1530873
* MRI: Development of the CyberCANOE- a Cyber-enabled Collaboration Analysis Navigation and Observation Environment
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Christopher Lee, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 08/31/2020
* USD 600,000.00

This project, developing CyberCANOE (Cyber-enabled Collaboration Analysis
Navigation and Observation Environment), aims to serve as an eyepiece, providing
researchers with powerful and easy-to-use information-rich instrumentation in
support of cyberinfrastructure-enabled data-intensive scientific discovery.
CyberCANOE will provide users with the ability to see both 2D and 3D
stereoscopic content in a completely seamless display environment with almost 50
Megapixels of resolution.

CyberCANOE provides a unique alternative approach to constructing ultra-
resolution display environments by using new and completely seamless direct view
Light Emitting Diode displays, rather than traditional projection technologies
or Liquid Crystal Displays. The net effect is a visual instrument that exceeds
the capabilities and overcomes the limitations of the current best-in-class
systems such as the CAVE2 at EVL and the WAVE at CALIT2 at UC San Diego.
Immediately 46 researchers, 28 postdocs, 833 undergraduates, 45 graduate
students spanning disciplines that include Oceanography, Astrobiology,
Mathematics, Computer Science, Electrical Engineering, Biomedical Research,
Archeology, and Computational Media are poised to use the CyberCANOE for their
large-scale data visualization needs. The instrument opens up new opportunities
in computer science research at the intersection of data-intensive analysis and
visualization, human-computer interaction, and virtual reality. It enables the
Laboratory for Advanced Visualization and Applications (LAVA) at the University
of Hawaii at Manoa (UHM), to provide an EPSCoR and Native Hawaiian Serving
Institution, with state-of-the-art equipment, opportunities, and supervision to
enhance undergraduate and graduate research and education; to provide scientific
communities with highly integrated visually rich collaboration environments; to
work with industry to facilitate the creation of new technologies for the
advancement of science and engineering; and to continue ongoing partnerships
with many of the worlds best domain scientists and computer scientists in
academia and industry, who readily become early adopters of new instrumentation,
and who provide students with summer internships and jobs upon graduation.