* 1530726
* EXP: Helping Teachers Help Their Students: Teachers' Use of Intelligent Tutoring Software Analytics to Improve Student Learning
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Vincent Aleven, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* John Cherniavsky
* 08/31/2018
* USD 581,575.00

Improving learning in K-12 Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics
(STEM) is a critical national need as more jobs require STEM proficiency.
Recently, Intelligent Tutoring Systems (ITSs) have shown great promise in
improving STEM learning in middle school and high school. While these tutors
support students directly, they do not provide information to teachers. This
project will remedy this shortcoming by developing software that will display
the students' progress in middle school mathematics and will also suggest help
that the teacher can provide to the students to enhance their learning. The help
that the software provides is based on the analysis of learning built into the
tutor, but which is too complex to be usable by
teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will take a user-centered design
approach to create a teacher's dashboard for ITSs, so that it can be effective
in various realistic classroom scenarios. Classroom studies will be conducted to
evaluate whether, when used by the teacher, the dashboard helps students learn
more effectively. The work will focus on Mathtutor, a freely available website
with intelligent tutoring software for middle-school mathematics learning.
Specifically, the project will focus on Lynnette, a tutor for grades 7 and 8
with a proven track record in helping students learn to solve linear equations.
The research questions to be addressed include: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;What is
the up-to-the-minute data about student learning that intelligent tutoring
systems can provide that is helpful to teachers and how can it best be presented
in an actionable manner?&lt;br/&gt;How do teachers use actionable analytics
presented in a dashboard to help their students?&lt;br/&gt;Do students learn
better when their teacher monitors a dashboard and uses it to adjust the
instruction?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project work will include design,
development, pilot testing, and classroom studies. The dashboard will be
designed with substantial teacher input. Further, the project will provide
teacher guides for how to use the dashboard via the Mathtutor website. The
dashboard will work with all Mathtutor units and all tutors built with
CTAT/Tutorshop, a widely used tutor-building infrastructure. Diverse student
groups will benefit, as tutoring software has been effective with a wide range
of students, including minority students, non-native English speakers, and low-
income students.