* 1530852
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in DRMS:   Testing the Links between Savings, Credit, Betting, and Consumption among Small Business Owners
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2015,02/29/2016
* Jeremy Magruder, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 02/29/2016
* USD 29,725.00

This research examines the links between consumption, savings, credit, and
betting decisions among small business owners. Legal betting on international
football matches has exploded across much of sub-Saharan Africa and is wildly
popular among young men in many countries. Many of these participants are small
enterprise owners and household heads. The project looks at the impacts of high
intensity sports betting on participants' businesses and families. In addition
the project hypothesizes that savings and credit constraints contribute to the
allure of betting. While risk-aversion is a commonly made assumption about human
behavior, it may not hold in a setting with severe financial constraints. The
promise of a large infusion of liquidity is one of the main stated appeals of
betting for participants.

The field research will take place in Uganda where a pilot has showed that
nearly half the men in the informal sector reported to participate in sports
betting with a mean intensity among bettors of 10% of weekly earnings. The study
creates a representative weekly panel of small enterprise owners in Uganda's
capital while tracking earnings, consumption, and betting behavior. A set of
randomized interventions allows for the identification of a causal relationship
between savings and credit constraints on betting behavior as well as
information treatments about rate of return. This research builds on insights
from the development economics, behavioral economics, and psychology fields. The
project is one of the first efforts to explore topics relating to the causes and
consequences of risk-seeking betting activity in a developing country setting
with a population close to the poverty line.