* 1530800
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Economics: Debit Cards, Cash Transfers, and Savings: Evidence from Mexico
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2015,10/31/2016
* Nora Lustig, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* Seung-Hyun Hong
* 10/31/2016
* USD 16,481.00

A significant number of adults in the US and outside lack access to formal
financial services such as savings accounts. When available, savings products
are used to decrease income volatility, accumulate money for business
investments, pay for unexpected health emergencies, and invest in children's
education. Saving outside of formal bank accounts can be difficult: cash in hand
or under the mattress is more easily spent. Hence, devising means to improve
savings can lead to better living standards and economic outcomes Americans and
the poor in developing countries. After expanding its large cash transfer
program Oportunidades to urban areas, the Mexican government opened bank
accounts for urban recipients of the program and paid their benefits directly
into these accounts. In 2009, the government began tying debit cards to these
bank accounts, which are run by a government bank. This doctoral dissertation
project exploits this unique data collection opportunity by using the gradual
rollout of debit cards in urban localities in Mexico to identify their causal
impact on savings among program recipients. It will use data from a number of
sources, including bank account balances, deposits, and withdrawals in program
recipients' bank accounts over three years, as well as household survey data on
their consumption, income, and assets over seven years.

A theoretical model predicts that, by enabling program recipients to access
their accounts at the nearest ATM of any bank rather than the nearest government
bank branch, debit cards will increase savings through two channels. First,
debit cards reduce the non-monetary transaction cost of accessing savings,
making saving more attractive. Second, they provide a technology to build trust
in the bank, which is initially low among Mexico's poor: while saving, a
recipient can repeatedly check her balance at any ATM to make sure the bank
hasn't stolen her money. Furthermore, these effects should be greater for those
living far from government bank branches but sufficiently close to other banks'
ATMs, and this distance effect should be greater for those who have more
difficulty saving at home (for example, because the husband takes and spends the
saved cash, which is always given to women). The distances between each family
and the nearest ATM and nearest government bank branch are key variables to test
these hypotheses. Combining Census block codes for families in my panel data
with Census block shape files and the geographic coordinates of ATMs and
government bank branches, I will estimate the distance from each household to
the nearest ATM and government bank branch, and use variation in these variables
and the rollout of debit cards to test the model's predictions. The results from
this study will provide important insights for the American government and other
countries seeking to increase financial inclusion.