* 1530975
* MRI: Acquisition of a Liquid Chromatograph-Tandem Quadrupole-Orbitrap Fourier Transform Mass Spectrometer for High-Throughput Biological Analyses
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Steven Wilhelm, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 08/31/2018
* USD 412,443.00

An award is made to the University of Tennessee (UT) to acquire a Dionex
UltiMate 3000 liquid chromatograph-Q Exactive Plus tandem quadrupole-Orbitrap
Fourier transform mass spectrometer (LC Q Exactive), which will be the center
piece instrument of the institution's Biological and Small Molecule Mass
Spectrometry Core (BSMMSC) that provides state-of-the-art metabolomics and
lipidomics support. This instrument will have broad impacts for the training and
outreach capabilities or the institution and core, and acquisition of the LC-Q
Exactive will strengthen both intra- and inter-organizational collaborations by
providing new capabilities and infrastructure. Further, this instrument will
also have impacts for UT's teaching mission as it will be used to train a
diverse pool of post-doctoral, graduate, and undergraduate researchers. At the
undergraduate level, introduction to meritorious research in the emerging fields
of metabolomics and biological mass spectrometry will not only be accomplished
through independent research courses but also through summer undergraduate
programs and classroom exercises. The instrument will be made available to
enhance two NSF Research Experience for Undergraduate (REU) programs in the
departments of Microbiology and Chemistry at UT Knoxville; and the PI and Co-
PIs are also working to develop a new co-listed Nutrition and Chemistry course
that will utilize the LC-Q Exactive. At the graduate level, the instrument will
be made available for research, and users will receive training on all aspects
of experimental design and execution. Further, the LC-Q Exactive will be made
available to graduate courses given by the Chemistry, Nutrition, and
Biochemistry and Cellular and Molecular Biology departments to enhance
instruction in these classes. The PI and Co-PIs will make these resources
available to help broaden participation in the STEM disciplines and will
collaborate with Mr. Travis Griffin and the NSF Funded Tennessee Louis Stokes
Association for Minority Participation (TLSAMP) program to identify
undergraduate student participants from underrepresented groups and with Dr.
Laurie Richardson at Florida International University (~75% of students from
this institution are from underrepresented groups.) to engage both undergraduate
and graduate students.

Systems Biology technologies are important drivers for biological investigation
and discovery,and these tools fall into three broad categories: genomics,
proteomics, and metabolomics. The systems biology hierarchy aims to measure
genes and RNA transcripts, protein content, and metabolic activity,
respectively. While genomics and proteomics platforms are well established,
metabolomics and (and to some extent lipidomics) platform development is still
in its infancy. Significant infrastructure for systems biology is needed at UT
to ensure that approaches which integrate large scale measures of transcripts,
proteins and metabolites to develop holistic models of cellular, tissue and
organismal function are available to the University community and others in the
region. The LC-Q Exactive system will allow the development of novel techniques
for discovery metabolomics and lipidomics and will provide the BSMMSC with basic
targeted proteomics capabilities that will bolster available resources for
bioanalytical science and advance capabilities in the region. A number of
researchers within or near the UT Knoxville campus will benefit from these
capabilities to measure metabolites, lipids, and proteins that can be applied to
the study of all kingdoms of life. This instrument will enable research in a
broad range of scientific fields ranging including, but not limited to, marine
environmental science, soil microbiology, eukaryotic and prokaryotic
biochemistry, computer science, and analytical chemistry.