* 1530592
* Should We Go One Step Further? ? Accurate Comparison of One-step and Two-step Procedures in a GMM Framework
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2018
* Yixiao Sun, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 07/31/2018
* USD 210,000.00

This award funds a project that develops new knowledge about the statistical
properties of methods that are widely used to test hypotheses developed from
economic theory. The overall goal is to give researchers who use these methods
new tools for understanding which method to choose for their particular
application. Employing these tools could lead to more precise and reliable
conclusions. The project advances science by improving the methods used for data
analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Questions about the relative
efficiency of estimators and tests are fundamental in econometrics. In the
popular Generalized Method of Moments (GMM) setting, it is standard practice to
use a two-step procedure to improve efficiency. The two-step procedure requires
the estimation of a weighting matrix. Standard asymptotic theory predicts that
the estimator error in the weighting matrix is asymptotically negligible, and
therefore the two step procedure outperforms the one step procedure in large
samples. However, this asymptotic result, while elegant and convenient, ignores
possible estimation uncertainty in the weighting matrix. This uncertainty can be
very high. The PI plans to develop a new asymptotic framework that fully
accounts for estimation uncertainty. He will compare the performance of the one
step and two step GMM procedures, as well as other procedures, under this
framework. The PI plans to consider both time series and spatial settings as
well as parametric, nonparametric, and semiparametric models. The results should
help applied researchers choose the most efficient statistical procedures for
their specific problems.