* 1530753
* SNM: Massively Parallel Nanopatterning by Print and Repeat Nanopantography with Reusable Stencil Masks
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2021
* Demetre Economou, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 08/31/2021
* USD 1,425,722.00

The demand for ever-smaller electronic and photonic devices shows no sign of
stopping, and in fact it is accelerating. Fabricating patterns with sizes less
than 10 nanometers (10 billionths of a meter, or about 10,000 times smaller than
a human hair) is essential for the manufacturing of future integrated circuits
with speeds and functionality far exceeding current capabilities, that could
revolutionize computers, information storage, and clean energy devices.
Biological applications such as rapid DNA sequencing also require such small
dimensions. Although techniques have demonstrated this resolution, their
integration into manufacturing is hampered by serious technical and/or economic
issues. Previously, the researchers demonstrated a nanopantography method that
could address these issues. In this process, patterns are formed on a substrate
such as a silicon wafer by directing a beam of positive ions at the substrate.
Ions are focused to write patterns at sizes as small as 3 nanometers
simultaneously at billions of locations. The past research was limited by the
fact that the focusing structure (an array of lenses that focus ions much as
glass lenses focus light) had to be incorporated on the substrate, which
resulted in low throughput. The new studies will solve this problem by allowing
the lens array to be separate, so that it can be used on multiple substrates.
This will enable many applications for advanced electronic devices that benefit
all aspects of modern life, especially the energy and health industries, with
clear societal benefits. This challenging project will lead to new knowledge and
will advance education in this important area of science and
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The electrostatic microlenses were built on the
substrate, using standard microelectronic manufacturing methods. Voltages
applied to the lens array cause ion beamlets entering each of billions of
microlenses to be focused on the substrate. Using nanopantography, arrays of 300
nm diameter electrostatic lenses create nano-patterns in Si with sizes as small
as 3 nm. While nanopantography can form complex patterns with very high
resolution, the technique relies on the fabrication of a microlens array on each
substrate, adding complexity to the process. To address this issue, the PIs plan
on separating the microlens array from the substrate, so that it can be reused
for patterning of subsequent substrates. This involves the fabrication of a
stencil mask, containing the microlens array, which will be placed on sequential
substrates to demonstrate a print-and-repeat process. Following this approach
will greatly improve throughput, making nanopantography a manufacturing-worthy
process. Experimental work will be complemented by ion trajectory simulations to
achieve best focus, as a function of gap between the stencil mask and the
substrate, and plasma beam conditions. Molecular Dynamics simulations will be
used to study nanofeature etching in graphene on SiO2 by O+ and O2+, with an
emphasis on the effect of ion energy and mass on feature size. Quality control
measures will be demonstrated for potential pilot line manufacturing. The work
will demonstrate a massively parallel method to repeatedly write nanopatterns in
2-D materials (graphene and WS2) on a substrate with a better than the state-of-
the-art resolution of 3 nm, using a reusable stencil mask lens array. Nano
holes, dots, and ribbons formed in the 2D layers will be characterized for
plasmonic and other optoelectronic properties. Nanodisks will be carved out of
large area WS2 films. Micro-photoluminescence will be used to characterize their
light emitting properties.