* 1530628
* A Test Of Seasonal Models Of Early Holocene Subsistence And Settlement Strategies
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2020
* John O'Shea, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2020
* USD 189,803.00

Dr. John O'Shea, of the University of Michigan, Museum of Anthropological
Archaeology, and an interdisciplinary team of archaeologists, computer
scientists, and ecologists will investigate the early occupation of the Great
Lakes region as preserved on landscapes that are now submerged. The withdrawal
of the continental ice sheets resulted in large fluctuations in the water levels
of the newly formed Great Lakes. While archaeological sites associated with high
water levels are preserved on land, those associated with low water stages are
hidden beneath the Great Lakes. With NSF support it has been shown that sites
associated with the primary low water stand (Lake Stanley stage, 9900- 7500
years ago) are preserved underwater and provide a unique record of the early
human occupation during a time that is very poorly known on land. This research
will provide a view of the early settlement and subsistence that is unattainable
on land, and fill a critical gap in the understanding of how human societies
adjusted to changing environmental circumstances at the end of the Ice Age. The
research will provide important comparative data on prehistoric caribou
populations and procurement that will complement accounts from historical and
ethnographic sources, and provide a detailed environmental and ecological record
of this important transition time in the Great Lakes. The research will create
synergistic interactions among a broad range of academic disciplines, promote
international collaboration among American and Canadian scholars, and provide
international research experience for American graduate and undergraduate
students. It will also contribute to the development of innovative and cost-
effective approaches to underwater research. The results of the investigation
will be disseminated broadly to contemporary scholars concerned with the
changing environments of the Great Lakes, and to the general public via museum
exhibitions, workshops, and public lectures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. O'Shea and
the research team will investigate the Alpena-Amberley Ridge (AAR), a submerged
feature beneath Lake Huron, which was a dry land corridor linking northern
Michigan with southern Ontario during the most extreme low water stage. The
unique setting of the AAR will be used to evaluate a series of questions
concerning the seasonal and organizational character of the human occupation in
light of more recent examples of caribou hunting adaptations in northern
circumpolar regions. The research will also investigate how these early Holocene
strategies become transformed into the broad spectrum economies that
characterize the later Archaic period in the Great Lakes. The field
investigations couple fine grained remote mapping of archaeological sites within
a series of four micro-regions on the lake bottom using sonars and remote
operated vehicles (ROVs) with the testing and excavation of preserved sites by
SCUBA-trained archaeologists.