* 1530089
* Collaborative Research: Selenium redox reactions and isotope ratios:  The role of microbial and abiotic Selenium oxidation
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Nathan Yee, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 08/31/2019
* USD 78,042.00

Selenium (Se) is an essential micronutrient, a potential environmental
contaminant, and an indicator of chemical reactions involving oxidation and
reduction, in both present and past environmental systems. Chemical and
biological processes control the mobility and environmental impact of Se.
Although Se oxidation is an important Se-mobilizing process, our understanding
of this process is limited. Additionally, although measurements of variations in
Se stable isotope abundances (82Se/76Se ratios) provide a powerful new way to
study key chemical reactions involving Se in modern and ancient environments,
poor understanding of Se stable isotope shifts caused by Se oxidation limits
interpretation of Se isotope data. Therefore, this project will investigate
stable Se isotope variation caused by oxidation as a means to achieve a robust
understanding of Se oxidation in the environment. Investigators will train one
postdoctoral fellow, two doctoral students, and 6-8 undergraduate students per
year through programs that target underrepresented students. The societal
benefits of this project include communications with the concerned governmental
agencies to enable better assessments of Se fate linked to human nutritional
adequacy, toxic thresholds and the fundamental understanding of Se in the earth
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scope of the project is to integrate stable
isotope geochemistry and microbiology to gain an improved understanding of
biotic and abiotic Se oxidation. The specific objectives are to (1) demonstrate
that microbial Se oxidation supports chemoautotrophic growth, (2) determine the
magnitude of Se isotopic fractionation caused by microbial and abiotic oxidation
of reduced Se-species, and (3) examine oxidation of Se in natural soil/sediment
matrices to determine how the laboratory-derived fractionation factors will
apply in natural environments. Controlled laboratory experiments will be
conducted to determine reaction rates and Se isotope fractionation during
microbial and abiotic Se oxidation. Slurry experiments with soils and sediments
of two different field sites will provide complementary understanding of Se
oxidation in natural samples under well-defined conditions. By establishing a
link between Se oxidation and Se isotope fractionation, the results will open
new avenues for studies of Se cycling and the fate of Se as a micronutrient and
contaminant.