* 1530780
* Conference on Sociolinguistic Variation and Language Processing; March 31 through April 2, 2016; Blacksburg, Virginia
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2015,01/31/2017
* Abby Walker, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* William Badecker
* 01/31/2017
* USD 31,367.00

Language varies along a variety of social dimensions, such as region, age,
ethnicity, gender, education, formality, and mood. The result is that when we
talk, we are not only expressing ideas, but also conveying information about our
identity and stances. And when we listen, we not only process the linguistic
content of the speech stream, but also information about who we are listening
to. Recent work has suggested that linguistic and social content are
fundamentally interdependent in the cognitive representations and mechanisms
involved in speech production and perception: we automatically change the way we
produce and interpret linguistic content depending on the social context, and
vice versa. For example, listeners will hear the same ambiguous sound between
"s" and "sh" as "shod" if they think the speaker is female, but "sod" if they
think the speaker is male; listeners will rate speakers as more educated if they
say "running" instead of "runnin"; listeners will have more trouble
understanding English that is paired with an Asian vs. a White face; and
speakers change their pronunciation depending on recent speech they heard, and
the topic of conversation. Developing a better understanding of the
interconnections between social and linguistic information not only informs our
theories of language cognition, but can also lead to improvements in cross-
cultural communication in industry and education, and computer-mediated
communication. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This award will support a conference
devoted to Sociolinguistic Variation and Language Processing to take place at
Virginia Tech (March 31 - April 2, 2016). The conference will provide a venue
where leading researchers from a variety of backgrounds will meet to share
cutting-edge work at the intersection of social and linguistic processing, and
discuss the implications of this work for linguistic cognition and improving
communication. The conference will focus on five key areas of development in the
field: sociolinguistic theory, cognitive theory, socio-phonetics, socio-syntax,
and the applications of work in this area. The conference organizers will
promote participation by graduate and undergraduate students. Organizers will
also foster public engagement by developing a website to disseminate key
findings from the conference (as well as from this area of enquiry more
generally), highlighting the implications for improving communication and cross-
cultural understanding.