* 1530614
* Investigation on Modulated Structures and Subsolidus Phase Relations of Intermediate Plagioclase Feldspars Using Integrated Experiment and Simulation Methods
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2020
* Dane Morgan, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 07/31/2020
* USD 315,690.00

Plagioclase feldspars are the most abundant minerals in the Earth's crust. They
are major minerals in many commercial granite countertops and floor tiles.
Precious stones like peristerite, moonstone, and iridescent labradorite are
plagioclase feldspars too. The crystal structures and formation mechanisms of
the plagioclase feldspars have been an enigma for decades beginning with their
first discovery in 1940. The proposed study will help geologists to have
quantitative understanding of their structures, stabilities, formation
mechanisms, and evolution histories. The research results will be incorporated
into both introductory level and graduate level courses taught by the
investigators. The team of researchers is committed to the engagement of diverse
graduate and undergraduate students in their research. The investigators and
graduate students will continue outreach activities through the Geology Museum
for K-12 community, mentoring high school students through summer reach
opportunity, and developing open source software for learning, such as,
AtomTouch, a 3D interactive mobile platform molecular simulation software tool
for educational purposes. Because the studied incommensurate modulations in the
intermediate plagioclase feldspars occur in a wide compositional range with
continuous variation, the proposed study will also benefit the study of
incommensurate modulations in other non-conventional (aperiodic) crystalline
materials like intermetallic coumpounds with (3+1)D structures that may underlie
new materials for future applications.

Recent aberration-corrected Z-contrast imaging results from the investigator's
group reveal Ca-Na ordering and non-centrosymmetricity in both Na-rich and Ca-
rich e-plagioclase feldspars. The multidisciplinary team will investigate the
intermediate plagioclase feldspars that span the entire composition range (from
~An25 to ~An75) from different geological environments. Structural refinements
of e-plagioclase feldspars will be carried out using new breakthroughs regarding
non-centrosymmetricity and super space group characteristics to decipher the
intricate nature of e-plagioclase feldspars. The proposed study includes the
following 3 tasks: (1) Z-contrast imaging of intermediate plagioclase feldspars
using an aberration-corrected scanning transmission electron microscope; (2)
Crystal structure determination of e-plagioclase feldspars by single crystal
X-ray diffraction method; and (3) Atomistic calculation of the subsolidus phase
relations of the plagioclase binary system using density functional theory based
phase diagram modeling. Both crystal structure and subsolidus phase relation of
the intermediate plagioclase feldspars are very basic and important topics in
mineralogy and petrology. Solving the problems of the mysterious
incommensurately modulated structures and their subsolidus phase relations will
provide improved understanding about behaviors of the plagioclase feldpars and
their associations / intergrowths in metamorphic and igneous rocks that have
experienced different evolution histories.