* 1530505
* International Collaboration on Nanotube Safety (ICONS) NSF 15-022
* ENG,CBET
* 11/01/2015,10/31/2019
* James Bonner, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 10/31/2019
* USD 320,000.00

Proposal: 1530505 PI: Bonner, James C.

This project is the U.S. component of a joint US-European proposal submitted
concurrently to the European Research Area for Safe Implementation of Innovative
Nanoscience and Nanotechnology (ERA-NET SIINN) in coordination with NSF. The
International Collaboration on Nanotube Safety (ICONS) proposal entitled - An
integrated testing strategy for mechanistically assessing the respiratory
toxicity of functionalized multi-walled carbon nanotubes- creates a
complementary and interdisciplinary collaboration between North Carolina State
University (NCSU) in the U.S. with three European laboratories in Romania,
Belgium, and Germany to integrate transnational expertise in the toxicology of
multi-walled carbon nanotubes (MWCNT), which is likely to find increasing
practical applications.

The International Collaboration on Nanotube Safety (ICONS) project will be a
coordinated effort to understand the mechanistic basis of multi-walled carbon
nanotubes (MWCNT) toxicity and the physico-chemical parameters that result in
toxic effects. Experimental strategy includes - detailed characterization of
physico-chemical properties of pristine and functionalized MWCNT, testing them
in several in vitro assays, in vivo studies using oropharyngeal aspiration in
rats and mice for identifying relevant and meaningful MWCNT candidates, and a
28-day in vivo inhalation study in rats for validation of in vivo relevance,
hazard and dose-response characterization. A single and consistent source of
MWCNT will be used with various surface functionalizations. NCSU will coordinate
and perform in vitro cell testing of MWCNT samples with the Belgium partner to
determine the reliability of cultured human lung cells for predicting in vivo
outcomes in rats or mice exposed to MWCNT by oropharyngeal aspiration (NCSU and
Belgium) or inhalation exposure (Germany). Detailed characterization of
functionalized MWCNT in media and tissues (Romania) will complement the
bioassays. NCSU will coordinate dissemination of the findings of the ICONS
project via a publicly accessible website. The expected outcome of the proposed
project is the broad impact through promoting the safe development of
nanotechnology through dissemination of the interdisciplinary research findings
and NCSU will coordinate findings to the public through a newly created ICONS
website that will be linked to other accessible nanotechnology websites. In
addition, data will be deposited in the JRC NANOhub database, part of the
European Commission Joint Research Center, Institute for Health and Consumer
Protection (IHCP). Further, an important expected outcome is that ICONS will
serve as a model for U.S.-European interdisciplinary testing of nanomaterials
that will promote the safe development of nanotechnology and prevent potential
future lung diseases caused by occupational or environmental exposure to
nanomaterials. It is anticipated that the ICONS will increase partnerships
between academia, industry, and government, thus enhancing economic and safe
development of nanotechnology.