* 1530930
* MRI:   Acquisition of a high-density EEG/TCS device for the observation and modulation of brain activity
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2016
* Bart Krekelberg, Rutgers University Newark
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2016
* USD 208,805.00

Brains influence who people are; how people see, hear, and smell, how they move,
touch, and talk, how they remember and forget, how they feel, expect, and plan.
Understanding how the brain, with all its neurons and interconnections,
generates complex behavior is a tremendous scientific challenge and modern
technology is indispensable in this endeavor. This project will make a new
state-of-the-art instrument available at Rutgers University - Newark. The
instrument allows brain researchers to not only measure brain activity in humans
with unsurpassed spatio-temporal fidelity, but also modulate that activity by
passing small electrical currents through the scalp. The instrument will be used
by a broad range of researchers, and offer training opportunities to students
across departments of Psychology, Biomedical Engineering, and Neuroscience, and
at all levels; ranging from high-school summer interns to postgraduate research
fellows. The impact of this training is expected to be particularly broad at
Rutgers University - Newark due to its exceptionally diverse student body and
the large number of programs focused on increasing the participation of
underrepresented minorities.&lt;br/&gt;The new instrument can record and
modulate electrical brain activity inside a magnetic resonance imaging scanner.
Its 256 small electrodes have the capability to perform high-density
electroencephalography as well as high-density transcranial current stimulation.
This addresses three shortcomings of standard approaches in cognitive brain
research. First, the instrument will complement the slow, but spatially precise
recording of brain activity based on functional imaging with the simultaneous
measurement of rapidly changing electrical activity. This will allow researchers
to study the fundamental physiology of perception, thought, and action in
humans. Second, the instrument can modulate brain activity in a safe and
noninvasive manner. This creates a powerful research paradigm to investigate the
causal role of brain areas. Third, the new instrument will help build bridges
between animal and human neuroscience approaches by obtaining experimental data
noninvasively in humans that can be compared more directly with those obtained
in animals. Specific new projects will focus on improving perception using
transcranial stimulation, the role of oscillations in memory formation and
sleep, the interaction among prefrontal and striatal areas in reward processing,
and the rapid neural control of the heart, to name just a few.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The transformative aspect of the research enabled by this
device is the combination of high spatial and temporal resolution brain imaging
and the focus on active manipulations of brain activity that allow researchers
to move beyond correlation and towards a causal understanding of brain function.