* 1530544
* In Search of Dolphin Language
* MPS,PHY
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2017
* Marcelo Magnasco, Rockefeller University
* Continuing Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 05/31/2017
* USD 300,000.00

This project will address central questions in dolphin communication research by
aggressively attacking the key technical issues such as the attribution problem
with state-of-the-art computational neuroscience and statistical physics
methods. The project will move quantitative high-throughput studies, currently
tied to the bench, into field research of wild animals. This interdisciplinary
study is collaboration between the labs of animal cognitive psychologist Diana
Reiss and physicist and computational neuroscientist Marcelo Magnasco. One of
the broader impacts of the project, the aquarium studies are particularly
conducive to outreach efforts since the dolphin related activities take place in
an open amphitheater environment and the exhibit has changed from dolphin shows
to more educational demonstrations about animal care, behavior, and
conservation. The research activities will take place concurrently with visits
of the public and field trips of schoolchildren and therefore, the research
endeavor is being communicated to the public in real time. Virtually all the
activities proposed can, with modest effort and cost, be made into an open
exhibit at the National Aquarium in Baltimore, instructing visiting
schoolchildren on the research process and on collaborative research across
scientific boundaries. The field trips to the research sites are organized
jointly with undergraduate and graduate courses in field research for Hunter
College students and are excellent opportunities to showcase and engage actual
cutting edge research to these students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The cognitive and
communication capabilities of dolphins are legendary. Untangling the legends
into a body of rigorous science has been a slow process fraught with many
pitfalls; rigorous work in the last two decades has painted a rather more
nuanced picture than the legends. While dolphins do indeed have amazing
cognitive abilities, their natural conspecific communication in the wild remains
enigmatic, with ongoing debates as to the nature of many elements of their vocal
repertoire and the complexity of their communication overall. The key technical
problems have been the laboriousness of the attribution problem, the assignment
of which animal emitted which vocalization, the lack of automated behavior
analysis methods, and finally the linking of attributed vocalizations to
specific behaviors. Because we currently cannot automatically triangulate and
track their voices underwater there are no extant corpora of dolphin
vocalizations: what have been studied are mostly isolated calls, as opposed to
"conversations". In the last decade, studies in songbirds and rodents have
demonstrated the power of high-throughput setups in which a large number of
animals are studied through automated means. The overarching aim of this project
is to extend these high-throughput settings to dolphin communication studies, in
captivity and in the wild, and develop, for this far more difficult case, the
relevant automated audio and video analysis tools to handle the huge amount of
data generated. There are two specific activities: first, the PIs will study
learning and free use of a synthetic language and second record from multiple
vantage points and then computationally analyze natural dolphin behavior in the
wild, both during natural behavior in pods as well as during highly
circumscribed, specific behaviors such as bowriding. The corpora of
vocalizations generated will be analyzed computationally to establish whether
wild dolphins do have a rich-enough "language", as opposed to a repertoire of
calls.