* 1530578
* DIP: Data Science Games - Student Immersion in Data Science Using Games for Learning in the Common Online Data Analysis Platform
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2019
* William Finzer, Concord Consortium
* Standard Grant
* John Cherniavsky
* 09/30/2019
* USD 1,348,808.00

The Cyberlearning and Future Learning Technologies Program funds efforts that
support envisioning the future of learning technologies and advance what we know
about how people learn in technology-rich environments. Development and
Implementation (DIP) Projects build on proof-of-concept work that shows the
possibilities of the proposed new type of learning technology, and teams build
and refine a minimally-viable example of their proposed innovation that allows
them to understand how such technology should be designed and used in the future
and that allows them to answer questions about how people learn, how to foster
or assess learning, and/or how to design for learning. One important challenge
is helping teach people how to use technology and statistics to understand
numerical data through analysis and modeling. This project refines and studies
technology for 'data science games': essentially, a game is embedded in a data
analysis environment, in which the game can only be 'won' by doing data
modeling. Research will examine how students learn to analyze and model data in
high school biology, chemistry, and physics; how the game can support this
learning; and how such games can fit into high school science classrooms (as
tested in a large urban school district). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
uses design-based research methodology to understand how students engage with
and learn about data science (specifically, concepts of center, spread,
distribution, and inference) and to identify social, technological, and
pedagogical supports to allow classroom use, including various types of data
representations in the data games (flat, hierarchical, tree, digraph, and
relational). Semi-clinical interviews and direct observation of students using
the games in controlled settings will lead to broader workshop- and classroom-
based observations of individuals and dyads using think-aloud protocols. This
data will be analyzed both using grounded theory and using diSessa's knowledge
analysis method and analysis of discourse using Hmelo-Silver et al.'s CORTDRA
diagrams. In addition, teacher focus groups and classroom video will be used to
help identify affordances related to classroom adoption. The design and
development work will be driven by the empirical research, and will utilize
Squire's game-based learning design principles, starting with the existing CODAP
(Common Online Data Analysis Platform) software. Four design iterations will
take place, each culminating in user testing, initially with a summer workshop
of students, then with two rounds of classroom testing in six high school
classrooms, and finally in an open adoption phase in which 50 teachers will be
recruited for data collection (but more teachers may adopt the software and
curricula).