* 1530540
* SNM: Modulation of Surface Topography for Scalable Contact Printing
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2020
* Mitchell Anthamatten, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Ruyan Guo
* 08/31/2020
* USD 1,491,245.00

With this award, a team of researchers at the University of Rochester will
develop a scalable and versatile contact printing process to broadly benefit
nanomanufacturing of high-resolution displays, photonics, sensors, and devices.
Compared to conventional nanofabrication processes, nanoscale-printing
potentially requires less energy, relies on inexpensive processing tools and
generate less waste. A multidisciplinary team will mold responsive shape-memory
polymers into patterned surfaces and relate interfacial adhesion to surface
microstructure, bulk mechanical properties, and contact load and temperature
history. By optimizing the surface's ability to switch adhesion, research could
also enable transformative technologies including flow-switchable micro-
fluidics, switchable medical adhesives, cell culture and tissue growth
templates, and simplified demanufacture of intricate devices to recover
materials for recycle or reuse. With an improved understanding of how shape-
memory controls material transfer, investigators will optimize printing
parameters to obtain robust transfer of inorganic and organic thin films on a
large scale. To conclude the project, researchers will team with an industrial
partner (eMagin) to apply shape-memory contact printing by manufacturing working
organic light emitting diode microdisplays. Undergraduates, including students
from underrepresented groups, will take part in intense, modular research
experiences that are designed to cycle through the entire scientific loop. An
innovative pedagogical approach to engineering education will be explored by
integrating research activities into university courses including a team-taught
course on nanomanufacturing. Project activities will enhance manufacturing
skills of students entering the workforce by providing them multidisciplinary
educational experiences in chemical engineering, mechanical engineering,
materials science, and chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This technical goal of
this project is to develop a scalable nanomanufacturing platform for cost
effective, high-resolution additive printing of patterned organic and inorganic
thin films. Current elastomer-based contact printing primarily relies on rate
modulation to control adhesion and fracture at the stamp-substrate interface.
However, rate modulation must be optimized for each ink-substrate-stamp system,
and it remains challenging to adapt such processes to meso- and nanoscale
patterns. In this project, researchers will utilize responsive shape-memory
polymer networks that are molded into patterned surfaces to enable switchable
topography and adhesion for precise pick-up and delivery of small portions of
materials down to sub-100 nm dimensions. The stamp's mechanical properties and
surface structures will be designed to undergo heat-triggered topographical
changes, thereby imparting a change to the surface's adhesive properties.
Research aims are: (1) to identify shape-memory polymers with switchable
mechanical properties and tunable surface energies for use as contact-printing
stamps; (2) to use patterned shape-memory stamps with well-defined features and
arrays of features to perform, model, and optimize topographical switching,
interfacial adhesion and material transfer, (3) to conduct physical, chemical,
and mechanical characterization of features and surfaces that have experienced
thermomechanical stresses, and (4) to demonstrate additive contact printing of
thin films into clean, defect-free and high resolution organic light emitting
diode arrays. Unlike other patterning methods, shape-memory contact printing
makes efficient use of printed material, is scalable to large-area and flexible
substrates, and is not limited in resolution by light diffraction or material
diffusion. A central premise is that the manufacturing pathway must be accurate
and reliable over time, with no intractable barriers to large-area adoption of
the technology. Researchers will address issues that could limit the method's
scalability including stamp cycling and durability, cleanliness, and alignment.