* 1530233
* Collaborative Research: Watershed, estuarine, and local drivers of coastal marsh establishment and resilience
* GEO,EAR
* 11/15/2015,10/31/2018
* Marco Marani, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Justin Lawrence
* 10/31/2018
* USD 349,949.00

Salt marshes provide numerous ecosystem services including shoreline protection,
nutrient cycling, pollutant filtration, nurseries for fish and crustaceans, food
production, recreation, and carbon sequestration. Coastal wetlands have been
degraded and lost because of changes to upland and coastal environments, and
future sea-level rise threatens to exacerbate these trends. This project will
advance scientific understanding of the mechanisms that influence marsh
formation, persistence, and degradation, which is essential to forecasting
future wetland change. The project aims to develop a new way to analyze the
vulnerability of marshes that will be relevant to decision-making. Through a
student-organized symposium, the work will be communicated directly to policy-
makers and practitioners of marsh conservation and restoration. This project
will advance science teaching and education both through training the next
generation of university students and working with youth in local high
schools.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Coastal wetlands are complex biogeomorphic
systems that provide important ecosystem services, but our current understanding
of salt marsh evolution and projections of future changes are based on models
and empirical studies of limited spatial and temporal extent. In this project,
the team asks "what determines the present, continental-scale extent and
distribution of coastal marshes"? They hypothesize that marsh distributions
reflect interactions across a wide range of spatial scales, including local
biogeomorphic feedbacks, estuarine-scale morphology that governs sediment
gradients and wave energy, and past and present watershed processes that
influence sediment and water flux. The team proposes an integrated theoretical
and empirical approach that takes advantage of continental-scale variation in
watershed and estuarine characteristics to understand (1) when, where, and how
salt marshes have established, and (2) how marsh distributions respond to sea-
level rise, altered suspended sediment concentrations, and other environmental
changes.