* 1530827
* MRI: Acquisition of a Solids Probe for a 400 MHz NMR Spectrometer to Enhance Research and Training at Texas A&amp;M International University
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Qingwen Ni, Texas A&M International University
* Standard Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 08/31/2018
* USD 59,840.00

To evaluate cortical bone porosity Nuclear Magnetic Resonance equipment can be
used. The hydrogen atom attached to oxygen in the water molecules in biological
tissue can be used to assess how far a water molecule moves in the bone due to
random motion during a specific time of measurement. This information can be
used to obtain a map of the pore sizes in the bone and thus is of practical use
in medicine. Similar techniques have been successful in assessing the pore sizes
of oil rich earth samples to assess oil content. The acquisition of the
equipment requested in this proposal will allow Texas A&amp;M International
University, a minority serving institution (93% Hispanic students), to enhance
the quality of student research/instruction. The proposed equipment will help
faculty and students to: (1) study and understand the principle of magnetic
angle spinning NMR and solid state NMR; (2) pursue and develop bone related
research; and (3) learn solid state NMR technology and apply it to a variety of
different applications. Research findings and results will be disseminated in
journals and at professional conferences. Several graduate and more than 40
undergraduate students will be involved in NMR related workshops and projects
each year. This equipment will also be of benefit for the studies of physics,
chemistry, and bioengineering, as well as will be used in classes of more than
20 undergraduates each year for the training of critical thinking and research
methodology. The addition of this spectrometer probe will make the science
program at TAMIU more competitive, aid the recruitment of new faculty and
students, and enable more primarily minority undergraduate and graduate students
to conduct high quality research in science degree programs at
TAMIU.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI's current low-field bench-top NMR system uses
NMR CPMG spin-spin (T2) relaxation time signal due to water in mobile phase to
characterize the cortical bone porosity and pore size distribution, and uses NMR
free induction decay (FID) measurements to determine water components in bound
and mobile phases. With this requested instrumentation the PI can conduct
further research into the 1H environments of bone materials to identify the
locations of bone minerals and bone architecture, including water. Specifically,
the PI will characterize how water stabilizes the mineral structure and how it
couples with mineral crystallites to the surrounding bone structure. We
hypothesize that low-field NMR and high field with magnetic angle spinning (MAS)
NMR will provide a more complete interpretation of water distribution in bone
microstructure, and these data are important to assess bone quality and predict
the mechanical behavior of bone. In addition, the high-field magnetic angle
spinning (MAS) technique can be used to decouple and reduce the dipolar and
susceptibility effect between the solid and the liquid-like phases. This
research will provide a more complete picture of bone microstructure to be used
as the basis for further bone related research, and material and edical
applications. The requested instrumentation will provide other faculty with a
necessary tool for use in pursuing aspects of their research that are presently
not available on the TAMIU campus.