* 1530097
* Collaborative Research: Cosmogenic nuclide chronology and paleohydraulic modeling of late Pleistocene Missoula floods
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2017
* Jorie Clark, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Yuretich
* 07/31/2017
* USD 25,238.00

A non-technical description of the project, which explains the project's
significance and importance&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Channeled Scablands of
Washington and Oregon are spectacular landmarks of geology. They were formed at
the end of the last ice age when Glacial Lake Missoula breached its dam and a
catastrophic flood carved the landscape as the water made its way to the
Columbia River. Recent investigations have shown there was more than one flood
episode; this project will use new dating techniques to provide a closer
constraint on the ages and number of flood events. The project will then use
these results in conjunction with a hydraulic model to evaluate the size and
duration of these flood events and the effects on the landscape. The results
could be used to examine the impact of large floods on topography in other parts
of the world. The project will support the education of a female PhD student
from an underrepresented group.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A technical description of
the project&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By establishing the age of landscape
development in this region, the new sampling sites strategically located to
address a number of specific questions related to flood history that can be
assessed with the proposed modeling scenarios, including: (1) How much of the
landscape is the product of waning stages of one large flood versus of multiple-
age floods? (2) How does the timing of advance and retreat the ice relate to
ages of flood events? (3) Are all present flood landscapes related to the
draining of glacial Lake Missoula? This new geochronology will indicate a
variety of different flow paths taken by different-aged late Pleistocene mega-
floods, different inundation levels for various flow events, and possibly even
different source regions for generating the flows. To evaluate the implications
of these anticipated results, a model will calculate time-varying topography
resulting from glacial isostatic adjustment from the adjacent ice sheet, and
then use a hydraulic model which solves the full two-dimensional, depth-averaged
momentum and continuity equations for free-surface flow.