* 1530689
* MRI: Acquisition of a High-Temperature X-ray Diffraction System - Transforming Materials Science and Culture in West Texas
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2016
* Emily Hunt, West Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Joanne Culbertson
* 08/31/2016
* USD 239,965.00

This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) award supports the acquisition of a
High-Temperature X-Ray Diffraction System (XRD) at West Texas A&amp;M University
(WTAMU) for potentially transformative fundamental research on nanotechnology
and resilient building materials. The XRD allows researchers to investigate
material properties under controlled temperature and pressure conditions, making
it a critical tool for developing new materials, increasing the lifespan of
materials, and improving production processes. The research team includes female
and African American faculty and researchers from mechanical engineering,
materials science and civil engineering. The instrumentation also provides broad
educational opportunities for a regional, emerging Hispanic Serving Institution
(HSI), enabling over 1500 K-12 and higher education students to have a research
or laboratory experience with the XRD.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The XRD has unique
capabilities that will enable fundamental research on nanoaluminum,
nanodiamonds, and resilient materials and infrastructure. Researchers will
measure stress states at the nanoscale to determine how manipulation affects
particle reactivity. This knowledge may lead to advances in nano aluminum energy
storage capabilities. The XRD will be used in-situ to study the high bond energy
of the nano-sized diamond and the effect of its highly functional surface when
used as an additive in metallic mixtures. These alloys may enable advances in
aerospace applications, where weight and temperature resistance are vital, and
may hold promise for prosthetics and implant technology. The XRD probes atomic
distances and provides information aabout material properties at the microscale.
By analyzing structures with different materials both before and after damage,
it is possible to estimate wind loads, ground accelerations and blast
intensities that they can withstand. This knowledge enables the development of
structural materials optimized for use in areas with a high probability of
natural or man-made hazards.