* 1530790
* Translocation, biological fate, stability, and effective dose of engineered nanomaterials for nanosafety studies
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2018
* Hendrik Heinz, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Nora Savage
* 12/31/2018
* USD 300,000.00

1530790(Heinz)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal deals with in vitro and in
vivo fate studies of engineered nanomaterials (NMs). ZnO, Au and PLGA NPs and
Graphene will be produced with controlled shape, size and surface properties.
The intracellular localization, dynamics and state of aggregation of the NMs
will be first studied in vitro by a combination of biophysical techniques. Ion
Beam Microscopy will be applied to determine intracellular dose of ZnO and Au
NPs. Toxicological studies will be performed and related to the intracelular
dose. The stability of the bio corona and conformational state of proteins in
the corona will be studied intracelularly. NMs will be further radiolabelled for
in vivo imaging and strategies for dual radiolabelling will be developed.
Positron Emission Tomography and Single Photon Emission Computed Tomography will
be applied to study the biodistribution and fate of radiolabelled NMs in small
rodents following different administration routes. By dual radio labelling the
in vivo stability of NMs will be investigated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
synthesis of various nanomaterials (NM) will be carried out, including metal and
metal oxide nanoparticles, polymeric PLGA based nanoparticles, as well as
graphene and graphene oxide nanomaterials. The materials will be surface-
functionalized in different ways, and the introduction of dual radiolabels in
the core and in the corona will be explored to be able to track the location of
the NM during in vitro and in vivo studies by collaborators. Characterization of
the NMs involves zeta potential measurements, DLS, NTA, ATR-FTIR, TEM, and micro
scanning transmission ion microscopy. The specific interactions between the
nanoparticles and their corona will also be explored by molecular simulation,
which allows to track the effects of surface chemistry on ligand packing,
binding strength, and agglomeration of the nanomaterials. Further tests by
steered molecular dynamics simulation aim at understanding the translocation
process through cell membranes and probing the stability of the nanoparticle
corona. Specific interactions with selected peptides and proteins will be
explored in models to rationalize accumulation in specific organs and tissues as
experimental information becomes available.&lt;br/&gt;A combination of all-atom
and coarse-grain simulations will be employed to explore length scales from
nanometers to micrometers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The knowledge generated in this
project will be essential to understand the behavior of nanomaterials at
cellular and organism levels with the ultimate goal to minimize toxicity. This
objective is of paramount importance for future developments in cosmetics,
medical and pharmaceutical products, as well as for new structural materials
enhanced by nanoscale materials to which humans are exposed. The synthesis,
modeling, and testing of various systems also helps uncover ways in which
nanomaterials may be designed to minimize toxicity. Nanomaterial stability
studies will also tackle issues such as the stability of the coating around the
core, the stability of the core itself as well as the degree of aggregation of
the nanomaterials. In the project we propose a complex and unprecedented
combination of labelling strategies, which will allow the PI to address these
issues through highly sensitive, non-invasive imaging techniques such as PET or
SPECT. The stability of surface coating can explain why the same nanomaterial
core can have different toxicity when functionalized with different coating or
even when the same coating is linked to the nanomaterial surface in different
ways. Coating and nanomaterial stability in relation with their distribution can
explain specific toxicological responses as well as provide understanding on the
time frame of the toxicological response. The nanomaterial stability can become
a novel toxicological end point and be fundamental in risk assessment.
Ultimately, the results will contribute to a quantitative evaluation of risks
associated with the materials investigated. The proposed effort will also
include the training of PhD students and outreach activities for High School
students through Engineering Career Days and hands-on research experiences in
university laboratories