* 1530927
* Developmental Biology Gordon Research Conference 2015, Hadley, Massachusetts, June 21-26, 2015
* BIO,IOS
* 05/15/2015,10/31/2015
* susan mango, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Matt Buechner
* 10/31/2015
* USD 15,000.00

This award supports the 2015 Gordon Research Conference on Developmental
Biology. This five-day conference, which has been running since 1970, is
recognized as the major, mid-size meeting in Developmental Biology, bringing
together about 150 outstanding senior and junior scientists for discussions of
the recent advances in the field. Twenty-nine invited speakers, chosen based on
their creative contributions to the field and their ability to promote fruitful
discussions, have confirmed their attendance. The nine sessions cover classic
topics and emerging areas in the field: Morphogenesis; Epigenetic Control of
Development; Cellular Polarity; Stem Cell Biology; Small ncRNAs in Development;
Intercellular Signaling; Self-Assembly within Cells; Transgenerational
Inheritance; Transcription and Patterning. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual merit of this meeting derives from its small size, which promotes
interactions between participants, and the assembly of many top scientists in
developmental biology. It spans a wide variety of experimental systems and
focuses on areas of exceptional activity or promise. This combination leads to
fruitful comparative analyses, raises new questions about underlying mechanisms
and often leads to new collaborations. By maximizing both formal discussion and
informal interactions, the Gordon Conference on Developmental Biology will help
to define both the present state and the future of the field. With respect to
broader impacts, this meeting will benefit the larger community in four
respects. First, it will help train and inspire the next generation of
scientists, by exposing students and postdoctoral fellows to exciting science
and scientists. Second, it will be a forum for those who teach science in
smaller colleges and high schools, to hear about the latest findings and to
discuss topics with experts. Third, it will benefit junior faculty who can
present their work in talks and posters and who can get to know the more senior
members of the developmental biology field. For each session, time has been
allotted for speakers chosen from abstracts submitted by the participants.
Fourth, half of the invited speakers are women and two are minorities. In
addition, we will encourage minorities to participate. These features will offer
opportunities to minorities to participate in an excellent conference, and
conversely, it will give all participants the opportunity to learn about
exciting research conducted by their minority and female colleagues.