* 1530767
* NSF 15-022 Fate of aerosolized Nanoparticles: The influence of surface active substances on lung deposition and respiratory effects (NANOaers)
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2016,01/31/2020
* Joseph Brain, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 01/31/2020
* USD 289,274.00

Brain, Joseph 1530767

Nanotechnology has expanded dramatically during the past decades. While
maximizing benefits, there is also a need to minimize risks of nanotechnology.
One of the current major research areas in nanotechnology is to optimize novel
properties of nanomaterials to improve quality of life. The PIs will study
examples of public and workplace exposures to nanoparticles specifically those
containing either silver (Ag) or cerium (Ce). Both are inexpensive and produced
in large quantities. Silver-containing nanoparticles are used in medical
supplies, cosmetics and textiles for their ability to kill microorganisms.
Nanoparticles containing cerium oxide are used to polish glass mirrors, computer
chips, and ophthalmic lenses. The PIs seek to develop techniques to explain
nanoparticle behavior and control human exposures during production, use, and
disposal of these products. An important feature of this proposal is that it
involves researchers from the United States in an international consortium that
includes Germany, Romania, Austria, and Spain. As a result the PIs will better
understand how that affects the phospholipids and proteins that bind to particle
surfaces and how that influences their ultimate fate and biological effects.

The PIs will characterize human exposures to novel nanoparticles. The research
project will use models and exposure scenarios to elucidate the mechanisms
underlying inhalation of nanoparticles. The project will involve exploration of
where inhaled nanoparticles deposit, how fast they migrate from lungs, and to
what extent they cross the air-blood barrier and thus have access to other
organs. A key issue is particle interactions since mixtures are commonplace.
Nanoparticle exposures are is often combined with particles that are larger and
with a variety of chemicals and vapors. This project will explore what happens
to particles after they deposit deep in the lungs. The PIs will measure how the
size, morphology, and surface composition of nanoparticles determine the
specific proteins and phospholipids that bind to their surface. In turn, this
binding activity will determine the fate of and biologic responses to
nanoparticles. The research objective is to integrate these data to better
predict risks from nanomaterials for humans or the environment.