* 1530914
* I-Corps: Business Analytics for Large Scale Intelligence
* TIP,TI
* 04/15/2015,09/30/2016
* Yung-Hsiang Lu, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 09/30/2016
* USD 50,000.00

For the last 20 years, traditional "brick-and-mortar" stores have been trying to
find strategies to compete with on-line store in understanding customers'
behaviors and preferences. An on-line store can easily create personalized
advertisements, based on what a customer has purchased and seen. In contrast,
traditional stores do not have such information and cannot provide personalized
experience attracting customers into the stores and encouraging customers to buy
after they are in the stores. Understanding customers' needs are currently met
by surveys, focus groups, in-store observers, sales records, and market trends.
Surveys and focus groups are costly and disrupt customers' buying process. In-
store observers are labor-intensive and cannot record many customers' activities
at once. Sales records show what has been sold, without any information about
why customers do or do not purchase products. This research team has created the
Business Analytics for Large-Scale Intelligence (BALSI) system that allows
retailers to make real time, dynamic, and personalized advertisements and
promotions to attract customers into the stores.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The BALSI
system uses visual analysis of video stream from in-store camera systems to
observe a shopper's behavior, movement, gaze and other actions. From such data,
information can be mined to help the retailer better attract, retain, and
satisfy customers. BALSI's software solution analyzes the videos captured in
stores without interfering with the customers and does not require any
additional employees. The software will analyze the characteristics of customers
to presents trends and patterns to the clients and to create dynamic
advertisements to attract the customers into stores. Inside the store, the
software can adaptively try to increase the likelihood of a purchase by a
shopper. BALSI's software also augments human sales people by alerting a store
associate to help a customer that appears to be looking for something. The
technology does not recognize faces and offers better privacy protection when
compared with technologies that attempt do similar things within the retail area
by tracking the signals coming from a customer's phone.