* 1530613
* Search Theory in Economics
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2018
* Lones Smith, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 07/31/2018
* USD 145,916.00

This project extends the frontier of search theory to shed light on three
economic problems. The first asks how we should expect rejection rates at
colleges to vary with caliber, and inquires whether they are informative
measures of excellence. Preliminary research suggests that rejection rates might
be reverse quality measures at the very best colleges. The second application
explores the economics of optimal liquidation, such as transpired with the
Resolution Trust Corporation in the 1990s or prior to the famous bankruptcy of
Lehman-Brothers in 2008. Early work reveals, among other things, how an optimal
selling strategy proceeds far more slowly at lower interest rates, formalizing
an insight publicized by Alan Greenspan. The third develops a theoretical
analysis of the economics of web search, such as occurs in web sites like
Amazon; among early findings are that the seller need not find it most
profitable to make a maximally informative search engine.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project pursues two dynamic programming projects in
search theory, and one directed search model. The first project incorporates
insights from auction theory into a directed search problem that is motivated by
the journal submission and college application processes. As the rank of the
journal or college rises, its standards rise and its applicants improve. But it
is not obvious that rejection rates must rise and in fact, with complete
information, early results suggest that they do not. The two dynamic programming
exercises explore two inherently nonstationary search models. The first is how
does one optimally unwind a large position in an asset when facing periodic
arrivals of buyers willing to buy portion at a specified price. Among many key
results, most important is the "decreasing returns to optionality" that the
value function is concave in the position - but the marginal value is convex.
The second dynamic programming exercise explores how one optimally searches
among many ranked options. This arises in web search, and this model is
tractable enough to produce many novel usable comparative statics.