* 1530522
* SNM: Scalable Cell-free Protein Manufacturing via NanoClay-DNA (NanoCD) Microdonuts
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2015,02/28/2021
* Paul Steen, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 02/28/2021
* USD 1,625,999.00

Proteins are becoming increasingly important drugs to treat and prevent
diseases. In fact, among the current top ten best selling drugs in the world,
eight of them are protein-based. At present, almost all proteins are
manufactured by living organisms. Unfortunately, using living organisms to
produce proteins has various limitations and problems including low production
rate and high set-up cost. Most severely, living organisms need to be
sufficiently fed and well taken care of, which has not been easy on an
industrial scale. In this project, the researchers led by Prof. Dan Luo at
Cornell University will develop a first-ever, nanotechnology-enabled protein
manufacturing process without using live cells. The researchers will use
nanoclay crystals along with DNA as starting materials; nanoclay is an
inexpensive material that can be easily scaled up, and DNA provides the
blueprint for the desired proteins. Together, nanoclay and DNA will be processed
into billions of teeny tiny donuts such that proteins can be manufactured
through these donuts efficiently and continuously, all without living organisms
and on a large scale. If successful, this research will become an entirely new
platform where proteins, including those that cannot be produced by living
organisms, can be manufactured relatively inexpensively on a large scale.

The goal of this research project is to address major issues for cell-free
protein manufacturing, which is recognized as a critical manufacturing
challenge. The investigators have established exciting results in: 1) DNA
hydrogels to produce proteins without live cell with 20X enhanced throughput
rates; 2) use of nanoclay crystals to protect DNA and enhance protein
productions; 3) NanoClay-DNA (NanoCD) microdonuts to form a manufacturing
platform. The investigators covers DNA bionanotechnology, electro hydrodynamic
processing and large-scale system design, fluidic dynamics and interface
stability, and protein engineering. The industrial partners, TeraPore
Technologies and DuPont, cover issues for protein purification and outreach and
future commercialization. The proposed research, if successful, will become a
platform technology that enables NanoCD-based, continuous, scalable and cell-
free manufacturing of most proteins. The project will also be a demonstration of
integrating hierarchical materials in a scaled-up manufacturing process: from
molecular-scale DNA to nano-scale clay to micro-scale electrosprayed micro-donut
gel particles and to macro-scale continuous bioreactors.

This research will have significant societal impact and benefits. First, it
translates both nanomaterials (nano-clay) and nanobiotechnology (DNA nanotech)
into a large-scale manufacturing platform that may replace the often slow,
costly, and labor-intensive conventional cell-based protein productions. In
addition, these systems will pave the way for manufacturing many more different
or difficult-to-express proteins that will be urgently needed. The successful
completion of this research project will have become a powerful, economic and
universal technology that will be adopted by both academics and
pharmaceutical/biotechnology industries. This research will also impact
education with a carefully-designed, feasible, and integrated three-pronged
plan: (1) Outreach to high school students; (2) Expand undergraduate and
graduate students' experience and horizons including international research
experience and industrial experience; and (3) Increase the recruitment of under-
represented minority and female engineering students.