* 1530632
* Bounds Approaches to Empirical Market Design
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2020
* Joachim Freyberger, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 07/31/2020
* USD 392,892.00

Abstract:&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt; This project develops new methods and presents
new data to study two important forms of price discovery: auctions and
bargaining. Both auctions and bargaining have received attention in the
theoretical economic literature but many empirical questions remain, and both
forms of transaction are widely used methods of price discovery and trade which
affect governments, consumers, and suppliers worldwide, both in developed and
less-developed countries. Providing tools for robust analysis of bargaining and
auction data will better allow researchers and policymakers to make informed
decisions about how to design markets. For example, these tools can help
identify markets in which a fixed, nonnegotiable price would be more efficient
in practice than allowing for negotiated prices, and identifying cases in which
the opposite is true. These tools can also be used for studying how buyers and
sellers are affected by different designs of auctions or bargaining settings,
measuring the impact of collusion on market participants, or many other
questions about the design of marketplaces. The specific real-world settings
which this project uses to illustrate these tools are bargaining and auctions
transactions for online consumer-to-consumer sales and bargaining and auctions
for used cars.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt; At a technical level the project brings
together econometric tools for partial identification and bounds estimation and
the questions of empirical market design. Bounds approaches provide a framework
for analyzing questions about efficiency and optimality of market mechanisms
under weak structural assumptions. The project will provide new nonparametric
partial and point identification results and estimators of important model
features. Estimation will build on recent developments in the moment inequality
literature. The first part of the project will demonstrate how data on auction
bids and reserve prices can be used to either point or partially identify all
features of the auction (depending on whether the reserve price is private
knowledge of the seller or publicly observed) while allowing for an unknown
number of bidders and unobserved heterogeneity. These results will then be
applied to evaluate consumer surplus under different legal regimes regarding
used smartphone sales. The second part of the project is concerned with data on
alternating-offer price negotiations and will derive bounds on both buyer and
seller valuations under minimal assumptions and provide estimators for bounds of
functions of these distributions. These bounds will be used to analyze how close
the current bargaining mechanism is to a fully efficient bargaining mechanism
and document features of products or bargaining parties which contribute to
efficiency. Finally, in a combined auction and bargaining setting the proposed
research will show that the object of interest in the auction (distribution of
buyer values for a given car type) is point identified and the object of
interest in bargaining (distribution of seller values for a given car type) is
partially identified.