* 1530591
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Economics: The Economic and Behavioral Effects of a Value Added Tax: Evidence from Firm-level Data
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2016
* James Alm, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 07/31/2016
* USD 13,455.00

The Value-Added Tax (VAT) is a tax on consumption. It is one of the youngest yet
among the most important sources of government revenue. The VAT was first
introduced in 1967 in Brazil and Denmark and by 2013 more than 160 countries had
adopted it. One of the key reasons for the rapid adoption of the VAT is that it
is believed to be an efficient tax instrument. That is, a VAT does not create
distortions in firms' production decisions, implying that government can raise
revenue with minimum cost and without impeding economic growth. A key weakness
of this prediction is that it is based on an environment with perfect tax
compliance and perfect tax enforcement, which is often violated in practice.
Thus, whether the VAT is an efficient tax system is ultimately an empirical
question. There is, however, surprisingly little evidence evaluating these
efficiency properties of a VAT. This proposed research uses a commercial
database that contains information on millions of firms for up to 10 years, to
estimate the causal impact of a VAT on firm' growth (e.g, output, employment,
investment spending, and productivity) and firms' behavioral responses (e.g,
under-reporting of the revenue or over-reporting of the cost to claim undue tax
credit).

Randomized experiments are considered the gold standard in studying the effect
of a treatment. However, due to ethical or economic reasons, most of the social
and economic policies (including a VAT) are not implemented randomly. The PI
uses Regression Discontinuity Designs (RDD) to create the conditions for a local
random experiment by exploiting behavior around a registration threshold imposed
by law. This research makes several contributions. It analyzes the effects of a
VAT by exploiting a VAT rule that creates the conditions for a local random
experiment. Second, most of the previous studies on the effects of a VAT use
aggregate data that often mask great deal of variability. Isolating causality
using aggregate data is difficult due to many omitted variables that can affect
growth. The PI uses rich micro data that allow establishment of a tighter link
between a VAT and relevant outcomes. Third, there is a voluminous literature on
firms? behavioral responses to direct taxation such as the corporate income tax.
However, the literature on firms? behavioral responses to the indirect taxation
such as a VAT is small. This study contributes to this small but important
literature. Finally, at present, the full impact of a VAT is poorly understood.
The results from this study will provide insights on how to improve the
administration, enforcement, and ultimately the effectiveness of a VAT system.