* 1530650
* SNM: High-Throughput Electrospinning of Photocatalytic Mats for Energy Harvesting
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2015,01/31/2017
* Fu-Pen Chiang, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 01/31/2017
* USD 935,056.00

Electrospinning is a nanomanufacturing process that enables the single step
processing of self-supported, three-dimensional, and/or hierarchical networks of
nanofibers, typically of polymers and their composites. This process has been
exploited in recent years for the synthesis of nanoscale ceramics. However, the
amount and quality of the electrospun mats produced are still close to a
laboratory-scale. The focus of this award is to advance ceramic nanofiber
electrospinning to ensure high process yield, process and product repeatability
and reproducibility, along with optimized quality control. The anticipated
result is a commercially-viable, high-throughput, nanomanufacturing process that
produces functional nano-ceramics in large volumes and at a low cost. Processing
of advanced photocatalysts for solar energy conversion to hydrogen fuel through
water splitting is one of the targeted applications for the electrospun oxides
addressed by this award. There are multiple anticipated benefits to the US
economy and the welfare of the society, in terms of material availability and
it's use in harvesting energy from the sun. This multidisciplinary project
brings together expertise in materials manufacturing, nanomaterials synthesis,
electrochemistry, mechanical engineering, and computational modeling. This award
will add to the skilled workforce that will guide the growth of new industries
for nanomaterials manufacturing based on ceramic electrospinning, thus creating
more jobs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award addresses fundamental issues related
to the mechanism of formation of large-scale 3D mats, comprised of self-
supported, high surface area, ceramic oxide nanostructures. It spans several
disciplines, and it is the joint effort between four collaborators with
complementary expertise in nanofibrous materials processing, structural and
mechanical property characterization and modeling, and photocatalytic property
assessment. The structural features of the as-spun and calcined nanofibrous mats
will be modeled to enable the fine-tuning of their processing conditions and to
optimize the final design of the high-throughput process. The measurement of the
mechanical properties of the electrospun mats will determine how they will
perform as photocatalytic blankets. Assessment of the photoelectrochemical
properties of the mats will guide their tailored synthesis. The methods and
techniques employed in this work are expected to revolutionize industrial
processes for the nanomanufacturing of self-supported / non-dispersed ceramic
nanofibrous mats for energy-related applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is jointly funded by the Engineering Directorate and the Division of
Materials Research in the Mathematical and Physical Sciences Directorate.