* 1530345
* Collaborative Research: An Investigation Into Long Term Human Coastal Adaptation
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2019
* Patricia Beddows, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2019
* USD 28,046.00

Dr. Jeffrey Glover (Georgia State University), Dr. Trish Beddows (Northwestern
University), Dr. Beverly Goodman (University of Haifa), Dominique Rissolo
(University of California, San Diego), Derek Smith (University of Washington),
and colleagues will undertake research on the relationship between humans and
the environment along the north coast of Mexico's Yucatan Peninsula. Shorelines
are dynamic places, both culturally and environmentally, and the project will
explore this dynamism by employing earth, biological and social sciences to
elucidate the linkages between human settlements and their coastline. Working on
the coast, researchers must take into consideration a distinct range of
geomorphological, hydrogeochemical, and ecological variables. When these
variables are connected with archaeological data, the end result is a nuanced
understanding that illuminates barriers and opportunities people faced as part
of a dynamic coastal landscape over millennia. By focusing specifically on
coastal settlements, this research adds a much needed dimension to the growing
body of literature from various parts of the world that attempts to understand
how the dynamic relations between cultural and environmental factors, at local
and global scales, influenced the developmental trajectory of past human
societies. The results of this research can serve as the foundation for a
broader understanding of the interrelated variables that modern and future
groups will have to contend with as they adapt to changing coastal regimes. The
project has a long history of sharing its research with the local community and
will make every effort to share pertinent research results with the broader
public through popular media.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over the past three
millennia, rising sea levels and fluctuating climatic regimes have dramatically
transformed the physiographic characteristics of this drowning coastline, while
Maya society witnessed the rise and fall of divine kings and the emergence of a
market-based economy. By correlating multiple facets of the changing
paleoenvironment with broader social and economic changes, the research team
will be in a strong position to reveal the challenges faced, and opportunities
pursued, by these coastal peoples as they adapted to their changing coastal
landscape. The neighboring ancient Maya port sites of Vista Alegre and Conil are
the focus of study. Located only 7 km apart, preliminary data indicate that
human habitation along the coast was not continuous over the past three
millennia, nor did the occupational histories at Conil and Vista Alegre mirror
one another. This episodic settlement history provides tantalizing clues to the
vulnerabilities and resilience of these coastal peoples. The project first aims
to investigate what social and environmental factors conditioned the resilience
and vulnerability of the inhabitants of Vista Alegre and Conil over the past
3000 years. It will do this by employing sediment coring, water salinity
mapping, coastal ecological surveys, archaeological survey and excavations, and
multi-proxy lab analyses (Loss on Ignition [LOI], ¦Ä18Ocarb and ¦Ä13Ccarb of
bulk carbonate, grain size analysis, micropaleontology, and AMS radiocarbon
dating). With these data collected, project members will be able to understand
how these factors shifted through time and correlated with one another in order
to examine how their interplay shaped past lifeways.