* 1530847
* Promoting Empathy and Collaborative Decision Making for Natural Resource Management using a Computer Mediated Scenario
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2019
* Edward Wellman, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 06/30/2019
* USD 449,090.00

To promote effective collaborative management, it is critical to develop
interventions that promote empathy, which is a precursor to cooperative
behavior, and to understand the contextual factors that may prevent empathy from
resulting in collaborative action. Collaborative approaches to natural resource
management have had their share of success and failure. The latter is often
driven by the inability or unwillingness of interest groups to collaborate over
the provision of public goods. Collaboration sometimes require actors to forego
selfish behaviors in favor of more prosocial behavior. Therefore, understanding
the role of empathy and how to promote it becomes a necessary component of
successful collaborative decision making. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
team uses a multi-method, multi-disciplinary approach that includes a cross-
sectional public survey that will be used to test a model of the relationships
between perspective taking and prosocial behavior and identify the key
individual and contextual predictors and barriers to perspective taking and
prosocial action in resource management contexts. Further, the projects tests
multiple hypotheses about why preliminary experiments using computer-mediated
communications resulted in egoistic behavior, a counterintuitive result.
Finally, the research teams uses their theoretical and experimental results to
develop and test a series of experiments using computer-mediated scenarios to
mimic real-world collaborative management decisions. The work enhances
understanding of the causal connections between perspective taking and prosocial
action, identifies the contextual and individual barriers to perspective taking
and prosocial behavior, and develops reliable and valid instruments and
strategies to promote prosocial action within a computer mediated situation. As
a result, the work contributes to existing models of social cooperation,
proenvironmental behavior and collaborative management. Moreover, this research
makes the multidimensional relationships between perspective taking and
prosocial action visible, testable, and ultimately instrumental. This study also
improves teaching by using interactive scenarios to educate students across
multiple disciplines to promote collaborative behavior and cooperation through
complex decision-making scenarios.