* 1530479
* An Integrated Learning Theory of Descriptive and Experience-Based Decisions
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2015,05/31/2019
* Cleotilde Gonzalez, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 05/31/2019
* USD 484,997.00

This research program will unify currently fragmented decision theories leading
to a greater understanding of general decision making process beyond the
traditional distinction of judgment and choice. Additionally, this research will
provide insights into how decision options are evaluated over different
attributes, and how they are ultimately selected under different amounts and
types of information. Given that our decisions are often informed by some
combination of explicitly described information and previous experience, this
research is expected to have large impact in the multiple contexts in which we
make decision every day, including financial, health, energy, and other
contexts. The research may impact communication policies, the design of
information and decision support systems, marketing strategies, and many other
areas by clarifying what impact different amount, type, and format of
information has on risk taking and decision making. This project will go beyond
descriptions of phenomena by constructing behavior prediction algorithms.
Because we will deliver computational implementations of the mental processes
involved in making these decisions, this research has the potential to enhance
and improve traditional technology of decision support and big data approaches
used to predict decisions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;People make decisions by using
information that varies in format, completeness, accuracy, certainty, and many
other factors. Often, we rely on descriptive information (explicit definition of
risks, outcomes, probabilities) and on experiential information (implicit
collection of past outcomes and probabilities through feedback). Decisions that
use both types of information are ubiquitous in both trivial, low-risk
situations and highly consequential and risky situations, but most research
deals with decisions made from descriptions or from experience exclusively; not
a combination of both. This research undertakes a comprehensive integration of
decision making theories and models, and proposes to generate a novel theory of
descriptive and experience-based decisions. The research begins with performing
a conceptual integration of the key psychological processes involved in judgment
and choice in descriptive and experience-based decisions; second, establishes
behavioral phenomena of the integration of these two types of information and
their effects on choice; and third, proposes new computational formalizations to
extend current models of learning to include the processes discovered through
experimentation.