* 1530963
* MRI: Acquisition of a Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM) with EDS, EBSD and CL detectors to advance research and undergraduate research training
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2017
* Rachel Beane, Bowdoin College
* Standard Grant
* Dennis Geist
* 06/30/2017
* USD 437,876.00

This Major Research Instrumentation award supports the acquisition of a modern
scanning electron microscope (SEM) equipped with an array of detectors that
image samples and collect quantitative data on chemical compositions and crystal
orientations. This highly versatile instrument will support and advance research
in geology, oceanography, chemistry and archaeology at Bowdoin College, a
liberal arts college in Maine. Examples of some of the diverse research that
will be advanced by the SEM relate to the movement of Earth?s tectonic plates,
the evolution and eruptions of supervolcanoes, factors affecting clamshell
strength, the origin of Arctic artefacts, and the metallurgy of ancient Greco-
Roman coins. The new instrumentation also will facilitate undergraduate research
training at the College. Undergraduate students will use the SEM in multiple
courses as well as during independent-study and summer research projects. These
research projects will train students to apply modern analytical techniques to
original research questions in Earth Science and will enhance the infrastructure
for research across disciplines at the College. Additionally, the PIs will
incorporate SEM-based research into a pre-matriculation outreach program at the
College that provides underrepresented undergraduate students with a multi-day
immersion program in science. Images and data collected by undergraduates and
researchers with the SEM will be used to increase public scientific literacy
through an annual exhibition at Bowdoin College and through web page features.
The SEM will be equipped with a backscattered electron (BSE) detector,
cathodoluminescence (CL) detector, energy dispersive spectrometer (EDS), and a
fully integrated electron backscatter diffraction (EBSD) system. Using these
detectors, the research activities will leverage the high spatial resolution of
the SEM and the ability to simultaneously acquire multiple datasets (i.e.
geochemistry and crystal orientation) to investigate a variety of mineralogic,
petrologic, and tectonic questions. Example applications include: 1)
characterization of accessory minerals that record pressure-temperature-time
constraints, 2) crystal orientation measurements to infer the mechanics of
plutonic-volcanic, deformation, and crystal growth processes, 3) determination
of compositional zoning and/or domains in rock-forming minerals to track changes
in pressure, temperature, deformation, and composition, 4) characterization of
deformation microstructures, 5) measurement of the impact of freshwater flow on
the carbonate chemistry of estuarine environments, 6) identification of growth
bands in deep sea corals, 7) determination of the origin of artefacts in the
Arctic, and 8) evaluation of metallurgy and the circulation routes of ancient
coins. The instrumentation facilitates innovative research that meaningfully
involves professors, collaborators, students, and community partners and expands
the breadth of scientific inquiry possible at Bowdoin College.