* 1530141
* Continuing Support for the LTER Network Office
* BIO,DEB
* 05/15/2015,04/30/2017
* Robert Waide, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* louis kaplan
* 04/30/2017
* USD 765,085.00

Natural ecosystems experience constant change, and the consequences of this
change are often revealed gradually over long periods of time. Twenty-five
active Long Term Ecological Research (LTER) projects collect the long-term data
necessary to identify these consequences and their effects on the ecosystem
services, such as provision of clean water, that are critical for society. The
LTER Network Office provides information management, communication, and logistic
services to advance LTER research. This project will continue these services for
one year while a new National Office is selected and becomes operational. The
project will advance the field of ecosystem ecology by organizing
multidisciplinary meetings and by providing the information management services
needed to ensure public access to LTER data. Activities over the coming year
will increase the amount and diversity of ecological data available to the
scientific community, policy makers, resource managers, and the public, and will
facilitate understanding of the nature and pace of ecological change. The
researchers will organize people, tools, and ideas to promote understanding of
ecological systems from local to global scales. The Science Council meeting will
initiate network-level syntheses leading to scientific publications and
presentations, lay the groundwork for broad community-wide participation in a
triennial All Scientists Meeting, and address issues critical to the long-term
stability and success of the LTER Network. Outcomes from the All Scientists
Meeting will include the formation of new collaborations with programs outside
of the LTER community, the development of new LTER science themes, and better
integration of graduate students and early-career scientists into the LTER
community. Continued support of the LTER Network Information System will
increase the amount and diversity of ecological data available to the scientific
community and observation networks such as the National Ecological Observatory
Network (NEON) for comparison and synthesis. The researchers will provide
leadership in the important areas of data sharing, data standards, connectivity,
and the acquisition and implementation of new technologies through relationships
with other distributed networks and research programs.