* 1530603
* SNM: Low-Cost, Large-Scale Nanomanufacturing of Superinsulating Aerogels and Lightweight, Mechanically-Strong Aerogels
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2016,06/30/2022
* Nicholas Leventis, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 06/30/2022
* USD 1,551,974.00

Heating and cooling of buildings in the United States accounts for 15 percent of
energy use and 32 percent of carbon dioxide emissions. Aerogels are low-density,
superinsulating nanomaterials that can dramatically reduce these numbers but are
expensive to manufacture. While the insulation market is about $40 billion,
aerogels account for less than 1 percent of it. Fossil-fuel-based transportation
accounts for another 27 percent of emissions. Mechanically-robust aerogels can
be used as lighter weight replacements for plastics to reduce the weight of
vehicles, improving fuel efficiency by 10 percent. During aerogel manufacturing,
supercritical carbon dioxide-based extraction is commonly utilized to remove
liquid from a gel while preserving the solid nanostructure of the gel skeleton.
This process accounts for as much as 50 percent of manufacturing costs, requires
copious amounts of carbon dioxide and energy and stifles throughput. This
research award will provide a scientific foundation to enable development and
piloting of fast, efficient drying processes that preserve the skeleton of
aerogels. It will enable lower costs, scaling of quantities and dimensions and
diversification of materials. Porous three-dimensional nanomaterials other than
aerogels are pervasive across many fields; for example, artificial tissue
scaffolds. Results generated from this research will be relevant to the
manufacture of such other nano-scale materials and structures. The work plan
includes development of a pre-college STEM curriculum and distribution of
public-friendly content about nanotechnology through an online outreach
portal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The enabling technical output is a model of mass
transfer in supercritical carbon dioxide under aerogel drying conditions that
captures the effects of fluid composition, compressibility and properties and,
additionally, material microstructure and strain. This model will enable the
determination of modulation of flow rates, temperatures and pressures, select
solvents, order pore-fluid exchanges and formulate gels to develop and pilot
inexpensive, fast drying processes that minimize macroscopic and nanoscopic
damage to aerogels. The technical approach consists of five Tasks. (1) Measure
drying kinetics as a function of process parameters to aid in model development
and iteratively refine pilot-scale nanomanufacturing; (2) Measure densities of
supercritical carbon dioxide-solvent systems and develop metrology to monitor
drying; (3) Measure diffusion coefficients; (4) Measure volumetric strain states
inside gels in situ as they are dried; and (5) Use small-angle X-ray scattering
to elucidate effects of drying on and correlate stresses with morphostructural
changes and identify materials for pilot testing. The fundamental
nanomanufacturing principles will be applicable to a range of inorganic,
polymeric and composite aerogels.