* 1530944
* MRI: Development of a 3-D Imaging for Vibrationally Resolved Cross Section Measurements
* MPS,PHY
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2019
* Vola Andrianarijaona, Pacific Union College
* Standard Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 09/30/2019
* USD 209,922.00

The goal of this project is to develop a versatile device that probes quantum
properties of small diatomic molecular ions (particles composed of two atoms
that have lost one or more electrons). The singly charged hydrogen molecular ion
(two protons, bound together by a single electron) is a simple but fundamental
example of such an ion. Diatomic molecular ions are important because they are
abundantly found in space, and might also briefly exist in other settings,
including living organisms. The mechanism binding the two atoms is very similar
to a coiled spring, allowing the atoms to move one with respect to the other
without going astray. According to the basics of Quantum Mechanics, a diatomic
molecular ion is continually vibrating in a range of discrete quantum states at
different temperatures, which are defined by integers that state the degree of
vibration on a given scale for which the bigger the integer, the stronger the
pulsation. The proposed device probes these discrete states and is comparable to
a thermometer reading a low temperature for a cold object and high temperature
for hot one. It will also provide data that will help to understand how the
vibrational states affect their environment during interaction with other
particles. Not well understood, these slow interactions, technically called low
energy interactions, are known to play important roles in the interstellar
medium, in the cold part of nuclear fusion plasmas, and in the processes of DNA
strand breaks, etc. Thus, this project will promote the progress of science and
may have implications to a broad spectrum of areas of importance to society; at
the same time, it will give participating undergraduate students the opportunity
to take part in the development of a sophisticated 3-D imaging device at their
own institution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The charge transfer in collisions between
hydrogen and diatomic molecular ions touches a variety of disciplines spreading
from physical science to life science. First of all, it is of foremost
importance in fundamental physics because it involves the smallest atom. It is
also one of the dominant reactions in environments such as the cold divertor
plasma regions of a fusion tokamak or in interstellar clouds where the main
constituents are neutral H, the positive hydrogen ion, and H-molecules.
Moreover, understanding of this simplest fundamental system is a key for
mastering more complex systems which exist in, e.g., biophysics where radical
attacks on biomolecules such as DNA potentially involve charge transfer at very
low energy. However, it is often almost impossible to compare laboratory
measured cross sections to existing theories and calculations because the
vibrational state distribution of the molecules is not known. The proposed 3-D
imaging device will ultimately improve previously measured absolute cross
section measurements by making them vibrationally resolved, enabling a more
detailed comparison between theoretical and experimental results. In this 3-D
imaging technique, the molecular ion undergoes a resonant dissociative charge
exchange with an alkali atom and releases its vibrational energy in the form of
kinetic energy of the two fragments. The detection of the positions of the
daughter particles and their flight time differences made possible with the
detectors allows the reconstruction of the molecular ion's initial vibrational
energy via simple dynamics. This detection technique is equivalent to taking a
time resolved snapshot picture of the molecular ion fragments (thus the name 3-D
imaging). The whole 3-D imaging apparatus is envisioned to be a portable device
which could be easily transported to and used at a variety of research
facilities.