* 1530122
* GOALI: Energy Efficient and Reliable Motion Mechanism for Ocean Wave Energy Harvesting
* ENG,CMMI
* 12/30/2014,08/31/2018
* Lei Zuo, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Steve Schmid
* 08/31/2018
* USD 314,000.00

The potential of wave energy source in the US is estimated to be 64% of the
total electricity generated in 2010. Over 53% of the US population lives within
50 miles of the coasts, so ocean waves offer ready opportunity to provide
electricity for the population without long-distance electricity transmission.
The power takeoff - the machinery to convert the mechanical energy into
electricity - is considered as the single most important element in wave energy
technology, and underlies many of the failures of ocean wave energy systems to
date. Revolutionary power takeoff is urgently needed in order to realize the
high electricity potential from the untapped ocean waves. The objective of this
Grant Opportunity for Academic Liaison with Industry (GOALI) project is to
experimentally and theoretically investigate the design, modeling and control of
an innovative ocean power takeoff mechanism to solve the most fundamental
challenge in wave energy harvesting. The power takeoff offers much higher energy
conversion efficiency, enhanced reliability, and unmatched compactness, and
completely eliminates hydraulic components for potential environmental
pollution. It can be integrated into the point absorbers, wave attenuators, wave
terminators, or other type of wave energy converter whenever oscillatory wave
motion is involved. Therefore, the success of this research will help
establishing the leadership role of the US in the area of ocean wave energy.
This project is expected to pave a sustainable energy pathway of harvesting vast
but untapped ocean wave sources to meet the increasingly urgent national demand
for energy and energy security. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Multidisciplinary research
on energy manufacturing, marine hydrodynamics, mechatronics design, multi-
physics modeling, control, and in-field study will be conduct in this project.
The state-of-the-art ocean wave energy technology either uses direct-drive power
takeoffs with linear electromagnetic generator or indirect-drive power takeoffs
using intermediate fluid. The direct drives are simple and reliable but require
heavy and bulk permanent magnets; the indirect drives are more compact but
suffer from serious shortcomings on the complexity, reliability, and efficiency.
The research team will create and investigate a "mechanical motion rectifier"
based power takeoff to uniquely convert the irregular oscillatory wave motion
into regular unidirectional rotation of the generator, having the advantages of
direct and indirect drives. The research team will also systematically study the
vibration energy harvesting synthesis from new perspective of modern electrical
engineering including diodes and transistors. Multi-body dynamic motion
magnification will also be investigated to significantly enhance the power
extraction capacity.