* 1530874
* MRIConsortium: Development of a Neutral Particle Spectrometer to Investigate the Quark Structure of the Proton at JLab 12 GeV
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Tanja Horn, Catholic University of America
* Standard Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 08/31/2019
* USD 526,059.00

Gaining a quantitative description of the nature of strongly bound systems is of
great importance for our understanding of the fundamental structure and origin
of matter. Revealing the inner structure of the core of the atom that contains
the protons and neutrons and understanding the dynamics that bind these most
basic elements of nuclear physics is an essential part to advance this
knowledge. This project is aimed at conducting leading-edge research to
construct a neutral particle spectrometer (NPS) critical to confirm the
understanding of the structure of the proton. The NPS enables a multifaceted
experimental physics program at the Jefferson National Accelerator Facility, in
which the PIs play a leading role. The participation of postdoctoral
researchers, graduate students, and undergraduate students is an integral part
of this project and contributes to the development of the technological work
force in the USA. The all-female project leadership will provide role models
that could encourage under-represented groups to pursue advanced studies in
physics or technical fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The two-arm combination of
neutral-particle detection as provided by the NPS and a high-resolution magnetic
spectrometer offers unique scientific capabilities to push the energy scale for
studies of the transverse spatial and momentum structure of the nucleon through
reactions with neutral particles requiring precision and high luminosity. The
NPS allows accurate access to measurements of so-called hard exclusive (the
recoiling proton stays intact in the energetic electron-quark scattering
process) and semi-inclusive (the energy loss of the electron-quark scattering
process gets predominantly absorbed by a single pion or kaon) scattering
processes. To extract the rich information on proton structure through spatial
and momentum imaging, it is of prime importance to show in accurate
measurements, pushing the energy scales, that the scattering process is
understood. Precision measurements of real photons or neutral-pions with the NPS
offer unique advantages here. The instrument will be built by a collaboration of
researchers forming a consortium led by the Catholic Univ. of America and Ohio
Univ. It will also include the Old Dominion Univ. and as non-lead partners, the
Jefferson Lab, North Carolina A&amp;T University, the Yerevan Physics Institute,
U. of Glasgow, and the Institute of Nuclear Physics at Orsay.