* 1530519
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Economics: The Economic Value of Natural Language Communication
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2015,12/31/2017
* Daniel Houser, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Seung-Hyun Hong
* 12/31/2017
* USD 10,184.00

We propose a project to increase understanding of the economic value of natural
language communication both theoretically and empirically. Language is a
powerful and complex human tool facilitating social and economic decisions. The
richly detailed structure of natural language has evidently survived an
evolutionary process has led some economists to argue for its importance not
only to understanding grammar but also for understanding human social and
economic decisions. Consequently, it has been long argued that the existence of
a rich language should play a more prominent role in game theory (see Farrell,
1993). At the same time, others have demonstrated empirically that, in in
contrast to situations where players can engage in limited forms of
communication, efficient economic outcomes emerge more readily when players can
communicate using rich natural language. Our aim here is to present and test a
formal framework that predicts people both use and respond to multi-meaning
natural language in a way that improves coordination.

This project investigates why cheap-talk natural language communication is
systematically found to promote coordination better than predetermined intention
signaling. We hypothesize the reason is that, when communicating with natural
language, people both use and respond to intentions and attitudes, where
attitude indicates the strength of a message sender's desire to have her message
followed. We test our hypothesis using controlled laboratory experiments in both
the United States and China. Our preliminary data has shown (i) free-form
messages do include both signaled intentions and attitudes; (ii) people respond
both to intentions and attitudes when making decisions; and (iii) the use of
attitude significantly improves coordination. Moreover, while males and females
recognize and respond to intentions and attitude equally well, we find females
are more likely to send more demanding signals than males, while males send
messages focused more on the equilibrium outcome than attitude. Overall, we find
that natural language communication in our environment can be well-modeled by a
language that includes both intentions and attitudes. We propose to conduct more
experiments to assess whether these results are robust with a variety of games
and within the context of social learning environments. In particular, building
on a well-established literature, we propose to test the hypothesis that natural
language brings unique value beyond that which is available from knowledge of
social history or narrowly constructed advice. Our research helps to identify
the features of natural language communication that promote coordination, and
also sheds light on the nature of communication systems that may promote
efficient economic outcomes.