* 1530791
* Experimentally Identifying Constraints to Risk Sharing: Separating Limited Commitment, Moral Hazard and Hidden Income
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2021
* Arun Chandrasekhar, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 08/31/2021
* USD 578,447.00

Households in developing countries face a lot of income risk, yet formal credit
and insurance markets often do not exist. To deal with this risk, households
participate in informal risk sharing, making transfers between households. This
"informal risk sharing" has been one of the most widely studied topics in
development economics. While early work focused on the surprising effectiveness
of village informal risk sharing, more recent literature has shifted to
understanding specific constraints that may be barriers to informal insurance.
However, there is little evidence of the relative importance of such
constraints. In order to effectively design policies to address household income
risk it is important to understand which constraints to informal insurance are
important, and also, how such constraints may interact with one another. Our
project will design an experiment that lets us look at constraints individually
as well as together. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, research has considered
three main frictions: (1) hidden income, (2) moral hazard and (3) lack of
commitment. Our project studies the joint interaction of each type of friction.
First, we will develop a risk-sharing model with all three frictions and
characterize the first order equations together with the various multipliers.
This gives us a set of modified (inverse) Euler equations that we can take to
the. Second, we will conduct a field experiment wherein individuals face job
opportunities but the job opportunities differ in terms of whether the wage is
known to one's risk sharing partners, whether there is a bonus, and whether the
bonus feature is known to one's risk sharing partner. The theory allows us to
characterize the relationship between today and tomorrow's consumption in terms
of (inverse) Euler equations with Lagrange multipliers. The experiment, by
exogenously varying the degree to which a given friction can matter, gives us
the power to measure the extent to which various constraints are binding in this
framework.