* 1530965
* A Quantitative Investigation of the Impact of Supply Chain Leadership on Coordination under Information, Demand, and Supply Uncertainty
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2016
* Sila Cetinkaya, Southern Methodist University
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 08/31/2016
* USD 118,356.00

The goal of this research project is to advance practical knowledge of designing
supply contracts under emerging trends in industry because such knowledge is
crucial for optimizing supply chain performance in the real world. Mass
retailers are powerful "buyers" that manage buyer-driven channels with multiple
- domestic or international - supply options. Other examples of powerful buyers
include the government and the military. Although market power has been shifting
to the buyer in various markets, only a limited amount of academic research has
analyzed this shift in the power structure. Traditionally, the supplier (e.g.,
manufacturer) has been more powerful, and, hence, the previous research
emphasizes supplier-driven contracts in which the supplier acts as the channel
leader. Taking into account the recent trend in power shifting explicitly, this
research attempts to provide a comparison of optimal supply contract designs
under different types of uncertainty due to volatile nature of market
conditions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The outcomes are expected to provide insights
about the individual and joint impacts of power structure and information
asymmetry on supply chain performance, the value of information for contract
design under different supply chain channel structures, and the impact of supply
uncertainty on contract design under different supply chain channel structures.
By providing insightful results that address the efficiency of buyer-driven
channels, if successful, this research is expected to i) improve the efficiency
of decision making and contract negotiations, ii) impact the way contracts are
developed both in buyer- and supplier-driven channels with an emphasis on supply
chain performance, and iii) lead to quantifiable benefits for partnering
companies in terms of cost efficiency in contractual settings, ultimately
benefiting customers, shareholders, and the economy. An accompanying goal is to
contribute to the education of a new generation of supply chain engineers
through the PI's research, education, and industry collaboration activities
focusing on contemporary trends in industrial engineering and supply chain
management.