* 1530179
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in DRMS: Improving Food Safety Crisis Communications
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2017
* William Hallman, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 06/30/2017
* USD 33,302.00

The discovery of the contamination of foods products can pose major threats both
to public health and to the economic and reputational viability of the companies
held responsible. A central tenant of risk communication is to prevent
additional public exposures by releasing information as quickly as possible,
even when causality or responsibility for the problem is uncertain. However,
companies discovering food contamination problems may be reluctant to release
timely information, wishing to avoid potential negative publicity or liability.
Therefore, a central problem in managing such contamination incidents is how to
conduct effective crisis communications that can simultaneously protect public
health while minimizing unnecessary or undeserved damage to an organization?s
reputation and bottom line. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite an increase in the
discovery of food contamination problems and their impacts on public health and
the economy, research specifically focused on food safety crises and food safety
crisis communication is extremely limited. Therefore, this study is designed to
test the applicability of a leading crisis communications model, Situational
Crisis Communication Theory (SCCT), to the unique circumstances posed by food
safety crises. To do so, the study uses two controlled experiments with a
representative sample of online participants. The experiments investigate the
effects of different types of food safety crises, different crisis communication
strategies, and different message framing on public responses to a food safety
crisis. The study also extends the SCCT theory by proposing and testing novel
sub-categories of food safety crises and crisis communication strategies
relevant to food contamination incidents. Finally, the research yields practical
recommendations for government and industry regarding how to more effectively
communicate about food contamination incidents. In particular, the research
highlights communications strategies that may make it possible for companies to
release information quickly, without unnecessarily jeopardizing their
reputations and future economic viability.