* 1530534
* Collaborative Research: Econometric Methods for Models with Clustered Data and Covariate-Adaptive Randomization
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2018
* Ivan Canay, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 07/31/2018
* USD 237,000.00

This award funds research that will develop new statistical theories and methods
for analyzing three different kinds of data that are used to test economic
theories. The first project considers how to analyze data when the individual
data points can be grouped into a small number of "clusters". Since statistical
methods begin with assumptions about randomization, the PI team will develop a
theory of randomization tests that work in these settings. The second project
considers problems associated with using randomized controlled methods to test
the effects of an intervention, policy, or technology. These methods generally
involve assigning people to a treatment or control group based on complicated
rules that are designed to assure the two groups are comparable. These rules
have implications for the best ways to analyze the resulting data, and the PIs
plan to develop a new method that takes this into account. Finally, the team
will consider how to best develop a method that can combine several separate
statistical tests into a single framework. The project advances science by
developing new methods that will be used to test theories from economics and
other social sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs pursue three different
projects in econometrics. First, in joint work with Joseph Romano, they will
develop a theory of randomization tests under an approximate symmetry
assumption. A leading example where approximate symmetry holds is settings in
which the data can be grouped into a small number of clusters. The hope is that
their new methodology will work well in such settings, for which inference is
known to be challenging. Second, in joint work with Federico Bugni, they will
study how complicated treatment assignment rules designed to balance baseline
covariates across treatment and control groups impacts inference about the
average treatment effect. In preliminary work, they have shown that the usual
two-sample t-test can be quite conservative in such settings. We plan to develop
methods that do not have this feature. Finally, in joint work with Andres
Santos, the PIs will develop methods for testing unions of functional moment
inequalities. This framework encompasses many problems that have so far been
treated separately in the econometrics literature, including (subvector)
inference for (conditional) moment inequalities and tests of stochastic
dominance.