* 1530707
* Estimating Macroeconomic Models of Financial Crises: An Endogenous Regime Switching Approach
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2018
* Christopher Otrok, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 07/31/2018
* USD 282,532.00

The research in this grant develops a new approach for empirical analysis of
macroeconomic models of financial crises. This new approach will provide a way
to measure which economic shocks are driving an economy towards a crisis. It
will also provide a framework for analyzing the effectiveness of policies to
avoid and mitigate the impact of crises. The model developed is based on the
idea that financial crises are rare but large events, implying that any
reasonable model for analyzing crises must be non-linear. The research writes
models of financial crises as a two-regime model. A key innovative feature of
the new model is that the probability of moving to the crisis regime is a
function of the current state of the economy; for example when debt rises
relative to GDP the probability of a debt crisis increases. The recent global
financial crisis has clearly shown the need to develop policies to both prevent
such events from occurring as well as more effectively dealing with such events
when they do occur. The project contributes to the progress of science by
developing new methods for empirical testing of important macroeconomic models.
Developing a deeper understanding of how to avoid and mitigate financial crises
clearly contributes to the national prosperity.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project develops an endogenous regime
switching approach to modeling financial crises. In the model there are two
regimes, one a crisis regime, the second a regime for normal economic times. The
switch between regimes is based on a probability determined by economic
variables in the economy. Agents in the economy know how economic fundamentals
affect the probability of moving in or out of the crisis state. That is, it is a
rational expectations solution of the model. The solution then ensures that
decisions made in the normal state fully incorporate how those decision affect
the probability of moving into the crisis state as well as how the economy will
operate in a crisis. The model developed captures all of the salient features
one would want in an empirical model of financial crises. First, it captures the
non-linear nature of a crisis. Second, the regime switching model is solved
using perturbation methods and a second order solution. This allows the solution
to capture the impact of risk on decision rules due both in an out of the
crisis. Third, since the solution method is perturbation based it can handle a
number of state variables and many shocks. That is, we are less constrained than
current non-linear methods in terms of the size of the model. Fourth, the speed
of the solution method means that non-linear filters (e.g. particle filter) can
be used to calculate the likelihood function of the model for a full Bayesian
estimation of the relevant shocks and frictions that are fundamental to models
of financial crises. Fifth, the fully rational expectations nature of the
solution allows one to ask key counterfactual policy questions. For example,
what policies, if any, would have mitigated or eliminated the Great Recession?