* 1530332
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement: Fast and Slow Linguistic Predictions
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2017
* Colin Phillips, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* William Badecker
* 05/31/2017
* USD 17,951.00

Language unfolds rapidly in time, and is often contaminated by various kinds of
noise. Despite these challenges, native speakers? comprehension is generally
robust and efficient. A key cognitive mechanism that underlies the robustness
and efficiency of language understanding is the ability to predict the future
based on knowledge acquired from past experience, i.e., memory. Much recent
research has shown that comprehenders are very good at predicting upcoming
words. However, little is known about exactly how comprehenders generate
predictions in real time, as they hear or read sentences. In order to understand
predictive mechanisms, we need to understand the nature of the memory systems
that are engaged, the mechanisms that guide memory access, and how those
mechanisms relate to the linguistic information that provides the memory cues.
Understanding these mechanisms is important for figuring out how human languages
are processed in the brain, and it may serve as a foundation for understanding
how human language processing mechanisms can be impaired or repaired (in
clinical settings), trained (in educational settings), and simulated (in
technological settings).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research aims to examine the
mechanisms underlying word prediction by studying native English speakers (in
the US) and native Japanese speakers (in Japan) using electroencephalography
(EEG). The project will support the doctoral dissertation research of Shota
Momma. The studies build on previous research that shows that some linguistic
predictions are computed rapidly while others are computed more slowly. The
guiding hypothesis for the current project is that the speed of linguistic
predictions depends on the compatibility between linguistic cues and the format
of memory encoding. Linguistic cues that mismatch the format of memory are
slower to compute. The project tests this hypothesis via experiments that vary
the nature of the linguistic cues. The Japanese studies will be carried out with
partners at Waseda University in Tokyo, where they will contribute to a growing
scientific partnership between the American and Japanese laboratories.