* 1530891
* MRI: Acquisition of an Advanced Nanoscale Deformation with Imaging System for  Multiscale Study of the Mechanical Behavior of Advanced Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2015,02/28/2017
* Nicholas Pingitore, University of Texas at El Paso
* Standard Grant
* Leonard Spinu
* 02/28/2017
* USD 257,958.00

Nanoindenter (indenting at a scale about thousand times finer than the human
hair) is a highly versatile experimental tool for materials characterization
that utilizes diamond indenter of 10-20 nanometers in diameter into the surface
of materials to determine mechanical properties, including hardness, stiffness,
adhesion strength, and wear. It also has the unique ability to rapidly and
precisely make several hundred measurements for probing the surface properties
of materials. These characteristics make nanoindentation an indispensable tool
for research in disciplines ranging from Engineering to Biology, Chemistry,
Geology and Medicine. The significance of the project relates to exploring at a
fundamental level the mechanical behavior of materials that include the response
at high impact, local hardness of thin films for electronic applications, and
wear of biomedical implants. Furthermore, the project addresses the challenge of
tailoring the surface properties of materials for a host of applications from
susceptibility to scratching of electronic devices to adhesion of cells on
biomedical implants, providing new directions in the development of next
generation of advanced materials with superior mechanical performance and longer
life. The project supports nanotechnology education in the Colleges of Science
and Engineering at the University of Texas at El Paso and provides practical
training to undergraduate and graduate students throughout the campus in a
manner that will enable new understanding to emerge at the atomic or molecular
level. The compact all-in-one configuration is envisioned to advance the
research capabilities of more than 10 research groups, over 45 graduate
students, 40 undergraduate students, and 5 post-doctoral researchers, in terms
of new understanding at the nano or molecular level, thereby opening entirely
new avenues of research in materials science and engineering, and biomaterials
and biomedical engineering including the design of nanostructured materials,
organic-inorganic hybrid materials, materials for nanoelectronics, and
biomedical applications. The research team is committed to disseminate the
educational resources on nanoindentation to facilitate broader participation of
K-12 audience to scientific and engineering concepts on nanoindentation.

Strength is a fundamental property of the majority of materials systems.
Automated, advanced nanoindentation and scratch experiments are appropriately
suitable for this challenging task because of high spatial resolution and
throughput. The acquisition and subsequent utilization of an automated nanoscale
deformation system for materials research at the University of Texas at El Paso
constitutes the scope of the project. The goals are to use nanoindention in
areas of research that concern deformation mechanisms in nanostructured
materials, mechanics of mechanically-induced surface deformation in thin films
and polymer nanocomposites, nanomechanical characterization of 3D-printable
materials, biomechanical properties of tissue engineered biomaterials including
bone, cartilage and skin, adhesion strength of cells, and mechanical properties
of ceramic proppants used for hydraulic fracturing. The approach and method
involves use of different modules (ultra-low mechanical force, dynamic
mechanical analysis, extended z-range, high temperature stage, high load
transducer, high resolution imaging, and fluorescence microscope), enabling the
researchers to acquire new understanding of the materials at the nanoscale.