* 1530465
* DIP: Next Generation WeatherBlur: Expanding Non-Hierarchical Online Learning Community Models for Citizen Science
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2019
* Ruth Kermish-Allen, Maine Mathematics and Science Alliance
* Standard Grant
* Amy Baylor
* 09/30/2019
* USD 1,349,958.00

The Cyberlearning and Future Learning Technologies Program funds efforts that
support envisioning the future of learning technologies and advance what we know
about how people learn in technology-rich environments. Development and
Implementation (DIP) Projects build on proof-of-concept work that shows the
possibilities of the proposed new type of learning technology, and PI teams
build and refine a minimally-viable example of their proposed innovation that
allows them to understand how such technology should be designed and used in the
future and that allows them to answer questions about how people learn, how to
foster or assess learning, and/or how to design for learning. This project is
building and studying a new type of online learning community. The WeatherBlur
community allows kids, teachers, scientists, fishermen/fisherwomen, and
community members to learn and do science together related to the local impacts
of weather and climate on their coastal communities. Members of the community
propose investigations, collect and share data, and learn together.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;WeatherBlur is designed to be a new form of knowledge-
building community, the Non-Hierarchical Online Learning Community. Unlike other
citizen science efforts, there is an emphasis on having all members of the
community able to propose and carry out investigations (and not just help
collect data for investigations designed by expert scientists or teachers).
Prior research has demonstrated important structural differences in WeatherBlur
from other citizen science learning communities. The project will use social
network analysis and discourse analysis to measure learning processes, and
Personal Meaning Mapping and embedded assessments of science epistemology and
graph interpretation skills to examine outcomes. The measures will be used to
explore knowledge-building processes and the scaffolds required to support them,
the negotiation of explanations and investigations across roles, and the
epistemic features that drive this negotiation process. The work will be
conducted using an iterative design-based research process in which the prior
functioning WeatherBlur site will be enhanced with new automated prompt and
notification systems that support the non-hierarchical nature of the community,
as well as tools to embed assessment prompts that will gauge participants' data
interpretation skills and epistemic beliefs. Exponential random graph modeling
will be used to analyze the social network analysis data and test hypotheses
about the relationship between social structures and outcomes.