* 1530959
* MRI: Acquisition of a 400 MHz NMR Spectrometer to Support Undergraduate Research and Chemical Education at Florida Gulf Coast University
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2018
* Scott Michael, Florida Gulf Coast University
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 07/31/2018
* USD 274,466.00

With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation Program (MRI) and
support from the Chemistry Research Instrumentation Program (CRIF), Florida Gulf
Coast University will acquire a 400 MHz NMR spectrometer. The instrument will
allow research in different areas including organic synthesis and materials,
peptide, forensic and inorganic chemistry and enhance the teaching program at
the University. The research will impact areas of biological and environmental
interest including DNA stability, anti-viral peptides, precursors to novel drugs
and gas adsorption materials. In general, Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR)
spectroscopy is one of the most powerful tools available to chemists for the
elucidation of the structure of molecules. It is used to identify unknown
substances, to characterize specific arrangements of atoms within molecules, and
to study the dynamics of interactions between molecules in solution. Access to
state-of-the-art NMR spectrometers is essential to chemists who are carrying out
frontier research. This instrument will be an integral part of teaching as well
as research performed by undergraduate students at Florida Gulf Coast
University. The NMR will also increase the chemistry department's capability to
collaborate with local law enforcement institutions on drug identification as
well as with local bio-tech companies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal is
aimed at enhancing research and education at all levels, especially in areas
such as synthesizing (a) bio-inspired ionic liquids; (b) medicinally relevant
natural products; (c) bioactive molecules; (d) studying structure and function
of membrane disruptive anti-viral peptides; (e) studying forensic applications
of NMR with concentration in long-term structural and chemical stability of DNA;
and (f) studying metal-organic materials from pillared discrete structures.