* 1530777
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in DRMS: The Psychology of Political Risk in Repressive Regimes
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2016
* Macartan Humphreys, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 07/31/2016
* USD 17,508.00

The US government spends billions per year on democracy and governance
assistance in foreign countries. Nevertheless, one in five elections in Africa
since 1990 has been afflicted by significant levels of violence, which impedes
citizens from freely voting for their preferred candidates. Identifying how and
when coercive violence influences voters is critical to effectively reducing its
impact on the quality of elections. This study uses the case of Zimbabwe to
understand how citizens make decisions about politics when faced with the threat
of violence. More generally, it seeks to understand how the emotional impact of
the threat of violence affects perceptions of risks and participation in pro-
democracy collective action. The results of this study can help improve efforts
to monitor elections and encourage participation in democratic politics by US
institutions such as the National Democratic Institute, Carter Center, and
USAID. Specifically, it implies that efforts to monitor elections should be
focused not only on where coercion is most likely to occur but also on where it
is most likely to impact behavior. Second, interventions to prevent and mitigate
violence should take into account the psychological resilience of voters.

This study combines a historical analysis of the relationship between violence
and voting patterns in Zimbabwe, lab-in-the-field experiments that test for the
causal effect of emotions on perceptions of political risks, and a field
experiment to test whether emotions can be used to mobilize citizen action. The
historical analysis uses constituency and individual level data to test whether
violence has a bigger impact on the behavior of voters who are more physically
and psychologically vulnerable to intimidation. The lab-in-the-field experiment,
conducted through a household survey of opposition supporters in Zimbabwe, uses
photos of facial expressions and recalled past experiences of emotions to induce
anger and fear. It then measures how these induced emotions affect how
participants perceive the likelihood that they personally will face repressive
violence as well as their willingness to engage in a number of political
actions. It induces emotions using both political and apolitical recall-based
stimuli to assess the extent to which the context of the emotions matters. Last,
the field experiment leverages a unique partnership with an African political
party to test whether negative campaign messages are more effective in
mobilizing action in riskier political environments.