* 1530953
* MRI: Acquisition of an IVIS Lumina K Series III real-time in vivo-in vitro fluorescent and bioluminescent fast imaging system
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2018
* Neal Stewart, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Harsha Chelliah
* 08/31/2018
* USD 294,477.00

To study and understand the complexities of a living system, it is essential
that methods be available to probe biological functions directly within the
living system itself. The progression of a disease and how it responds to a new
pharmaceutical agent, for example, is best discerned not in a petri dish but
rather inside the living being where all interactions and reactions can be
investigated under the most authentic environmental variables possible. Optical
bioimaging is one such method that enables researchers to peer inside of living
entities. Using powerful cameras alongside genetic techniques that enable cells,
tissues, and organs to emit visible light, it is now possible to noninvasively
visualize biological systems in their native state. The goal of this proposal is
to acquire an IVIS Lumina camera to facilitate further advances in optical
imaging technologies. The camera will become a centerpiece of a bioimaging core
facility that serves a diverse investigator pool across the University of
Tennessee campus, Health Science Center, Veterinary College, and neighboring
community colleges and non-research intensive colleges. Access to the camera
will spur new investigative activities centered on addressing current and
emerging research challenges across the biological, engineering, environmental,
and physical sciences while emphasizing cross-disciplinary student training and
educational outreach. Priority research topics include imaging applications
addressing cancer therapies, implantable biosensors, faster bedside diagnostics,
advanced drug delivery systems, improved animal models for the understanding of
human disease, and even glowing plants capable of monitoring for harmful
environmental pollutants. The shared nature of the IVIS camera will foster new
multidisciplinary collaborations to further advance the optical imaging field.
Dedicated teaching and hands-on training activities focused on undergraduate and
high school students are also in place for the challenging pursuit of new
knowledge and discoveries centered on state-of-the-art bioimaging
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this MRI instrument acquisition
proposal is to obtain an IVIS Lumina K Series III real-time in vivo-in vitro
fluorescent and bioluminescent fast imaging system for shared use among a
multidisciplinary cross-campus and cross-institutional investigational team.
Optical imaging using proteins, dyes, and nanomaterials that emit fluorescent
and/or bioluminescent light has provided a new technological toolbox for
interrogating and surveying biological molecules, cells, tissues, organs, and
organisms, from which new insights can be gained into the complexity, structure,
and dynamics of discrete biological units and interactive biosystems. The IVIS
Lumina represents a state-of-the-art technology that provides 10-fold
improvements in sensitivity and speed over current existing imaging
infrastructure. For researchers performing animal studies, millisecond exposure
times permit real-time conscious animal imaging and promote improved animal
welfare by negating the requirement for animal anesthetization. The ability to
monitor conscious animals represents a transformational leap in in vivo
bioimaging that significantly enriches our ability to understand and model
disease states and therapeutic interventions. The investigational team assembled
for this MRI proposal represents a diverse ensemble of researchers dedicated to
applying optical imaging across the conventional boundaries of biological and
engineering research. The imaging system will foster new collaborations and
synergies focused on shared strengths in environmental biotechnology,
biomicroelectronics, nanobiotechnology, organismal development and physiology,
synthetic biology, biomedical diagnostics, and materials sciences.