* 1530253
* Carbonate Formation Induced by CO2 Degassing: Controls on the Isotopic Compositions and Implications for Clumped Isotope Thermometry
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2015,01/31/2018
* Weifu Guo, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 01/31/2018
* USD 150,000.00

Calcium carbonate formation induced by carbon dioxide (CO2) degassing is
ubiquitous in nature and produces some of the most important paleoclimate
archives available, most notably speleothems. These cave carbonate deposits hold
huge potential for reconstructing terrestrial paleoclimate, because their
isotopic compositions reflect mean annual surface temperatures and their
formation age can be precisely dated. However, various kinetic processes are
involved in this type of carbonate formation, complicating the interpretation of
their isotopic compositions. This impedes the realization of the full potential
of these paleoclimate archives. Recent development of the carbonate "clumped
isotope" thermometer offers new opportunities for reconstructing
paleotemperatures based on these carbonates. Unlike the conventional carbonate-
water oxygen isotope thermometer, this novel clumped isotope thermometer can
determine carbonate formation temperatures without assumptions about the
isotopic compositions of the water from which carbonate precipitates. But this
thermometer has not escaped the influence of kinetic effects. Direct application
of this thermometer to natural speleothems has resulted in systematic
overestimations of their formation temperatures. This proposal seeks to
systematically determine the isotope effects, especially clumped isotope
effects, associated with carbonate formation induced by CO2 degassing, through
series of well-characterized laboratory experiments. The overarching goal of
this project is to provide a quantitative framework for interpreting the
isotopic compositions of this type of carbonates in nature and thus enable
robust paleotemperature reconstructions based on their isotope compositions.
Undergraduate students will be exposed to the state-of-the-art technologies for
aqueous carbonate chemistry measurements and stable isotope analysis during the
course of this project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the investigators
propose to determine (1) the kinetics of the clumped isotope exchange between
different dissolved inorganic carbon species and water, and (2) the kinetic
isotope fractionation factors associated with bicarbonate (HCO3-) dehydration
and dehydroxylation reactions - the key pathways for converting dissolved HCO3-
to CO2. This proposed work will bring together the respective expertise of two
investigators in clumped isotope geochemistry and aquatic carbonate chemistry.
The use of state-of-the-art technologies for solution carbonate chemistry
measurements will make it feasible to pair the changes in solution carbonate
chemistry with isotope measurements, and thus allow detailed investigation of
the kinetic controls on the isotopic compositions of carbonate precipitates. The
parameters to be determined in this project are fundamental for understanding
the isotope systematics of aqueous carbonate system, and will be applicable in
many future studies.