* 1530543
* The 8th USA-China Chemical Engineering Conference, Shanghai, China, October 12-15,2015
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2016
* Norman Li, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Triantafillos Mountziaris
* 04/30/2016
* USD 30,000.00

PI: Yang, Ralph T.&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1530543&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
grant is to provide travel funds to U.S. speakers, authors of papers,
particularly young academic participants to the The 8th USA-China Chemical
Engineering Conference, to be held in Shanghai, China, on October 12-15, 2015.
The funds will provide for approximately 30 partial travel grant awards to U.S.
speakers, authors of papers, particularly young academic participants at the
Conference. Travel awards will be made based on the following considerations:
(1) scientific or technological merit of the speaker/participant; (2)
professional qualifications relative to age and position; (3) institutional and
geographical distribution. All awards will be made in full compliance with the
Civil Rights Acts of 1964. NSF travel policies with respect to U.S. air carriers
will be followed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;The theme
of the conference is: "New Era of Opportunities and Challenges of Chemical
Engineering: Frontier of Chemical Engineering and Future Development of Chemical
Industry." The Conference is co-sponsored by the Chinese Academy of Engineering,
Chinese Academy of Science, the Chemical Industry &amp; Engineering Society of
China (CIESC), and the American Institute of Chemical Engineers (AIChE). The
purpose of the Conference is to provide a forum for U.S. Chemical Engineers to
meet their counterpart in China to discuss the latest advances, exchange
research ideas and discuss opportunities for
collaboration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;Global issues
such as new and renewable energy sources, clean fuels, sustainability and
environment will be among the focal points of discussion that will be beneficial
to the U.S. participants, and lead to the development of new research ideas and
collaborations. The direct communication will facilitate development and
expansion of the potentially vast markets in China as well as Asia for U.S.
chemical products.