* 1531690
* Collaborative Research: Impact of Snowfall Processes on Potential Vorticity Generation in High-Latitude Snow Events
* GEO,AGS
* 09/15/2015,02/28/2019
* Tristan LEcuyer, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 02/28/2019
* USD 366,877.00

Precipitation processes, such as evaporation and condensation, have the ability
to affect the large-scale weather systems in which they are embedded. This
research award will provide funding for a collaborative team of researchers to
study how snowfall processes affect overall storm evolution. The research will
make use of ground-based instrumentation, remote sensing, and numerical modeling
to gain a better picture of the profile of snowflakes in a storm and whether the
models are representing the snow correctly. Differences between the observations
and the models will indicate the relative importance of snowfall processes in
storm events. The result of the award should be improved modeling for both
weather and climate purposes and enhanced international scientific collaboration
between the United States, Norway and Sweden. Students would be educated and
trained, ensuring the development of the next generation of
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team plans to contrast real-world
observations of the spatial and vertical distributions of snowfall with the
representation in numerical models, and seek to quantify the impacts of any
differences on storm evolution. The goal would be to better define the
relationships between microphysical and dynamical processes for three
meteorologically distinct high-latitude meteorological extremes (Alaska, Norway
and Sweden). The observational component of the research will include in-situ
measurements of snowflake statistics using the Multi-Angle Snowflake Camera and
remote sensing from radars using an existing satellite radar snowfall retrieval
scheme. The modeling aspect of the work would be performed using the HARMONIE,
ECMWF-IFS, and WRF systems. Three main objectives will be addressed in the
project: 1) Quantify real-world vertical profiles of snowfall microphysical
properties with uncertainties at each site, 2) Compare observations of the
vertical profile of precipitation properties with their representation in
numerical model for different synoptic conditions, and 3) Evaluate the impact of
discrepancies in modeled and observed precipitation profiles on potential
vorticity modification for forecast storm events at each site.