* 1531627
* MRI: Development of Angle-Resolved Light Scattering System for Ultrafast Surface Spectroscopy
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Felix Fernandez, University of Puerto Rico Mayaguez
* Standard Grant
* Leonard Spinu
* 08/31/2020
* USD 264,001.00

This award from the Major Research Instrumentation program and the EPSCoR
program supports the development of a state-of-the-art time- and angle-resolved
hemispherical elastic light scattering (TARHELS) instrument to observe light
scattering with femtosecond resolution at cryogenic temperatures. The apparatus
will be the first optical system of this kind, and provides unique capabilities
beyond current limitations and will advance the standards for state-of-the-art
instrumentation in a field at the forefront of condensed matter research. Multi-
user access to the instrument will significantly increase and advance the
research activity of the Physics Department at the University of Puerto Rico-
Mayaguez. Beyond its scientific impact, the project provides an excellent
education and training opportunity for graduate students at the University of
Puerto Rico, a higher education institution that serves and graduates the
largest number of Hispanic STEM students in the United States. Students will
receive extensive training in working with the modern ultrafast diffraction
techniques that are frequently utilized in National Labs and the US
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This TARHELS instrument will provide unique
possibilities for the ultrafast pump-probe surface spectroscopy of condensed
matter, while enabling high-quality recording and spectral analysis of
hemispherical scattering indicatrix with femtosecond resolution using large-
scale aspherical reflective optics. The setup is designed as a computer-
controlled apparatus that operates with external ultrafast laser pulse sources.
The use of several geometries will enable monitoring of the light scattering of
homogenous and surface waves. The project will also develop the user interface
and algorithms for fast analysis of the scattering field. Collecting the time-
and angle-resolved scattering over a hemisphere, the TARHELS instrument will
provide the real-time reconstruction and visualization of transient
autocorrelation function and power spectral density of the surface, enabling
insight into the nonsteady state of multi-scale structural irregularities.
Operating at low temperatures, the TARHELS system will yield substantially new
information about nonequilibrium disorder of stochastic surfaces on the
mesoscale, information about grain-size-dependent electron-lattice interactions,
the role of electronic correlations in nonequilibrium quantum phases of matter,
and multi-scale quantum condensed matter dynamics, including insulator-to-metal
phase transition in different functional materials, correlated oxides,
topological insulators and superconductors under strong laser excitation.