* 1531086
* Belmont Forum Collaborative Research: Food Security and Land Use: The Telecoupling Challenge
* GEO,RISE
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2021
* Emilio Moran, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Uhle
* 07/31/2021
* USD 639,925.00

This award provides support to U.S. researchers participating in a project
competitively selected by a 14-country initiative on global change research
through the Belmont Forum and the European Joint Programming Initiative on
Agriculture, Food Security and Global Change (FACCE-JPI). The Belmont Forum is a
high level group of the world's major and emerging funders of global
environmental change research and international science councils. It aims to
accelerate delivery of the international environmental research most urgently
needed to remove critical barriers to sustainability by aligning and mobilizing
international resources. FACCE-JPI brings together 21 countries committed to
building an integrated European Research Area addressing the interconnected
challenges of sustainable agriculture, food security and impacts of
enviornmental change. Belmont Forum and FACCE-JPI countries participated in this
initiative under a funding framework developed by the G8 Heads of Research
Councils. This framework supports multilateral research projects that address
global challenges in ways that are beyond the capacity of national or bilateral
activities. Each partner country provides funding for their researchers within a
consortium to alleviate the need for funds to cross international borders. This
approach facilitates effective leveraging of national resources to support
excellent research on topics of global relevance best tackled through a
multinational approach, recognizing that global challenges need global
solutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Belmont Forum and FACCE-JPI have provided
support for research projects that seek to deliver knowledge needed for action
to mitigate and adapt to detrimental environmental change and extreme hazardous
events that relate to Food Security and Land Use Change. This award provides
support for the U.S. researchers to cooperate in consortia that consist of
partners from at least three of the participating countries and that bring
together natural scientists, social scientists and research users (e.g., policy
makers, regulators, NGOs, communities and industry). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project brings together researchers and stakeholders from four different
countries. The team will use the framework of telecoupling - socioeconomic and
environmental interactions among coupled human and natural systems at different
scales over great distances - to examine feedbacks between food security and
land use. Results of this project include an enhanced capacity to predict
effects from shifts in food flows and land use; and tools to facilitate policy
changes that will improve food production and distribution while ensuring a more
sustainable environment.