* 1531757
* MRI:  Acquisition of a Cryo Field Emission Transmission Electron Microscope
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Mathew Maye, SUNY College of Environmental Science and Forestry
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 08/31/2018
* USD 1,120,000.00

An award is made to State University of New York College of Environmental
Science and Forestry (ESF) to acquire a field emission scanning/transmission
electron microscope (FES/TEM) with cryo-capabilities and elemental analysis
using Energy Dispersive Spectroscopy (EDS). This instrument will replace a 30
year-old failing TEM in the shared-core N.C. Brown Center for Ultrastructure
Studies at ESF. This project is a joint partnership of three adjacent
universities, ESF, SUNY Upstate Medical University (UMU) and Syracuse University
(SU). This new FES/TEM will provide these institutions with capabilities that
are currently not available in central New York, and will expand the research
capabilities of faculty and graduate students at these institutions, and provide
support for competitive extramural funding. The NC Brown Center at ESF offers a
unique academic program, a "Microscopy Minor" in central New York with graduate
and undergraduate coursework and comprehensive formal training in the theory and
application of microscopy such as: sample preparation, instrumentation and
interpretation of results. This acquisition will enhance these academic
offerings. In addition to its academic program, the Center routinely provides
light, scanning and transmission microscopy demonstrations to community and
industrial groups including outreach activities and demonstrations. This project
will support such activities. The new FES/TEM will facilitate interactive,
online high school and client access, with potential to provide interactive
information with online demos. The new TEM enables the asbestos testing lab at
ESF to become the only local laboratory to offer both phase contrast and TEM
asbestos analysis for the asbestos remediation industry. Societal benefits of
the project include raising scientific literacy of students and the public,
providing students with skills for employment, providing potential for research
that can result in wide-ranging impacts such as new vaccines or drug delivery
systems for disease prevention, as well as environmental and industrial impact
from the development of novel nanomaterials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Acquisition of
this cryo-capable field emission scanning and transmission (S/TEM) will permit
advances within a wide-range of research groups at ESF, SU and UMU. Among these,
at ESF: better tracking of measurable chemical changes and ultrastructure in
fish ear stones due to environmental conditions, chemistry of both inorganic and
organic nanoparticles, with potential use in targeted drug delivery, studies of
wood cell wall degradation by fungi affecting forest trees and wood products,
studies of insect vectors of human and plant diseases; at SU: this microscope
will determine size and shape of semi-conductive quantum rods and alloy
nanoparticles, atomic imaging and elemental inspection of atomic derived lattice
planes and compositional gradients in alloy nanoparticles, S/TEM and EDS
analysis of compositional changes in hetero-structured nanoparticles, S/TEM of
stacking faults and extended defects in quantum dots, and analysis of protein
and DNA modified nanomaterials; and at UMU: the proposed field emission electron
source with its superior brilliance and beam coherence will produce high
contrast images from frozen hydrated biological macromolecules at much better
resolution than is now possible with the older machine. Such data will allow 3-D
structure determination of ATP molecular motors. The high resolution 4K CCD
camera will enable high throughput situations especially when thousands of
images are collected for single particle or 3Dimensional reconstruction. The
motorized goniometer will enable generating tomographic or tilted
reconstructions of cryo sections of animal or plant cells revealing the internal
structure and location of organelles, virus or nanoparticles as well as large
drug molecules without the confusing artifacts created by chemical fixation.
This microscope features a 2 nanometer resolution for examination of unstained
samples, bacteria, viruses, proteins, nanoparticles and at the same time, map
and locate elements. This new generation S/TEM will have a field emission gun,
cryo-capable stage, Energy Dispersive X-ray Spectrometer, 4K CCD digital camera,
electron diffraction, tomography software, and remote access. This instrument
permits entry into the fields of protein folding, molecular motors, materials
research, 3D reconstruction of single particles, cryo-imaging and elemental
analysis. The FES/TEM with these options will enable visualization and
reconstruction of subcellular particles, drug delivery vehicles, identification
of elements in biological samples and nanoparticles, and localization of
pharmaceuticals in target tissues by cryo-sections; all things that cannot be
achieved with present instrumentation.