* 1531026
* I-Corps:  NanoScript: A Nanoparticle-Based Artificial Transcription Factor for Effective Gene Regulation and Stem Cell Differentiation
* TIP,TI
* 04/15/2015,09/30/2016
* KiBum Lee, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 09/30/2016
* USD 50,000.00

The development of stem cells holds significant potential to transform the field
of regenerative medicine by having the ability to treat and cure debilitating
diseases. As such, there is an urgent need among biologists, researchers, and
clinicians for a product that effectively regulates stem cell differentiation.
To address this demand, the main goal of the proposed research is to develop a
nanotechnology-based product (termed NanoScript). NanoScript is a tunable
technology platform that effectively regulates gene expression in stem cells and
differentiates stem cells into any cell lineage in a non-viral manner.
NanoScript appeals to the broader stem cell market. Specifically, biologists and
researchers, working at universities or private companies, who are interested in
pursuing stem cell-based research are ideal customers, and are expected to be
the 'early adopters.'&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the advent of the proposed
NanoScript technology, stem cells can safely and effectively be differentiated.
By integrating small molecules onto gold nanoparticles, this team has developed
NanoScript to mimic and emulate the function of natural proteins within the cell
that regulate gene expression. The most attractive feature of NanoScript is its
ability to regulate genes in a non-viral manner, which makes it a safe platform
for fundamental and translational stem cell research. Furthermore, by making
minor adjustments, NanoScript can be designed to induce the differentiation of
stem cells into any cell type, thus making NanoScript a powerful and broadly-
applicable platform. This interdisciplinary research and technology is the
first-ever demonstration of a safe, effective, and tunable platform for stem
cells.