* 1531070
* US Ignite: Collaborative Research: Cloud Computing and Software-Defined Networking Enhancements to Support Collaborative, Problem-based STEM Education
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Shivakumar Sastry, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 08/31/2019
* USD 239,862.00

Innovative ideas are needed to improve the relevance of STEM education and
student engagement. It is known that student motivation and engagement can be
improved by challenging them with open-ended, real-world problems and having
them work in multi-disciplinary teams. The proposed research will achieve these
objectives and impart STEM knowledge and 21st century skills by connecting
course content and assessments to deep STEM learning and real-world engineering
problem solving. Using cloud-based software infrastuctures, students can use the
proposed C3STEM environment to collaborate with their peers on knowledge
intensive tasks, conduct joint experiments, and solve complex problems by
decomposing them into smaller, more manageable tasks. This approach will improve
the technological competence of students and help them to develop into global
leaders. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will research, design and validate
new technologies that will enable ubiquitous and collaborative STEM education.
The team will design new software systems by exploiting the Cloudlet and
Locavore patterns in conjunction with Cloud Computing. New techniques for
Software Defined Networking (SDN) will be designed and validated to dynamically
create and manage network bandwidth in support of the envisioned applications.
Resource allocation, scalability and Quality of Service issues will be addressed
in the integrated context of SDN blended with Cloudlets. The investigation will
address insights and scientific foundations that inform new directions in Cloud
Computing and Network Virtualization as applied to collaborative engineering
problem solving. The team will design STEM curricular units using real-world
applications, such as traffic flow in city streets and discrete manufacturing
systems that are directed at high school and undergraduate students. The
investigators will design, instrument, and validate next-generation test beds
for remote access using multiple mobile devices and computing platforms for
performing experiments and problem-solving by remote teams. For example, high
school student teams in Nashville, TN will be able to collaborate with graduate
and undergraduate students at Vanderbilt University and interact with students
in Akron, OH while using a manufacturing test bed located at the University of
Akron. The distributed team will be able to collaboratively collect real-time
data from the test beds via mobile devices, program new behaviors, validate
their designs and engage in solving complex problems of real-world significance.