* 1531512
* RAPID:  Morphological Effects of Extreme Sea-Level Anomalies
* GEO,EAR
* 02/15/2015,01/31/2017
* Peter Ruggiero, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Yuretich
* 01/31/2017
* USD 45,000.00

A non-technical description of the project, which explains the project's
significance and importance

Coastal erosion is a problem of national and global importance. As more people
live along the shore, it is becoming increasingly vital to forecast how storms
and other weather systems can alter the landscapes of coastlines. This RAPID
project will collect intensive field data from the Oregon coastline during a
period of elevated sea level and El Niño conditions that will make numerical
models of beach movement and erosion more accurate. Numerical models of coastal
processes are widely used by federal/state government agencies, local planners,
and consultancies for a range of engineering and planning applications;
accordingly, enhancing the quantitative accuracy of morphological evolution in
these models has the potential to improve the quality of many products and
services.

A technical description of the project

This RAPID project will implement a beach and dune topographic surveying
campaign in the Netarts littoral cell, Oregon to quantify the impacts of extreme
sea level anomalies on beach morphology. Hypotheses to be tested are whether 1)
the majority of the dune-backed coastline within Oregon's headland-bound
littoral cells will experience the "collision regime" of the Sallenger storm
impact scale approximately 10-15% more during El Niño than during normal years.
Dunes along the coast will also experience the "overwash regime" significantly
more than during a typical year; 2) the southern extent of littoral cells will
experience significant erosion and will be more impacted than the north.
Gradients in longshore sediment transport will erode on the order of tens of
thousands of cubic meters of sand from the southern ends of littoral cells with
that sediment being transported both offshore and northward; and 3) Cross shore
sediment supply to the beach following storms and at the end of the anomalous
period, initiating the recovery phase for the dunes, will be highly spatially
variable based on beach morphometrics, but will be strongly correlated to local
gradients in longshore sediment transport. Although there is a general sense of
how sea level anomalies and El Niño events impact beaches and dunes along the
U.S. West Coast, there are few data sets available and the rates and mechanisms
of onshore feeding of sediment are poorly documented. This research will
quantify the sediment volume lost from the beach during each storm event and
subsequently track the spatial and temporal trends in beach recovery throughout
the winter and spring.