* 1531664
* MRI: Acquisition of a Multichamber Deposition and Surface Analysis System for Quantum Materials and Device Research
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* L. Andrew Wray, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Leonard Spinu
* 08/31/2020
* USD 1,500,000.00

This Major Research Instrumentation award support New York University with a
project to acquire a system for preparing and studying interfaces between
dissimilar electronic materials to identify new scientifically important
interface phenomena. The proposed system combines capabilities to grow a variety
of material types as well as to prepare and analyze their interfaces. This will
enable the development of interfaces between dissimilar materials that could not
be achieved with only one growth method or with separate systems. The system
will enable the preparation of interfaces by growing each component of the
interface with the technique that is most appropriate for that material. A major
theme of this project is the creation and exploration of interfaces between
materials with vastly different electronic properties, such as superconductors
(materials that conduct electricity without energy loss), semiconductors,
insulators, low-dimensional materials and magnetic materials. The properties of
the interfaces between such materials are predicted to be distinct from that of
either component and these predictions will be tested in experiments made
possible with this system. The project will also enable advances in
understanding of interfaces that are important for technological applications.
Training students in important scientific/technological areas and providing them
with expertise in state-of-the-art methods is an integral part of this project.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Major Research Instrumentation award supports New
York University with the acquisition an integrated thin film deposition, surface
preparation and analysis system to advance the understanding of a variety of
electronic material systems, with a focus on identifying novel interface
phenomena and device physics. The proposed system combines capabilities for
multiple thin film growth techniques, surface preparation and surface analysis
techniques. The system design will enable the development of new classes of
heterostructures that could not be achieved with only one growth method or with
separate systems or vacuum chambers. Having these capabilities within the same
ultra-high vacuum envelope will enable the preparation of the desired interfaces
in situ, using the deposition and sample surface preparation techniques that are
most appropriate for each component of a heterostructure. A major theme of this
project is the creation and exploration of interfaces between materials with
competing electronic states that include topological-insulators,
superconductors, ferromagnets, metals and low-dimensional materials. New
electronic properties and phases that have been predicted theoretically will be
studied experimentally. Examples include topological insulator surface states in
proximity with conventional broken symmetry quantum states, such
superconductivity and ferromagnetism. When paired, the combination of
topological and symmetry-broken phases is thought to provide a route for
realizing novel quasiparticle states such as Majorana fermions, Dyons and
Axions. Surface states of topological insulators also interact strongly with
thin ferromagnetic layers, leading to spin-transfer torques on the ferromagnet
that are just beginning to be explored. Other applications include the study of
organic superconductors, for which an ability to form tunnel junctions and gate
dielectrics will allow a deeper understanding of a variety of electronic states
of matter, inducing spin density wave, superconducting and quantum Hall phases.
The project will also enable advances in understanding of structural and
interface factors that are key to the viability of novel low dimensional
semiconductors for technological applications.