* 1531475
* MRI: Acquisition of a High-Speed Laser-Based Imaging System for Fluid Mechanics, Combustion, and Physical Chemistry
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2019
* Tobias Rossmann, Lafayette College
* Standard Grant
* Harsha Chelliah
* 08/31/2019
* USD 527,681.00

A high-speed laser-based imaging system is a primary tool for researchers
working in the area of fluid mechanics, combustion, and physical chemistry to
illuminate the complexities of these harsh flowfields. The system is able to
measure time-resolved, species-specific scalar fields and three-dimensional
velocity fields to understand the initiation and propagation of combustion in
high-speed flows as well as the early development of turbulent flows. This
technology provides unprecedented access to the details of the physics of
turbulent reacting flows influenced by mixing as well as transitional boundary
layers. The new instrumentation will be utilized for both research and student
training at Lafayette College, a private liberal arts college with engineering
located in Easton, PA. The system will also be used to provide undergraduate
students with meaningful involvement in many state-of-the-art research programs
across several departments. Additionally, the velocimetry and high-speed
visualization capabilities will be incorporated into junior level and senior
level courses offered by both Mechanical and Chemical Engineering. Chemistry
students will have the opportunity to perform fluorescence experiments and time-
correlated spectroscopy measurements in new laboratory experiences. The system
will significantly augment the ability to involve undergraduates of diverse
backgrounds in meaningful research as well as incorporate advanced research
capabilities into the undergraduate curriculum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed high-speed laser-based imaging system enables a wealth of diverse
optical techniques to be applied to the study of mixing and combustion in
compressible flows and the characterization of coherent structures in turbulent
boundary layers. It will dramatically augment the capabilities of existing fluid
dynamic, combustion, and physical chemistry research facilities at Lafayette,
specifically supporting several research components: i) Examining the role of
mixing efficiency and finite rate chemistry on non-premixed combustion in
hypersonic flows, ii) Exploring ignition, flameholding, and extinction phenomena
using time-resolved imaging of pre-mixed hypersonic reactive flow, iii)
Characterizing the development and entrainment behavior of hairpin vortices and
turbulent spots and the roles they play in turbulent and transitional flows. iv)
Assessing the combustion properties of specialty biodiesel fuel blends, v)
Measuring the phosphorescence lifetimes of organic thin film materials utilizing
time correlated single photon counting, and vi) Generating reactive oxygen and
measure quenching rates due to interaction with thiols to determine their
detoxification capability in freshwater environments. Each of these research
areas relies on the high-speed, high-power, tunable illumination and imaging
capabilities enabled by this system.