* 1531284
* MRI: Acquisition of CI-API-TOFMS (Chemical Ionization Atmospheric Pressure Interface Time-of-Flight Mass Spectrometer) to Measure Condensible Vapors Associated with Fine Particles
* GEO,AGS
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2018
* Spyros Pandis, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Peter Milne
* 07/31/2018
* USD 439,950.00

Atmospheric fine particle organic aerosol (OA) is a known factor in human
respiratory and cardio-vascular health and is also a source of uncertainty in
climate change, though direct and indirect effects. It is also known that a very
large fraction (80-90%) of the submicron (PM1) particle mass arrives via
condensation, and that OA evolves to that state in a dynamic cycle of oxidation,
condensation, evaporation, and further chemical transformation. A factor
limiting our understanding of the reaction paths is that many of these compounds
are extremely sticky (surface active), presenting a challenge to their handling
and subsequent analysis. Recently developed instrumentation, specifically gas-
phase chemical ionization atmospheric pressure interface time-of flight-mass
spectrometry (CI-APCI-TOFMS), offers the promise of dynamically analyzing, both
in laboratory and field studies, condensable organic compounds before they
either reach particle size, and after they react and
volatilize.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The instrument will be deployed principally in
the Carnegie Mellon (CMU) Air Quality Laboratory to support organic aerosol
research experiments. The lab is a shared facility run by a team of CMU
investigators with an established history of collaborative research and
equipment sharing. The instrument is also field-deployable by design, allowing
improved research into new aerosol particle formation. CI-API-TOFMS data may
thus inform local, state and national regulatory and policy decisions,
ultimately to the public benefit.