* 1531590
* MRI: Acquisition of a Computer Cluster for Computational Materials Research and Education at the University of South Florida and Partnering Institutions in Tampa Bay
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2018
* Ivan Oleynik, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 07/31/2018
* USD 197,469.00

With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation Program (MRI) and
support from the Chemistry Research Instrumentation Program (CRIF) the
University of South Florida will acquire a computer cluster. The acquisition
will enable graduate and undergraduate students to undertake computational
research projects. Using theoretical methods coded into computer programs, they
will provide insight on projects involving the development of novel materials
for energy conversion, gas storage, sensors and catalysis and the development of
new biomaterials with superior properties. The computer cluster will be a
resource also used by students and faculty for research and education activities
at the University of Tampa, Eckerd College, and New College and by other
institutions in central Florida. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specific research
investigations to be undertaken will be in areas such as (a) modelling metal
organic frameworks (MOFs) for capturing targeted gases to understand gas
sorption mechanisms and dynamics; (b) designing novel materials and predicting
their structural, electronic, and mechanical properties; (c) investigating
biosensors, plasmonics and computational catalysis; (d) using titanium dioxide
catalysts for splitting water; (e) calculating interface specific sum frequency
vibrational spectroscopy (SFVS) spectra from time correlation functions and
instantaneous normal modes; and many other projects.