* 1531856
* MRI: Development of Adaptive Optics Upgrade for the CHARA Array - Phase II
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Harold McAlister, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* James Neff
* 08/31/2019
* USD 1,118,493.00

On the summit of Mt. Wilson overlooking Los Angeles sits a Y-shaped array of six
1-m aperture telescopes. Unlike telescopes located on other mountaintops, these
six are not used independently of each other, but are instead used in unison to
effectively form a single larger telescope, an interferometric array, in which
the optical and near-infrared light from each of the telescopes is combined with
the light from its neighbors. Operation of the six 1-m telescopes as an
interferometric array results in the ability to detect finer details (spatial
resolution) in astronomical sources than would be possible if the 1-m telescopes
were utilized individually. With physical separations between the six 1-m
telescopes ranging from 33 to 331 meters, spatial resolutions better than 1
milliarcsecond are achieved. This far exceeds the resolution of the largest
ground-based and orbiting telescopes, and is even an order of magnitude better
than will be possible with the extremely large telescopes (ELTs) currently under
development. Since construction of the Mt. Wilson array was completed in 2005 by
Georgia State University's Center for High Angular Resolution Astronomy (CHARA),
the Mt. Wilson interferometric array has yielded the first direct detection of
gravity darkening on a single star, the first angular diameter for a halo
population star, the first image of a single, main-sequence star, the first
direct image of an interacting binary, and first images of the expanding
fireball around a nova just 15 hours after its discovery. The funded work will
significantly improve the interferometric array's ability to detect faint
targets (sensitivity) and scientific throughput by completing an adaptive optics
upgrade for each of the six 1-m telescopes. The sensitivity will be improved by
0.5 to 3 magnitudes, depending on the seeing conditions, and the scientific
throughput will be enhanced by a factor of 3-5. Access to the Mt. Wilson
interferometer is afforded to consortium members but also to the general
astronomical community through an open allocation process managed by the
National Optical Astronomy Observatory (NOAO). Through the array, CHARA is
training the next generation of scientific and technical experts in the field of
interferometry, and scientific results emerging from the facility are
incorporated in undergraduate courses as well as public outreach activities.
Funding for completing the Mt. Wilson optical/near-IR interferometer upgrade is
being provided through the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) program of the
NSF.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The funded work will complete the first major facility
upgrade of the CHARA array since initial construction. Georgia State's Dr. T.
ten Brummelaar and collaborators have carefully considered the most cost-
effective approaches to enhance the sensitivity of the instrument. The principal
goal of the funded work is to add deformable mirrors (DM) to each of the six 1-m
telescopes, completing the development and implementation of full, fast AO
capabilities at each telescope. Together, these modifications should yield
sensitivity increases 0.5 to 3 magnitudes at H band, and increase the number of
nights of high-quality data by about a factor of 3 in the summer and 5 in the
winter, with the integration time required to reach a specific SNR reduced by a
factor of up to 3. New important areas of study include the study of highly
reddened targets such debris disks around young stars, T-Tauri disks, and
accretion flows onto YSOs.