* 1531436
* MRI:  Acquisition of an XRF Core Scanner for the Lamont-Doherty Core Repository
* GEO,OCE
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2017
* Peter DeMenocal, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 07/31/2017
* USD 419,300.00

This project will support the acquisition of an X-ray fluorescence (XRF) core
scanner capable of automated, high-throughput, high-resolution geochemical
analysis of sediment cores and other geological materials such as slabbed rock
cores or coral. The geochemical analysis of sediment and rock cores, from land
and sea, is a critical component of research studying past and present climate
change, Earth's tectonic history, and anthropogenic disturbance of our
environment. In climate research especially, high-resolution geochemical and
mineralogical proxy-data is needed to model and understanding mechanisms of
climate change on time scales ranging from decades to millions of years. The
three most important broader impacts of this proposal are a) the establishment
of a regional analytical facility that will serve scientists and students within
a three hour radius of New York; b) the provision of enhanced and needed
analytical capability to numerous pre-tenure faculty and scientists at Columbia
University; and c) the acquisition of an instrument that will provide graduate
student training central to their professional life and chosen fields. In
addition, the XRF facility will enhance the educational and research experience
of the many students and laypeople that come to visit and/or work in the
Repository. The number of visitors to the Lamont-Doherty Core Repository has
increased dramatically over the last four years as the Repository has evolved
into an educational and outreach center for colleagues, local colleges, high
schools, local intern programs, ELHI teachers and their local professional
organizations, workshop/conference attendees, and journalists, among others. The
goal of the Repository has been to create an environment that lends itself to
educating students and adults at all educational levels while simultaneously
inspiring curiosity and wonder. Particular effort has been put into to ensuring
that visitors understand (in an age-appropriate way) the link between the
science carried out every day in the Repository and the larger, issues of
evolution, natural resource availability, and climate change that all citizens
should understand.

XRF data are used to study topics as diverse as terrestrial drought and
precipitation history, glacier history, groundwater health issues, CO2
sequestration, and fisheries and resource pollution issues. Numerous scientific
projects based at Lamont, funded by programs spanning the breadth of the
Geosciences Directorate, will benefit from the acquisition of the XRF core
scanner. In addition, numerous scientists within the northeast corridor will
also benefit from the expansion of Lamont's analytical facilities. Many
scientists who run NSF-funded coring expeditions, on land or sea, recognize the
benefits of sampling and archiving their cores at the Lamont-Doherty Core
Repository, especially if their cores require cold storage. An XRF core scanner
at Lamont-Doherty Earth Observatory will meet the objective of enhancing the
analytical services offered to internal and external investigators, as well as
making it much easier for students in the region to be active participants in
the research they are undertaking with their advisors.