* 1531913
* MRI: Development of Three Wave Mixing Spectrometer for Chiral Analysis by Rotational Spectroscopy
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Kevin Lehmann, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 07/31/2019
* USD 577,643.00

With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) Program and the
Chemistry Research Instrumentation (CRIF) Program, Professors Brooks Pate and
colleague Kevin Lehmann from the University of Virginia will develop a new
instrument that involves Fourier transform microwave spectrometry for the study
of chiral molecules. Molecular chirality is the property of molecules to exhibit
handedness by existing in two forms (called enantiomers) which are mirror
images, like left and right hands in humans. A molecule's left form (enantiomer)
may react differently than its right form (enantiomer). Many pharmaceuticals can
exist in both forms. However, only one will generally be medically effective.
With this award the team will develop an instrument to analyze samples to
determine the relative amounts of each enantiomer in a given sample
(enantiomeric excess). The instrument will use a recently developed procedure
using a microwave spectrometer involving analysis of three gas phase rotational
transitions which are coupled through common energy levels (three wave mixing).
This technique could have important practical applications in the analysis of
reaction mixtures employed in drug preparations or materials research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The instrument would allow chiral analysis using three
wave mixing Fourier transform rotational spectroscopy. The instrument uses
design principles that have been developed for broadband, chirped-pulse Fourier
transform rotational spectroscopy and it will be capable of making three
essential chiral analysis measurements: (a) quantitative measurement of the
yields of diastereomers produced in the synthesis of a molecule with multiple
chiral centers; (b) quantitative measurement of the enantiomeric excess of each
diastereomer in a sample; and (c) accurate determination of the absolute
configuration (or handedness) of the enantiomer that is in excess.