* 1531594
* MRI: Acquisition of High Performance Scientific Computing Cluster at Trinity University
* CSE,OAC
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Steven Bachrach, Trinity University
* Standard Grant
* Stefan Robila
* 07/31/2019
* USD 623,730.00

This instrument supports large-scale, high-performance computing (HPC) at
Trinity University, which enables a broad range of scientific research efforts
spanning mathematics, computer science, chemistry, biology, and physics. Many
ongoing projects at Trinity relate to questions of 'big data' analysis,
including such diverse areas as weak interactions in host-guest chemistry,
multi-scale simulations of protein interactions, models of fluid dynamics
related to cellular motility in membranes, analysis of high-throughput genomic
sequencing data, multi-agent modeling of security systems, and simulations of
particle collisions and gravity within the rings of Saturn. Each of these
research areas requires considerable computational power to analyze extremely
large datasets, whether generated through traditional laboratory experiments or
through robust computational simulations.

The HPC cluster provides a shared computational resource to all researchers at
Trinity, and includes both traditional central processing units (CPUs) and newer
general-purpose graphics processor unit (GPU) systems optimized for large
quantities of floating-point numeric operations. The cluster operates on the
Linux operating system, with a hybrid queuing/priority system so that
computational jobs submitted by any researcher are quickly and efficiently
executed. This resource enables Trinity University, an undergraduate
institution, to more effectively train and educate students on tangible aspects
of large-scale computational projects and research endeavors, such as the value
of test-driven development, efficient algorithm design, memory management, and
data visualization, while still tackling the challenges of open research
questions on a modern scale.