* 1531593
* MRI: Acquisition of a Ultra-High Resolution Analytical Scanning Electron Microscope for Multidisciplinary Research and Education
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Howard Jackson, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Leonard Spinu
* 08/31/2018
* USD 531,693.00

Nontechnical&lt;br/&gt;This Major Research Instrumentation award is for the
acquisition of a UltraHigh Resolution Scanning Electron Microscope (UHR/SEM) for
determining the structure and chemistry of materials at the nanoscale to advance
the research of over 50 faculty, students and scientists at the University of
Cincinnati (UC) and the region. This instrument will strengthen and advance
multiple research areas and education of post-docs and graduate and
undergraduate students in state-of-the-art nanoscale characterization
techniques, strengthen outreach programs and provide new opportunities for
students and underrepresented groups, in line with the mission of the UC. Many
other faculty and students at other local universities (Miami University, Ohio
State University, etc.), and researchers in industry and government labs, will
also benefit by having access to this instrument. Research, innovation,
discoveries and education with the instrument will advance the science of
materials and devices and factors governing their reliability; it will lead to
new materials and products with unique properties and performance and new
strategies for materials/device/product design; aid scientists in industry and
government labs in the development and implementation of advanced materials and
devices; foster new users, collaborations and strategic research involving
academia and industry; and ultimately lead to expertly trained scientists highly
qualified for advanced careers in engineering materials and devices in various
sectors to enhance our nation?s global competitiveness.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical&lt;br/&gt;The new UHR/SEM, with appropriate
ancillary devices for bulk and thin foil samples, will be installed and managed
within the Advanced Materials Characterization Center (AMCC) at the University
of Cincinnati (UC) and will be utilized to study a broad range of
multidisciplinary problems in semiconductor nanowires; catalysis; structural
materials; nanotechnology and biosensors relating to the structure, chemistry
and phenomena of matter at the nanoscale and thereby advance in a transformative
way the mechanism-based understanding of synthesis-processing-structure-
property-reliability relationships of advanced materials and devices. Research
using this instrument will enable insight into the structural implications of
semiconductor nanowires for solar cell performance, probe the fundamental
mechanisms that govern, limit and enhance reliability of high temperature
structural materials, advance understanding of carbon nanotube and graphene
devices and sensors, and illuminate the role of functionalized metallic,
magnetic and photon upconverting nanoparticles in biosensors, photodynamic
therapy and antibacterial agents and of the structure and surface chemistry of
catalytic metallic/oxide nanoparticles.