* 1531582
* MRI: Acquisition of a state-of-the art shake table system to enhance teaching and research at California State University, Los Angeles
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Rupa Purasinghe, California State L A University Auxiliary Services Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Joanne Culbertson
* 08/31/2018
* USD 278,749.00

Earthquakes pose a major danger to society worldwide due to the potential
casualties, damage, and social and economic disruption. Shake tables allow
researchers to test physical models of civil, mechanical, and electrical
structures under simulated earthquakes and other types of vibration. These tests
are used to observe, measure, and understand the underlying physical phenomena,
and subsequently develop improved design approaches and computer models for
improved earthquake-resistant engineering. This Major Research Instrumentation
(MRI) award supports the acquisition of a bidirectional shake table capable of
testing specimens weighing up to 1 ton at accelerations in excess of twice the
acceleration of gravity. Acquisition of this instrument will significantly
enhance the capabilities of engineering faculty at California State University,
Los Angeles (CSULA), allowing them to bridge the gap between analytical results
and experimental verification. The instrument will be used for research on the
seismic performance of civil structures and infrastructure. The instrument will
also allow faculty to improve training programs for students at one of the
nation's most ethnically and culturally diverse universities. The shake table
will be integrated into three classes and independent study projects and will be
used for summer outreach programs for secondary students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The shake table will enable researchers at CSULA to test a
wide variety of engineered structures under simulated earthquakes. Researchers
in structural engineering will use the instrument to investigate the seismic
performance of energy efficient wood-framed shear walls. There is a need to
reduce the energy use in the building sector. If these walls, which insulate
better than traditional walls, have adequate seismic resistance, they have the
potential for significant improvement in energy. Researchers in structural
engineering will also investigate the behavior of unattached photovoltaic
panels. Attached photovoltaic panels present architectural difficulties in their
implementation; understanding the seismic behavior of unattached panels will
facilitate their use in seismic regions. Researchers in geotechnical engineering
will develop a database of test results for various arrangements of soil-pile
and soil-pipeline systems. They will use this database to assess the adequacy of
numerical modeling techniques. This understanding will help improve the
earthquake safety of our critical infrastructure. Researchers in material
science and structural engineering will investigate civil applications of bio-
and carbon-nanotube-based fiber reinforced polymers (FRPs) for potential use for
civil structures. Beyond this, the instrument will facilitate scientific
collaborations between faculty at CSULA and their partners in academia and
industry. The instrument will become a key piece of research infrastructure for
the College of Engineering, Computer Science, and Technology at CSULA.