* 1531373
* MRI: Development of a Mid-infrared Optical Microscope for Investigation of Femtosecond Dynamics of Single Large Spin Orbit Semiconductor Heterostrucutures
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2015,09/30/2019
* Howard Jackson, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Leonard Spinu
* 09/30/2019
* USD 470,863.00

The Division of Materials Research and the Major Research Instrumentation
program supports the University of Cincinnati with the development of a unique
instrument that will advance the understanding of a whole class of semiconductor
materials that can provide the basis for new applications of these
nanostructures. The combination of small size (in the nanoscale) and large spin-
orbit interactions may enable these materials to operate at the very high speeds
and low energies required for devices which might replace present day silicon-
based circuits. Graduate students involved in the development of this instrument
will learn technical skills and will develop substantial design skills.
Involvement of an electronics company, which makes imaging products in this
energy regime, provides the basis for interactions that could point to new
directions for the company and result in future collaborative research efforts.
Research efforts of this proposal will be included in the materials used for
continuing public outreach efforts, including NanoDays at the Cincinnati Museum
Cente.

The development of a femtosecond pump-probe light scattering instrument will
enable new studies of electronic- and spin-dynamics of single nanostructures
which have extremely strong spin-orbit interactions and gaps in the Mid-
Infrared. The mid-infrared 0.1 to 1 eV energy range poses significant challenges
because of the lack of widely tunable laser sources or sensitive detectors. This
mid-IR energy range covers an entire class of semiconductor materials which have
excited both theoretical and experimental interest because of their extremely
large spin-orbit coupling which enables the exploration and manipulation of
spins using combined electric and magnetic fields. This development proposal
takes advantage of two newly developed techniques for measuring energy structure
and femtosecond dynamics in single nanostructures which will be extended into
this mid-IR energy range: (A) Transient Rayleigh Scattering Spectroscopy (TRRS),
where a pump pulse excites the nanostructure and the complex index of refraction
is interrogated by the light scattered from a delayed probe pulse; and (B)
Transient Photocurrent Spectroscopy (TPCS), where a pump pulse excites a
photocurrent in a single nanostructure device and the non-equilibrium population
of the electronic structure is interrogated with a delayed probe pulse.