* 1531330
* MRI: Development of a Solar UAV Instrument
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2015,03/31/2024
* Jiarong Hong, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 03/31/2024
* USD 1,605,481.00

This project, developing a high efficiency solar power enabled aerial instrument
that incorporates sensory and processing requirements into the design
methodology, focuses on the development of a (robotic) instrument that fills a
niche in certain applications (i.e., small scale solar powered Unmanned Aerial
Vehicles (UAVs)). The work involves the creation of a platform for real-world
information gathering applications with special focus on robust navigation,
distributed sensing, and collaborative scenarios. In particular, the development
of a small scale solar powered UAV provides a robotic platform capable of
communication, sensory coverage, and flight endurance unattainable through
traditional UAV design. Existing UAVs utilizing solar power are constrained to
large aircraft designs requiring a traditional runway for takeoff and landing.
In contrast, electric powered small scale UAVs suffer from minimal flight time.
Additionally, aerial robots provide significant advantages over ground based
systems as they are unaffected by terrain and obstacles, and provide an
information-rich vantage point from the air. Conventional aerial robots are
significantly limited by their flight time and therefore their deployment is
severely restricted. Flight time has been the central limitation for airborne
sensory information and has prevented experimental research and real-world
applications from being performed. The development of a high efficiency aircraft
that leverages solar energy as a resource provides a solution to the flight time
problem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The methodologies mentioned involve the
incorporation of hierarchical planning methods that include high-level reasoning
for the optimal number of UAVs/sensors required, and low-level reasoning for
efficient sensor placement throughout the environment. Specifically, the use of
solar powered UAV platforms will enable work in the areas of precision
agriculture and environmental science, requiring strong demand for high
endurance systems capable of supporting a variety of sensor and measurement
units. (For example, timely and repetitive relevant information regarding crop
health is necessary for corrective actions to be implemented.) Additionally,
collaborative operation of dynamically placed sensor platforms and devices can
only be enabled through the use of small solar powered airplanes like the ones
to be implemented. The instrument that this project funds enables work in
application areas that require continuous and repetitive operation such as
Energy, Environment, Agriculture, etc. Consequently, this work addresses
the&lt;br/&gt;- Development of a small scale solar powered platform that is
capable of multi-day flight, &lt;br/&gt;- Experimental validation of the scaled
down solar UAV instrument, &lt;br/&gt;- Long-term solar powered flight planning
based on sensory data collected, and&lt;br/&gt;- Creation of benchmarks that
will allow comprehensive evaluation of the small solar powered UAV instrument.