* 1531752
* MRI: Acquisition of Conflux, A Novel Platform for Data-Driven Computational Physics
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Barzan Mozafari, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Alejandro Suarez
* 08/31/2019
* USD 2,422,972.00

This project develops an instrument, called ConFlux, hosted at the University of
Michigan (UM), specifically designed to enable High Performance Computing (HPC)
clusters to communicate seamlessly and at interactive speeds with data-intensive
operations. The project establishes a hardware and software ecosystem to enable
large scale data-driven modeling of multiscale physical systems. ConFlux will
produce advances in predictive modeling in several disciplines including
turbulent flows, materials physics, cosmology, climate science and
cardiovascular flow modeling. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A wide range of phenomena
exhibit emergent behavior that makes modeling very challenging. In this project,
physics-constrained data-driven modeling approaches are pursued to account for
the underlying complexity. These techniques require HPC applications (running on
external clusters) to interact with large data sets at run time. ConFlux
provides low latency communications for in- and out-of-core data, cross-platform
storage, as well as high throughput interconnects and massive memory
allocations. The file-system and scheduler natively handle extreme-scale machine
learning and traditional HPC modules in a tightly integrated workflow---rather
than in segregated operations--leading to significantly lower latencies, fewer
algorithmic barriers and less data movement. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Course
material developed from the usage of ConFlux is being integrated into the
educational curriculum via several degree and certificate programs offered by
two UM institutes dedicated to computational and data sciences. Use of the
ConFlux cluster will be extended to research groups outside of UM utilizing a
number of Extreme Science and Engineering Discovery Environment (XSEDE) bridging
tools and file-systems. Connections established through UM's Office of Outreach
and Diversity are being leveraged to extend the use of ConFlux to minority
serving institutions and Historically Black Colleges and Universities. Using the
programs developed by the Society of Women Engineers at UM, middle and high
school students will be engaged in hands-on educational modules in computing,
physics and data.