* 1531997
* MRI: Development of a Localized Field Emission Scanning Electron Microscope and Secondary Electron Spin Polarization Analysis System
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2016
* Torgny Gustafsson, The College of New Jersey
* Standard Grant
* Leonard Spinu
* 08/31/2016
* USD 994,365.00

The Major Research Instrumentation award supports the development of a novel
cost-efficient electron microscope capable of imaging the top-most layers of
surfaces with high spatial resolution at the College of New Jersey. The scope of
the project is to combine the fundamental concepts of scanning electron (SEM)
and scanning probe microscopies (SPM) into a single instrument called "Near
Field Emission Scanning Electron Microscopy" (NFESEM). The use of low energy
electrons NFESEM will have an impact over many areas including biological,
medical, data storage, computing and renewable energy. The device will
immediately provide an alternative, high resolution surface imaging device to
researchers in both New Jersey and Eastern Pennsylvania. The results from this
project will be incorporated in course curricula at The College of New Jersey.
Undergraduate students involved in the project will be trained and acquire
expertise in these techniques. The instrumentation will help underpin
forthcoming technological developments especially in the area of ultra large
scale integrated circuits and spintronics. Furthermore, the collaboration scheme
which includes early career and well-established scientists and engineers will
impact research on superconductivity, low energy electron spectroscopy, nano-
device characterization, nanoparticle enabled drug delivery and more.
Involvement of industrial partners will enhance the training and transfer of
knowledge. The researchers will also use this as an opportunity to introduce
underrepresented middle school and high school students from Trenton to basic
microscopy and its applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NFESEM will provide a
means of overcoming the limitations of conventional scanning electron
microscopes (SEM) and opens the possibility to use lower primary beam energies
(&lt; 100 eV). In essence, NFESEM is an intermediate technique in which
electrons are emitted from a needle tip via field electron emission, and then
impinge on and interact with the sample. As a result, electrons are ejected from
the sample surface and detected and an electron spin detector will be
incorporated into the system for polarization analysis of ejected secondary
electrons. The NFESEM coupled with a spin polarimetry will enable SEM with
polarization analysis capable of nanometer magnetic imaging, in particular low
dimensional magnetic systems. The microscope will be equipped with a cryogen-
free electro-magnet that is constructed to magnetize the sample of interest with
a magnetic field up to 3,000 Gauss. The design and the control unit added to the
scanning probe microscope will allow for high speed imaging, which is essential
to simulate the imaging capabilities of standard scanning electron microscopes.
The unique operating mode of the microscope, coupled with the polarimeter,
generates three characteristic signals: 1) field emission current; 2) variations
in the backscattered and secondary electron signal; and 3) a three dimensional
surface spin asymmetry. This ensemble will enable nanometric imaging of magnetic
materials; in particular, low dimensional magnetic systems. The NFESEMPA will be
the first of its kind, and the proposed research team will be able to determine
the advantages and/or disadvantages of using lensless scanning electron
microscopy, c.f. contemporary SEMPA. Accordingly, this project will present an
alternative method to generate a fine electron beam for high resolution imaging
of atomically "smooth" surfaces.