* 1531035
* MRI: Development of a Multifocal Hyperspectral Raman Imaging System for Research and Training in Advanced Materials at CWRU
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2015,02/28/2018
* Hatsuo Ishida, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Leonard Spinu
* 02/28/2018
* USD 280,000.00

Raman instruments can image the distribution of chemical bonds in matter and it
is commonly used in materials science, biology, energy, medicine, chemistry and
physics. Current instruments are slow in generating these images; therefore,
dynamic processes cannot be imaged with conventional Raman instruments. The goal
of this project is to address this limitation by developing a novel Raman
instrument which will be faster than conventional devices by an order of
magnitude or more, enabling the study of a range of dynamic applications
including battery charging, light emitting diodes and biological systems. The
impact of such a device elicits is not limited to the progress of science, but
also extends to healthcare, defense and energy. The user base includes local
institutions such as Cleveland Museum of Art's conservation science division as
well as the institutions and industry in the greater area of northeast Ohio. A
teaching module is being included in the undergraduate measurement laboratory
for visualizing temperature distribution in mixed temperature fluid flow. A
postdoctoral fellow and a graduate student will receive firsthand experience in
developing the system as instrument scientists in forefront research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The instrument developed in this project will be capable
of generating chemical images of materials expeditiously in a single snapshot
without the need for spatial scanning. A multifocal global Raman imaging system
with 2D CCDs is being integrated to cover visible to shortwave infrared range.
Using a dual axis kinematic dielectric filtering scheme, the system will be able
to operate in the hyperspectral mode, providing a full spectrum at each pixel of
the image. The system performance will be evaluated in a variety of applications
such as InGaN nanowhiskers, lithium ion batteries, cellulose nanocrystals,
mineralized nanocomposites, photovoltaic cells, polybenzoxazines,
micrometeorites, dental decay, art paintings, microplasma synthesized
nanomaterials and polymeric organic light emitting diodes. Instrument
development will be supplemented with training seminars, development of user
manuals, instrument showcasing in local and national meetings and the
development of an undergraduate laboratory module.