* 1531001
* Rethinking the Role of the Legal Profession in Authoritarian Societies
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Kathryn Hendley, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Brian Bornstein
* 08/31/2018
* USD 329,889.00

Authoritarian societies are typically marked by passivity among citizens.
Although violations of rights by the state may be rampant, citizens are
reluctant to challenge the state, fearing they might be targeted for
persecution. Lawyers tend to be similarly cowed. This project asks whether this
might be changing. Focusing on the case of Russia, the project explores how
lawyers think about themselves and their role in society through a random sample
of 2500 recent law graduates. Russia presents an intriguing case because the
number of young people studying law exploded just as the Putin regime stepped up
its curtailment of the exercise of civil rights. The survey will reveal how
graduates are dispersing themselves among various types of lawyering and their
attitudes towards their obligations toward clients, with particular attention to
the responsibility of lawyers to support clients who want to challenge the state
or other powerful actors. The results promise to provide a window into the
capacity of the Russian legal profession to spur the development of civil
society. The results of the survey, which will be the first to include all types
of Russian lawyers, will be archived and available to other researchers for
analysis.

The project uses mixed methods to map the Russian legal profession and
investigate its political significance. The fractured nature of this group makes
a survey of practicing lawyers impossible. The Principal Investigator, working
in collaboration with Russian consultants, plans a panel survey of a single
cohort of law school graduates. They will construct a sample of approximately
2500 law students (recipients of both bachelors and masters degrees) on the cusp
of graduation in 2016, stratified by region and institutional prestige. The PI
plans to return to this same group of respondents at regular 5-year intervals
(though this proposal seeks funding for the first round). Among the questions
that the PI will be able to answer are: how do graduates disperse among the
various subgroups of the profession; and to what extent are some demographic
characteristics (i.e., gender, ethnicity, religion, class) preferenced by the
different subgroups of the profession in getting a job and moving up the ladder
of success. As a supplement to the survey, the PI will conduct 120 follow-up
interviews with respondents culled from the surveyed population with an eye to
diversity in career path as well as demographic factors. These interviews will
build on the survey and will be conducted in 2017. They will be concentrated in
3 regions: Moscow, Saratov, and Tomsk. The interviews will be transcribed and
analyzed by the PI using NVIVO. As with the survey, future plans call for re-
interviewing this same cohort of 120 respondents at regular intervals.