* 1531639
* MRI: Acquisition of a liquid-handling robotic platform for high-throughput research in urban ecology and evolution at the Louis Calder Center-Biological Field Station
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Steven Franks, Fordham University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 08/31/2018
* USD 134,401.00

An award is made to Fordham University to acquire a liquid-handling robotic
platform. This technology automates many tasks that involve precise movement of
liquids, and has a modular design for highly flexible incorporation of
temperature control, plate readers, and other technologies into standardized
multi-step protocols. This liquid-handling robot will mitigate bottlenecks and
error rates in data generation for multiple research labs. Faculty based at the
Louis Calder Center, Fordham's biological field station, study urban ecology and
evolution, human-environment interactions, conservation genomics, and disease
ecology in suburban habitats. These studies span many taxonomic groups and
habitats, with a special focus on the New York City metropolitan area. The
Calder Center is one of only a few field stations located in proximity to a
major urban center, and since its founding has supported research in urban and
suburban ecology. Acquisition of the liquid-handling robot will support the
research mission of the Louis Calder Center and attract additional external
users to the station. Calder has an active summer Research Experiences for
Undergraduates (REU) program that will benefit from the ability to quickly
generate large datasets. This included nearly 100 participants to date, more
than half of whom were underrepresented minorities. Given the 10-week timeframe
of these projects, streamlining data collection will facilitate student success.
Biology is also now the most popular undergraduate major at Fordham, and the
liquid-handling robot will support research by the dozens of undergraduates
already working with Calder faculty.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Calder Center faculty
investigating the evolutionary consequences of urbanization and global climate
change will be core users of the robotic platform. Their research has recently
made use of new advances in high-throughput DNA sequencing, bioinformatics, and
analytical advances to address questions in their respective fields with
datasets of unprecedented size and power (particularly for non-model organisms).
Sample / library preparation for population genomic studies is labor intensive.
Calder faculty will use population genomic approaches for multiple studies and
thousands of samples in the next few years, and will automate several steps
using the liquid handling robot. Nearly all procedures require precise
quantification of DNA concentration and cleaning with magnetic beads. Automating
these steps alone will improve repeatability and shorten time to library
completion. A liquid handling robot will mitigate bottlenecks in data
generation, as well as unavoidable errors that are inherent to humans doing a
repetitive task over a long time period. Acquisition of this device will
immediately support the research of a diverse number of PIs, postdocs, graduate
students, undergrads, and high school students at the Calder Center.