* 1531149
* WORKSHOP: VL/HCC 2015 Graduate Consortium
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2016
* Anita Sarma, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 06/30/2016
* USD 26,034.00

This is funding to support a Doctoral Consortium (workshop) for approximately 11
graduate students (up to 2 of whom may be from universities outside the United
States), along with a panel of 4 distinguished research faculty as mentors. The
event will take place in conjunction with and immediately preceding the 2015
IEEE Symposium on Visual Languages and Human-Centric Computing (VL/HCC), to be
held October 18-22 in Atlanta, and sponsored by the IEEE Computer Society. The
primary goal of this year's VL/HCC Doctoral Consortium, the 13th to be funded by
NSF in this series, is to stimulate graduate students' thinking about how to
make computation easier to express, manipulate, and understand. In particular,
what methods, models and tools can people use to visualize, analyze, tailor, and
direct socio-technical systems? The doctoral consortium aims to stimulate novel
approaches that go far beyond simplistic solutions like Web browsers and search
engines. Although search engines do provide information that is useful in simple
situations, they represent only one portion of a socio-technical system
(information retrieval); search engines alone are not powerful enough to be used
to start new businesses and run them competitively, for example, since they only
give people the ability to find resources provided by other people rather than
the ability to create new resources. Effective approaches will bring users and
software together in creative and productive ways that bear directly on the
needs of modern society. The Doctoral Consortium will help shape ongoing and
future research projects aimed at alleviating a pressing problem of relevance to
a great many people within our society. This event will promote discovery and
learning, by encouraging the student researchers to explore a difficult and
challenging open problem, through involvement of a panel of well-known
researchers whose task is to provide constructive feedback, and through
inclusion of other conference participants who will also learn from and provide
additional feedback to the students and to each other. The PI and the members of
the organizing committee will make special efforts to attract a diverse and
interdisciplinary group of student participants, with special attention paid to
recruitment of students from underrepresented institutions and women; to further
increase diversity, no more than 2 student participants (at least one of whom
must be female) will be accepted from any one institution.

This year marks the 31st anniversary of the Symposium. Established in 1984,
VL/HCC's mission is to support the design, formalization, implementation and
evaluation of computing systems that are easier for a broader group of people to
learn, use, and understand. This includes research aimed at visual technology
and text, and technology that uses sound, taste, virtual reality, and the Web.
It also includes research on theories about the many media used toward this
goal. VL/HCC occupies a unique niche among HCI and programming language
conferences, in that it focuses specifically on how to help end users
successfully develop and use software. Recent advances in computing have led to
continually deeper integration between computers and human society. People now
swim in a "sea" of socio-technical systems that synthesize large numbers of
contributing users with vast amounts of source code. Examples include social
media systems, open source repositories, online marketplaces and massively
multiplayer online games. Yet as the socio-technical systems in this sea have
grown in complexity, they have become increasingly difficult for end users to
understand and direct toward productive ends. More information about the VL/HCC
Symposium may be found online at https://sites.google.com/site/vlhcc2015/. The
workshop will build community among young researchers working on different
aspects of these problems from the perspectives of diverse fields including
computer science, the social sciences, and education. It will guide the work of
these new researchers by providing an opportunity for experts in the research
field (as well as their peers) to give them advice, in that student participants
will make formal presentations of their work during the workshop and will
receive feedback from a faculty panel. The feedback is geared to helping
students understand and articulate how their work is positioned relative to
other human-computer interaction research, whether their topics are adequately
focused for thesis research projects, whether their methods are correctly chosen
and applied, and whether the results are appropriately analyzed and presented.
As in prior years the VL/HCC 2015 Doctoral Consortium will be part of the
regular conference program. A 2-page extended abstract of each participant's
work will be published in the conference proceedings.