* 1531511
* MRI: Acquisition of a small Unmanned Aircraft System (UAS) for natural and urban ecosystem studies and risk disaster management
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2021
* James Mower, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2021
* USD 147,983.00

This award permits University at Albany, SUNY, to purchase an unmanned aircraft
system. Researchers led by Dr. Alexander Buyantuev will use the system to
conduct a multidisciplinary study focused on monitoring fast ecological and
geophysical processes and advance the understanding of environmental changes at
scales of individual trees to whole landscapes. Several projects that utilize
near surface remote sensing made possible by the cutting edge drone technology
and ground measurements will examine effects of climate warming and local
anthropogenic impacts, such as soil acidification, wind power generation, and
urbanization, on vegetation growth. Gaining insight into these effects is of
great importance to predict more accurately the state of ecosystems in the
future and to develop sound mitigation strategies. Researchers will also be
committed to look closely into the use of the technology in identifying best
practices and developing protocols for post-storm area analysis and future
emergency management applications. Overall, these studies are expected to
benefit a large number of students and the public by either their direct
involvement in the work or through exposure to research during classwork or
public presentations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Buyantuev with colleagues will
use a professional grade unmanned aircraft system (UAS) outfitted with visual,
multi (hyper-) spectral, thermal, and laser sensors to collect geospatial data
at forested field sites and near developed areas. Such very high resolution data
will provide the missing link in scaling between ground sampling and airborne
and spaceborne remote sensing, primarily data from widely used Landsat and MODIS
satellites. It will allow researchers to assess how climate warming and
associated changes in timing of tree growth affect the dynamics of nonstructural
carbon in spruce trees and understand better the effects of soil acidification
and warming on growing season arrival and length for sugar maple stands in
Upstate New York, USA. The team is also particularly interested in how wind
turbines, being the sources of alternative and environmentally friendly power
production, and the process of urbanization characterized by the expansion of
built-up land, modify local climates and vegetation/crop growth. These effects
will be studied by quantifying inter-annual growing seasons and biomass changes
in the vicinity of an existing wind farm and along the gradient of land
development in a suburban site. The research will generate valuable datasets and
methods for processing high resolution imagery into important scientific
information.