* 1531515
* MRI: Acquisition of a Tabletop Scanning Electron Microscope for Research and Education at Northern Kentucky University
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Keith Walters, NORTHERN KENTUCKY UNIVERSITY RESEARCH FOUNDATION (DO NOT USE)
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 08/31/2018
* USD 228,851.00

With this award supported by the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) program,
the Chemistry Research Instrumentation and Facilities (CRIF) and EPSCoR
programs, Northern Kentucky University (NKU) will acquire a scanning electron
microscope with energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy capability (SEM/EDX). A
scanning electron microscope probes the surfaces of materials with a beam of
electrons impinging on a sample. The resultant micrograph (picture) produced
from the electrons scattering from the surface provides information on the
structure and morphology of the material. The EDX accessory provides information
on the elemental composition of the material. This provides insight on the
microscopic and macroscopic properties and characteristics of a substance. This
acquisition will provide training to students in the use of this important
analytical tool. It will be used by students in the chemistry and biological
sciences undergraduate research programs at NKU and by women and
underrepresented high school students at Nanoscience Summer Camps. It will be
employed in several laboratory courses providing training to large numbers of
undergraduate students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award will be employed in
research in areas including: a) development of a biocompatible drug delivery
device; b) investigation of in-vivo local detection platforms to understand the
metabolic pathway of thyroid hormones in relation to ancillary endocrine
disorders; (c) investigation of fullerene-TM polymeric systems and their optical
and physical properties; and (d) investigation of digestive physiology of
embryonic anurans with the aim of carrying out microelectrode fabrication.