* 1531199
* MRI: Development of a Helium-Jet Ion-Guide System for Harvesting Rare Isotopes and Commensal Operation at NSCL
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2021
* Antonio Villari, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 08/31/2021
* USD 1,200,000.00

The National Superconducting Cyclotron Laboratory (NSCL) is the nation's premier
facility to accelerate nuclei with the purpose of studying nuclear structure.
NSCL has developed world-unique new experimental capabilities with reaccelerated
rare-isotope beams, ensuring a continued leadership role in rare-isotope physics
worldwide. With the recent expansion of research capabilities at NSCL, demand
for these beams to be used in nuclear physics experiments has never been higher.
The instrument proposed here, called a Helium-Jet Ion Gas System (HJ-IGS) will
allow for commensal running of two experiments simultaneously, each using
different detector systems at NSCL, which will expand the number of experiments
and hence help to meet the demand for experiments that increase our
understanding of nuclei.

Helium-Jet Ion Sources have been used for harvesting isotopes in the past, but
the idea to use such a system to harvest some of the rarest isotopes available
to researchers in a projectile fragmentation facility is novel. Rare isotopes
that are bent out of the central beam path during the purification process of
the primary rare-isotope beam are stopped and collected in a high-pressure cell
filled with Helium saturated with aerosols to which the stopped isotopes will
attach. With a high-pressure differential, the collected isotopes are quickly
transported through a 40 meter-long capillary to an ion source that injects the
isotopes, after purification, into a beam line that can feed one of several
stations not used in the primary experiment. This allows two experiments to be
performed at the same time: an experiment using a fast rare isotope beam
directly produced in projectile fragmentation and an experiment with stopped or
reaccelerated beams using the harvested, transported, ionized and purified
isotopes in the HJ-IGS. State-of-the-art experiments that are in high demand in
the fields of nuclear structure and nuclear astrophysics, as well as fundamental
interactions and symmetries, and include such diverse techniques as high-
precision mass measurements in atom traps, in-beam laser spectroscopy and
polarization, nuclear decay spectroscopy, and low-energy reaction studies with
an active-target time projection chamber.