* 1531870
* MRI:  Acquisition of a Multinuclear 500 MHz NMR Spectrometer
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2018
* Daniel Swartling, Tennessee Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 07/31/2018
* USD 410,480.00

With this award supported by the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI), the
Chemistry Research Instrumentation (CRIF), and EPSCoR programs, Professor Jessie
Carrick from Tennessee Technological University and colleagues Daniel Swartling,
Jeffrey Rice, William Carroll and Xuanzhi Zhan will acquire a 500 MHz NMR
spectrometer equipped with a broadband nitrogen-cooled cryoprobe. This
spectrometer will allow research in a variety of fields such as those that
accelerate chemical reactions of significant economic importance, as well as
allow study of biologically relevant species. In general, Nuclear Magnetic
Resonance (NMR) spectroscopy is one of the most powerful tools available to
chemists for the elucidation of the structure of molecules. It is used to
identify unknown substances, to characterize specific arrangements of atoms
within molecules, and to study the dynamics of interactions between molecules in
solution or in the solid state. Access to state-of-the-art NMR spectrometers is
essential to chemists who are carrying out frontier research. The nitrogen-
cooled probe will provide a significant increase in sensitivity relative to
standard NMR probes. The results from these NMR studies will have an impact in
synthetic organic/inorganic chemistry, materials chemistry and biochemistry.
This instrument will be an integral part of teaching as well as research
performed by undergraduate and graduate students. The new instrument will have a
significant and immediate impact on the research training and teaching endeavors
of faculty in the departments of Chemistry as well as Chemical Engineering and
an interdisciplinary Environmental Sciences Program. The presence of a reliable
instrument equipped with a sample changer will allow much greater student access
to a spectrometer in the teaching laboratories than an old, low-field instrument
currently at this university. The PIs indicate that the instrument will be
utilized by students in the sophomore organic courses, the advanced analytical
laboratory, and an advanced organic spectroscopy course. Special emphasis will
be directed to women and other historically underrepresented students in
STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal is aimed at enhancing research and
education at all levels, especially in areas such as (a) synthesizing
bis-1,2,4-triazine ligands, including conformational and subsequent complexation
studies with simulated actinides for potential remediation of used nuclear fuel;
(b) structurally characterizing fluorescent proteins for nerve regeneration and
wound healing; (c) developing solution phase structure approaches for dynamic
molecules; (d) studying conformations of arrestin proteins; (e) developing green
chemistry methodology; and (f) studying thiosemicarbazone ligands as potential
anti-cancer therapeutics.