* 1531402
* MRI: Acquisition of a High Resolution Transmission Electron Microscope (HRTEM) to Enhance the Materials Science and Nanotechnology Research and Teaching at Kettering University
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2018
* Ronald Tackett, Kettering University
* Standard Grant
* Leonard Spinu
* 08/31/2018
* USD 452,000.00

This Major Research Instrument (MRI) grant will support the acquisition of a
High Resolution Transmission Electron Microscope (HRTEM) to enhance Kettering
University's efforts in interdisciplinary undergraduate education and research
in nanotechnology and materials characterization. This instrument will be used
by faculty, graduate and undergraduate students in a wide range of fields
including biology, chemistry, chemical engineering, electrical engineering,
mechanical engineering and physics for a large number of research projects and
classroom activities. The availability of a HRTEM on the campus of Kettering
University has a number of benefits including: (1) A stronger integration of the
on-campus and co-op-mediated education (for which Kettering University has long
been known) into a holistic educational model; (2) Strengthening Kettering
University's role as a steady partner in the economic redevelopment of the state
of Michigan and, in particular, the city of Flint; (3) Enabling original
contributions to research in areas identified as national grand challenges with
broad social impact; (4) Bolstering Kettering University's efforts to recruit
and retain students; (5) Further expansion of professional development programs
for in-service teaching professionals in the STEM disciplines; (6) The
initiation of a program to develop a center for advanced materials
characterization at Kettering University to provide services and training to
industrial organizations. Furthermore, work resulting from the use of this
instrument will allow a number of undergraduate students to attend and present
original research at local, regional, national and international meetings. Most
importantly, at least 15 courses offered across six academic departments will
benefit from the use of this instrument in the development of new laboratory
experiments and teaching aids. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The acquisition of a HRTEM
will greatly benefit a number of ongoing research projects at Kettering
University including investigations into the construction of reduced graphene
oxide films for use in the development of a super-capacitor, characterization of
novel materials for advanced solid oxide fuel cells, cathode materials for Na-
ion batteries and characterization of magnetic nanoparticles for a number of
biomedical applications. The proposed instrument will allow up to 0.1 nm crystal
lattice resolution and up to 0.23 nm point-to-point resolution thus providing
meaningful magnification for direct imaging of nanomaterials for size
distribution and morphology determination for the applications outlined in the
proposal. In addition, the ability to perform scanning transmission electron
microscopy (STEM) in conjunction with its energy dispersive x-ray microanalysis
system allows for elemental mapping at the nanoscale allowing for size
determination and elemental mapping at grain boundaries and other locations
within bulk materials. Highlighted ongoing research projects which will benefit
from this instrument include: (1) The characterization of magnetic nanoparticles
for use in targeted drug delivery and as mediators in the magnetic fluid
hyperthermia treatment of malignant tumors, (2) The fabrication and
characterization of reduced graphene oxide films using atmospheric plasma and
surface annealing, (3) characterization of polymer and composite fibers and
films for biomedical applications, (4) Synthesis and characterization of
Na4Mn9O18 cathodes and iron oxide anodes for sodium ion batteries, (5) Synthesis
and characterization of materials for advanced solid oxide fuel cells, (6)
Growth and characterization of magnetosomes produced by magnetotactic bacteria
for hyperthermia and micro- and nanorobotics, and (7) The study of the
interactions of ligand-capped fold nanostructures with metal ions.