* 1531298
* MRI: Acquisition of an Environmental Scanning Probe Microscope for Multidisciplinary Research, Teaching and Outreach.
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Joseph Kunkel, University of New England
* Standard Grant
* Leonard Spinu
* 08/31/2018
* USD 374,580.00

Non-technical&lt;br/&gt;Across disciplines ranging from biomedicine to consumer
electronics to national security, nanoscience is contributing to breakthroughs
in science and technology. This Major Research Instrumentation award provides
funds for the acquisition of an environmental atomic force microscope (AFM)
called the Asylum Research Cypher ES, an extremely versatile, high-speed, high-
resolution instrument for imaging, probing, and manipulating materials and
processes in fluids at the nanoscale (billionths of a meter). University of New
England (UNE) and regional university faculty, staff, and students in biology,
marine science, chemistry, physics, and biochemistry will use this instrument to
study a wide range of natural and engineered biomaterials. The instrument will
enhance research productivity and provide students with valuable hands-on
training on state-of-the-art microscopy techniques. UNE seeks to recruit a
diverse and talented student population in one of the least ethnically diverse
states in the country. The majority of UNE students are women, and many
represent the first generation of their family to go to college. By reaching out
to this underserved population the project will make a tremendous impact in
providing high quality educational and professional training opportunities. To
enable students to better appreciate relationships between biomaterials
structure and function, the project will use 3-D printing to create models of
nanoscale structures from AFM data that can be handled and touched. The
integration of AFM and 3-D printing facilitates an especially exciting
opportunity in the introduction of nanoscale structures and nanotechnology
experimental techniques to people who are blind or visually impaired. The
training takes advantage of a broad range of UNE faculty and staff expertise,
including nationally-ranked institutional excellence in online education.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Asylum Research Cypher ES environmental atomic force
microscope (AFM) replaces aging hardware and complements modern imaging
methodologies in the Microscope Core Facility (MCF) at the University of England
(UNE). This microscope will increase research productivity and educational
quality in Maine through provision of a unique regional environmental scanning
probe microscopy resource. The Cypher ES will allow for the use of a wide
variety of near field probing (ultra-high resolution, elastic, magnetic,
electric and Kelvin probe forces) and fast scanning rates for diverse research
questions including examining microbial biofilm and sheath formation,
characterizing topographic and viscoelastic properties of environmentally-
sensitive protein- and polymer-based nanomaterials, and exploring the
architecture and composition of mineralized arthropod cuticle. The modular
design of the instrument means that it is expandable to add new capabilities as
needs arise. Training of UNE students, staff and faculty in AFM theory and
practice will take place through a hybrid of online, face-to-face, and
supplementary macroscopic 3-D printing instruction. The instrument will serve as
an attractive tool to increase collaborative research, e.g., with colleagues at
the University of Maine, Orono, and the Bigelow Laboratory for Ocean Sciences in
Boothbay Harbor. This instrument will be a unique resource for biomaterials
characterization in northern New England.