* 1531394
* Major Research Instrumentatin: Acquisition Of An ICP-MS For Archaeometric And Geological Research
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2016
* Patrick Williams, Field Museum of Natural History
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2016
* USD 123,400.00

With support from the National Science Foundation, Drs. Laure Dussubieux,
Patrick Ryan Williams and Philipp Heck from the Field Museum and Dr Marc Walton
from the Northwestern University-Art institute of Chicago Center for Scientific
Studies will replace the inductively coupled plasma - mass spectrometer (ICP-MS)
that is the central piece of equipment of the Elemental Analysis Facility (EAF)
at the Field Museum. The EAF is used mainly to determine the composition,
including major, minor, and trace elements, of a large range of materials
including obsidian, ceramic, clay, synthesized glass and metals from all around
the world and natural terrestrial and extraterrestrial rocks. This new state-of-
the-art instrumentation will be used to establish extensive new datasets of
archaeological, cultural and geological materials that directly informs
hypotheses about ancient trade and exchange, technology, and their relationship
to the development of social complexity around the world and the origin and the
evolution of Earth and the solar system. This new instrument will contribute to
the research and training of undergraduate, graduate students and young
researchers. They will be initiated into the analytical process using ICP-MS by
undertaking the analysis itself and will be trained in method development, the
statistical processing of the data, and interpretation. Results of the research
at the EAF will inform future exhibits and education activities at the Field
Museum, Art Institute and Oriental Institute, which educate hundreds of
thousands of school children and millions of visitors annually.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A new ICP-MS, will not only increase inter-disciplinary
collaborations at the Field Museum but also stimulate collaborative efforts
between the Field Museum and other Chicago-based institutions. Among those are
the new Northwestern University-Art Institute of Chicago Center for Scientific
Studies, the Oriental Institute (University of Chicago), and the Chicago Center
for Cosmochemistry (C3), comprised of the three-institutions Field Museum,
University of Chicago and Argonne National Laboratory, to enhance training,
scientific research and exchange in the fields of Anthropology, Cosmochemistry,
Geochemistry, Materials Science and Engineering. The connection of the EAF with
the Field Museum, The Art Institute and the Oriental Institute collections will
be a unique opportunity to linking leading scholars and graduate students to
those institutions, extensive collections and giving them the tools to analyze
these one of a kind assemblages to significantly enhance understanding of the
role of cultural production in the development of complex societies. The C3
enables their scientists to access the world-class collections of meteorites,
terrestrial rocks and minerals from the Field Museum and analyze them using the
specialized analytical tools at its institutions and at the Department of
Materials Science and Engineering at Northwestern University with whom we have
established a close collaboration.