* 1531016
* The Downside of Social Mobility: Status-Based Identity Uncertainty, Academic Achievement &amp; Psychological Well-Being
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Jennifer Richeson, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 08/31/2018
* USD 149,974.00

A growing psychological literature links socioeconomic status (SES) to important
life outcomes, such as academic achievement and well-being. However, this
research tends to examine stable aspects of one's SES background (e.g., current
income or education level). Less is known about the more dynamic aspects of SES
and how status transitions influence achievement and well-being. The present
research seeks to fill this gap by investigating the antecedents and
consequences of perceiving that one's social status is in flux or transition,
called status-based identity uncertainty. Given that higher education is one of
the primary means through which people pursue upward mobility, status
transitions are especially likely during and just after the college years. The
present research focuses on this critical period for mobility and aims to
enhance the understanding of factors that contribute to academic achievement and
psychological well-being for college students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using a
multi-method approach, the current research will examine the experience and
implications of status transitions. First, a longitudinal study will investigate
the influence of status-based identity uncertainty on college students'
outcomes. More specifically, this study will examine whether changes in status-
based identity uncertainty over time predict changes in academic motivation,
grades, and psychological well-being. Next, a set of laboratory experiments will
seek to establish a causal relationship between status-based identity
uncertainty and college outcomes. These experiments will involve activating
different aspects of one's status identity (e.g., past or future) and then
evaluating academic motivation, psychological well-being, and physiological
responses. The project is poised to address socioeconomic disparities in
achievement and well-being and to improve outcomes of college students from low
SES backgrounds. Further, the proposed work, in which SES is conceptualized as
dynamic, opens the door for novel and important research that recognizes the
subtleties of how an individual's evolving SES can influence thoughts,
behaviors, and important life outcomes.