* 1531996
* MRI: Development of an infrared scanning near-field optical microscope (IR s-SNOM) for broadband nano-imaging and -spectroscopy
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2019
* Prashant Nagpal, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 08/31/2019
* USD 550,001.00

With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation Program (MRI) and
support from the Chemistry Research Instrumentation Program (CRIF) as well as
the MPS Office of Multidisciplinary Activities (OMA), Professor Markus Raschke
from the University of Colorado Boulder and colleagues Steven Cundiff, Prashant
Nagpal, Thomas Perkins, and Sean Shaheen are developing an infrared scanning
near-field optical microscope (IR s-SNOM) for broadband nano-imaging and
spectroscopy. The instrument provides vibrational and chemical infrared imaging
data with nanometer spatial resolution, high spectral resolution and single
molecule sensitivity. This instrument is to enable the study of molecular self-
organization and nanoscale phase separation in polymer blends, block-copolymers,
liquid crystals, and biomembranes; energy and charge transfer in photosynthesis;
and organic and inorganic photovoltaics. The award not only allows for the
development of a new instrument but also provides training to early career
scientists in instrumentation development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The instrument
development effort is being applied to projects such as: (a) studying coupling
and transport in organic photovoltaics and electrochemical transistors, (b)
achieving label-free access of structure and function of membrane proteins, (c)
investigating inter-sub-band transitions in nano-bio-hybrid materials for solar
fuel generation, and (d) probing intermolecular coupling and dynamics through
local probe vibrational solvatochromism. The technical innovation in IR s-SNOM
may lead to new discoveries in soft-matter and quantum materials of utility to
imaging technologies.