* 1531871
* MRI:  Acquisition of an X-Ray Tomography Microscope Supporting Multidisciplinary Fundamental and Applied Research
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2019
* Nan Yao, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 08/31/2019
* USD 586,140.00

1531871(Arnold)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Addressing today's grand challenges in
energy, environment, health, and security relies on the development of novel
materials with extraordinary properties and the understanding of natural
materials tasked with unprecedented performance. The properties and performance
of a material depend on its structure across different size scales and although
much information can be gained by looking at the surface, to truly understand
the design and use of materials it is necessary to characterize their internal
three dimensional structure without destroying the systems or devices in which
they are used. This project seeks to achieve this goal by acquiring an X-Ray
tomographic microscope (XRM) capable of visualizing the three dimensional
structure of materials with submicron spatial resolution while controlling such
environmental variables as tension-compression, temperature and fluid flow and
without destroying the sample in the process. In doing so, Princeton will be
able to complement its existing expertise in two dimensional characterization
and create a user facility that will open the door to new kinds of
characterization aimed at developing a deeper understanding of materials ranging
across areas such as biological materials for tissue engineering, geological
materials for carbon sequestration, or electrochemical materials for energy
storage. These and numerous other frontier research efforts will enable
Princeton and neighboring researchers to meaningfully and substantially
contribute to the solution of pressing problems confronting the nation and the
world. The XRM's ability to visualize the internal structures of materials will
be incorporated to education and outreach programs that seek to inspire and
excite young people about science and engineering and to instill confidence and
motivation for academic achievement.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The goal of this
project is to create a user facility that enables non-destructive, time
resolved, 3-D structural and chemical characterization of materials to probe
aspects of structure-property-processing-performance relations, formation and
evolution of defects, compositional heterogeneity, and the spatial organization
of phases for broad classes of materials. Through this funding we will acquire
an X-Ray tomographic microscope (XRM) capable of visualizing the 3D structure of
materials with submicron spatial resolution and the added ability to control
such environmental variables as tension-compression, temperature and fluid flow.
The x-ray microscope has a unique source-sample-detector design that provides
unprecedented sensitivity to contrast imaging along with multiple length scale
imaging of the same sample, spanning the nanometer scale (100 nm voxel
dimension) up to the device-scale (25 micron voxel). Users will come from across
the sciences and engineering, and specimens of immediate interest will include
batteries, fuel cells, electronic devices, polymers, composites, biofilms,
living tissues, cements, rock cores, sediments, vegetation and soil cores. This
XRM's large working distances provide space for in situ cells that will be
developed to enable time-dependent, in situ, nondestructive studies of materials
under their real-world operating conditions.