* 1531877
* MRI: Acquisition of a High Resolution Plasma Source Mass Spectrometer and Sample Introduction System for Multidisciplinary Geosciences Research and Education
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2018
* Peter Sedwick, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 12/31/2018
* USD 644,466.00

The elemental composition of natural waters, sediments, airborne dust, rainwater
and marine microbiota contains information that is essential to an understanding
the workings of Earth system, and its past and future trajectories, which are of
fundamental importance to human society. Moreover, the ability to perform and
interpret such chemical analyses is an essential part of the education and
training of many scientific professionals within the field of ocean and earth
sciences. Among the most commonly used methods for such elemental analyses is
plasma source mass spectrometry, whereby a new generation of sample introduction
systems coupled to a high-resolution inductively-coupled plasma mass
spectrometer (HR-ICP-MS) allows routine elemental determinations in a wide
variety of natural materials, over large ranges in elemental
concentrations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Major Research Instrumentation award
will support the acquisition of a new, state-of-the-art HR-ICP-MS and dedicated
sample introduction system, which will be housed in Old Dominion University's
Department of Ocean, Earth and Atmospheric Sciences (OEAS). This equipment
represents an essential replacement and upgrade of the 16-year-old system now in
place, and is critically required to meet the current and future research
demands of departmental faculty and graduate researchers, as well as provide
essential training and education to OEAS postdoctoral researchers, graduate
students and undergraduate majors. The new analytical equipment will be
maintained and operated by a dedicated research specialist who is highly
experienced in HR-ICP-MS analysis, and who will receive additional specific
training in the use and maintenance of the new instrument and sample
introduction system.