* 1531226
* SBE/RCUK: Relationship Strategies and the Stability of Interpersonal Security Over Time
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Madoka Kumashiro, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 08/31/2020
* USD 335,120.00

Strong relationships with close others are important for psychological and
physical well-being. However, people differ in how willing and able they are to
forge bonds in which they feel secure with others. People who achieve greater
security in their close relationships ("attachment security") have better
relationship outcomes, are more confident in pursuing personal goals and are
better able to handle challenges. Although attachment insecurity is often a
chronic condition, it can and does change with new experiences. This project
capitalizes on interactions in romantic relationships, which evoke experiences
that have powerful effects in regulating a sense of security. This research
introduces relationship strategies, such as communication strategies that
strengthen trust or confidence and perception exercises that aid in positive
reinterpretations of interactions, that could regulate attachment security. This
work will therefore shed light on fundamental questions in attachment research
and relationship science, such as what are the interpersonal processes that lead
to increased attachment security over time? Specifically, the research will test
theoretically-derived pathways through which short- and long-term changes in
attachment processes could be achieved. The relationship strategies examined in
this research target each type of insecurity and are designed to be incorporated
in typical couple interactions and daily events. These strategies may also be
adopted in non-romantic settings by individuals who have endured negative
interpersonal experiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary goal of this project
is to identify mechanisms through which insecure relational dynamics may be
reduced, and attachment security enhanced, over time. Specifically, the research
will test whether communication strategies mediate these processes in the short-
term; and, whether changes in mental models (beliefs about the self and others)
lead to longer-term shifts in attachment security. In a series of randomized
experiments, couples are assigned to strategies to target anxious tendencies or
avoidant tendencies. The first aim will test the mediating role that
communication strategies play in mitigating anxiety versus avoidance. Such
communication may reduce immediate relational tension but may not be sufficient
to cause enduring changes in attachment security. The second aim, therefore,
involves examining interactions and perceptions that can increase confidence
among anxious individuals and increase trust among avoidant individuals. The
effect of these security-enhancing strategies, combined with communication that
mitigates insecurity, will be examined over an extended time. These relatively
minor changes in couples' communication patterns and beliefs are expected to
ripple into more profound changes in general attachment security, which benefits
relationships and promotes meaningful activities that are fundamental to
societal well-being. This proposal is awarded under the SBE-RCUK Lead Agency
Agreement.