* 1531366
* MRI: Development of a State-of-the-Art Multiband Receiver for Arizona Radio Observatory's New ALMA Antenna
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2015,02/28/2021
* Lucy Ziurys, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Zoran Ninkov
* 02/28/2021
* USD 1,147,207.00

As part of the development phase of the Atacama Large Millimeter Array (ALMA),
two 12 meter ALMA prototype antennas (APA) were constructed for evaluation and
testing, and installed at the National Radio Astronomy Observatory (NRAO) Very
Large Array (VLA) site in Socorro, New Mexico. After completion of the ALMA
testing and evaluation phase, the Arizona Radio Observatory (ARO) at the
University of Arizona (UA) acquired one of the two APA telescopes. After
acquisition, the UA moved their APA to Kitt Peak, replacing the 40-year-old 12-m
telescope, and rechristening the telescope as the new Arizona Radio Observatory
(ARO) 12 m. The subject proposal funds a modern, multi-wavelength receiver
system which will realize the full scientific potential of the new ARO 12 m
antenna. The receiver will cover the 1-4 mm wavelength range in four separate
bands, and will enable a broad range of astronomical research including
spectroscopy of molecular clouds and planetary nebulae, astrobiological studies
of disks and pre-biotic molecules, and the study of black holes. The new
receiver and 12 m antenna will have a broad user base with U.S. astronomers and
scientists from universities and national labs, the Event Horizon Telescope
consortium, and the European Southern Observatory (ESO). As part of this program
ARO will allocate 28 days of observing time per year to the general U.S.
community to access ARO's unique northern hemisphere observing capability and to
enable pathfinder science for ALMA. The program will incorporate significant
student training at all levels, from high school through graduate school. This
telescope, along with the ARI 10 m telescope on Mt Graham, are perhaps the only
remaining general purpose radio telescopes operated by a US university. As such,
they are among the few remaining opportunities for direct student involvement in
radio telescope instrumentation and operations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The dual-
polarization 4-band receiver will cover the astronomically important atmospheric
windows at 1, 2, 3, and 4 mm wavelength regions well suited to the Kitt Peak
site. The 3 (84-116 GHz), 2 (130-180 GHz) and 1 mm (211-275 GHz) bands will
employ ALMA-type, sideband-separating (SBS), superconducting (SIS) mixers, which
represent the world's best in sensitivity and stability. SBS 2 mm mixers will be
developed in collaboration with the National Radio Astronomy Observatory (NRAO)
Central Development Lab (CDL) to cover a band scientifically important and well
matched to the Kitt Peak site. The mixer chip will be a series array of four SIS
junctions, similar to ALMA Band 6, and will be fabricated by the University of
Virginia Microfabrication Lab (UVML). The 4 mm band (67-90 GHz) will utilize
NRAO HFET amplifiers, previously tested on the old ARO 12 m. This system will
also be SBS through an E-band down-converter developed by ARO. The 3 mm mixers
are already in ARO's possession and the 1 mm devices will be obtained from NRAO.
The mixers/amplifiers will be mounted in the same dewar using a modular design
with each band and associated optics positioned on a separate plate. The
receiver system will bolt onto the flange of the antenna cabin at the secondary
focus. The spectral-line control system is fully operational at the new 12 m and
will accommodate the new receiver with minimal modification. The new receiver
will be used mainly for spectroscopic observations of interstellar and
circumstellar molecules, and will: i) cover important molecular transitions,
such as the J=1 -&gt; 0 lines of CO, HCN, N2H+, H2CO, and HCO+, used widely as
density and temperature tracers in interstellar gas; and ii) provide wider
frequency coverage necessary for many astrochemical programs. A major focus will
be the investigation of the extent of molecular matter in the Galaxy. The
subject work will redefine translucent cloud boundaries using low-level CO
emission, characterize dense cloud cores chemically and physically, probe the
sky as seen by Planck, and investigate hybrid gaseous/debris disks. The
surprisingly rich chemical content of planetary nebulae and its connection to
the diffuse interstellar medium will be further investigated. Combined with
laboratory spectroscopy, the molecular carriers of the biogenic element
phosphorus will be sought. The ARO 12 m will also join the Event Horizon
Telescope for 1 mm VLBI observations, improving overall sensitivity and adding
an intermediate baselines for probing the larger scale structure around black
holes.