* 1531193
* MRI: Acquisition of a Diffractometer for Research in Energy and Materials
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2018
* Philip Power, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 07/31/2018
* USD 327,311.00

With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) and Chemistry
Research Instrumentation and Facilities (CRIF) programs, the University of
California Davis will acquire an X-ray diffractometer with a sensitive detector.
In general, an X-ray diffractometer allows accurate and precise measurements of
the full three-dimensional structure of a molecule, including bond distances and
angles, and provides accurate information about the spatial arrangement of a
molecule relative to neighboring molecules. The studies described here will
impact a number of areas, including organic and inorganic chemistry, materials
chemistry, energy research and biochemistry. This instrument will be an integral
part of teaching as well as research and research training of chemistry graduate
and undergraduate students as well as postdoctoral fellows. An outreach center
will be created to enable education and research institutions to collect
diffraction data and provide help with crystal structure determination, at
minimal cost. Annual crystallography workshops will be used to educate potential
users and assess the effectiveness of the Center through user
feedback.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award is aimed at enhancing research and
education at all levels, especially in areas such as (a) controlling the
electronic structures of metal complexes to enable catalytic transformations
utilizing earth abundant metal complexes with unpaired electrons to convert
carbon dioxide and nitrogen into useful chemicals; (b) investigating fullerene
chemistry and intra- and inter-molecular bonding interactions in fullerenes; (c)
understanding the magnetic behavior of low coordinate transition metal complexes
that can exhibit strong spin-orbit coupling and high zero-field splitting; (d)
developing superconductors and magnetic materials based on layered and chained
Fe-Se structures; (e) designing thermoelectric materials capable of converting
waste heat into useful electric energy utilizing complex inorganic solids; and
(f) studying the chemistry of concave, hemispherical, or completely closed shell
bodies, self-organized molecular systems, and dopants for electroactive
polymers.