* 1531583
* MRI: Acquisition of integrated optical spectroscopy system at the Advanced Photon Source
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2018
* Alexander Goncharov, Carnegie Institution of Washington
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 07/31/2018
* USD 334,275.00

This award provides funding for the acquisition of a shared-use, state-of-the-
art combined Raman and optical spectroscopy system at the Advanced Photon Source
(APS), Argonne National Laboratory (Chicago, IL). This new system will enable
study of materials with unique physical and chemical properties, as well as
novel technological materials, with advanced state-of-the-art techniques
combined in a single instrument. This work has important implications to
societal quality-of-life issues such as carbon sequestration, environmental
remediation, properties of nanomaterials and earthquake generation. This work
will also advance discovery and understanding by students as participants in the
proposed research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The availability of a system capable of
concomitant in-situ X-ray diffraction and spectroscopy studies of materials at
ambient and extreme pressure and temperature conditions (static and dynamic),
including high spatial resolution studies of advanced and newly synthesized
materials, will greatly enhance research capabilities of APS users. This
instrumentation will enhance our understanding of planetary interiors by
enabling studies of synthetic samples at the relevant conditions and of
naturally-occurring minerals, rocks and their inclusions. Similarly, study of
materials under conditions of high pressures and variable temperatures (low to
very high) will be revealing for understanding of physical and chemical
phenomena in condensed matter under extreme conditions including phase
transitions and chemical reactions which provide a basis for synthesis of new
materials under extreme conditions. Study of materials with reduced
dimensionality, such as nanomaterials, will advance our understanding of their
electronic and vibrational properties, crucial information for designing new
advanced technology devices.