* 1531698
* MRI: Acquisition of an inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometer for interdisciplinary applications in science and technology
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2015,03/31/2019
* Mark Welker, Wake Forest University
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 03/31/2019
* USD 239,927.00

This award, from the Major Research Instrumentation Program (MRI) with
additional support from the Chemistry of Life Processes (CLP) and Chemistry
Research Instrumentation (CRIF) Programs, funds the acquisition of an
inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometer (ICP-MS) by Wake Forest University.
The instrument is a powerful analytical tool to determine trace elements in
samples from various sources. The instrumentation enables collaborative
interdisciplinary research to elucidate the effects and roles of trace elements
in diverse chemical, biological and environmental processes. Because of its high
sensitivity and multi-element capabilities, ICP-MS with microwave assisted
digestion (MAD) is essential in fields from environmental science and policy to
semiconductor and material sciences, food production, and biomedical industries.
Use of the instrument is shared with Winthrop University and Winston-Salem State
University for teaching and research. It is employed in several outreach
projects involving middle and high school students.

The proposal is aimed at enhancing research especially in areas such as: (a)
studying the availability of forage nutrients in grazing ecosystems; (b) using
platinum complexes as therapeutics and cellular probes; (c) monitoring metals
and phytoremediation across the Catawba watershed in the Charlotte, NC, region;
(d) applying ICP-MS to the early diagnosis of osteoporosis; (e) studying the
biogenesis and function of metalloenzymes in Gram-positive bacteria; and (f)
carrying out standard dilution analysis for trace element determination in
medicine formulations.