* 1531963
* MRI:  Acquisition of a 400 MHz NMR Spectrometer for Chemistry and Chemical Forensics
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Brenton DeBoef, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 08/31/2018
* USD 202,993.00

With this award supported by the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI), the
Chemistry Research Instrumentation (CRIF), and EPSCoR programs, Professor
Brenton DeBoef from University of Rhode Island and colleagues William Euler,
Jimmie Oxley, Brett Lucht and Geoffrey Bothun will acquire a 400 MHz NMR
spectrometer. This spectrometer will allow research in a variety of fields such
as those that accelerate chemical reactions of significant economic importance,
as well as allow study of biologically relevant species. In general, Nuclear
Magnetic Resonance (NMR) spectroscopy is one of the most powerful tools
available to chemists for the elucidation of the structure of molecules. It is
used to identify unknown substances, to characterize specific arrangements of
atoms within molecules, and to study the dynamics of interactions between
molecules in solution or in the solid state. Access to state-of-the-art NMR
spectrometers is essential to chemists who are carrying out frontier research.
The results from these NMR studies will have an impact in synthetic
organic/inorganic chemistry, materials chemistry and biochemistry. This
instrument will be an integral part of teaching as well as research performed by
undergraduate and graduate students. Additional broader impacts of the proposed
instrument will be realized by the hands-on training of advanced chemistry
students in the use of state-of-the-art instrumentation, the continued growth of
chemistry-related research and education at URI, and the outreach between URI
Chemistry and its community, including the hosting of an annual, state-wide High
School Chemistry contest, and an annual Chemistry Camp for junior high
girls.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award is aimed at enhancing research and
education at all levels, especially in areas such as (a) understanding
regioselective oxidative cross-coupling via C?H activation; (b) studying
cryptophane-derived molecular probes for hyperpolarized Xenon-129 magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI); (c) discovering new and sensitive methods for the
detection of explosives using fluorescence spectroscopy; (d) developing a better
understanding of reactions in lithium batteries; (e) investigating
organocatalytic ring-opening polymerization (ROP) processes; (f) studying
Clostridium pasteurianum adaptation during crude glycerol fermentation; (g)
investigating interactions between engineered nanoparticles and biological
membranes; and (h) synthesizing organic macrocycles.