* 1531050
* CIF: Large: Collaborative Research:  Cooperation and Learning Over Cognitive Networks
* CSE,CCF
* 12/01/2014,08/31/2016
* Anna Scaglione, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* John Cozzens
* 08/31/2016
* USD 119,905.00

Cooperation and Learning over Cognitive Networks&lt;br/&gt;Studies on herding
and self-organization in economics and the social and biological sciences have
observed that coordination among multiple agents leads to regular patterns of
behavior and swarm intelligence, even when each group member shows limited
behavioral complexity. In ant colonies, for example, individual ants cannot
capture rich spatial information from their environment because of their limited
sensing ability. Nevertheless, when the ants coordinate their activities within
a colony, the group ends up exhibiting better sensing abilities. Using signal
processing and communications techniques, the research studies how and why such
manifestations of rational and organized behavior arise at the group level from
local interactions among agents with limited abilities, what communication
topologies enable such behavior, and what type of signal processing enables such
formations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research seeks to understand and reverse-
engineer the distributed intelligence encountered in socio-economic-biological
networks, by investigating relations with learning and rationality over
cognitive networks. The latter are adaptive networks that avoid centralized
information processing and perform in-network inference and control decisions.
Cognitive networks contrast with networks that rely on centralized and parallel
information fusion, which are not scalable, are hard to adapt to changing
topologies, and suffer from points of vulnerability and information bottlenecks.
The research considers large scale networks of agents and studies how global
(rational or irrational) patterns of behavior emerge, including herds,
contagions and bubbles in economics. An understanding of how the biotic
environment influences collective behavior in animal societies provides a real
world guide to good cognitive networks, which can be used in turn to design
engineered systems. Cognitive networks have applications in areas ranging from
precision agriculture, to environmental monitoring, disaster relief management,
and smart spaces.