* 1531636
* MRI: Acquisition of a Gas Chromatograph-Mass Spectrometer (GCMS) for Citizen- and Student-Driven Inquiry in Urban District of Columbia
* GEO,AGS
* 03/15/2016,02/28/2019
* Shizuka Hsieh, Trinity College
* Standard Grant
* Peter Milne
* 02/28/2019
* USD 106,500.00

The MRI instrumentation seeks to engage neighborhoods and schools in an urban
setting (Washington DC) to broaden the participation of underrepresented groups
and low-income students in understanding environmental issues that affect their
quality of life, health and environmental justice. A combination of research and
educational tasks will advance both the understanding of urban environmental
factors and inquiry based STEM education. Partnerships will be sought in
neighborhoods where residents are concerned about their ambient air quality,
with students informing them specifically for volatile organic compounds (VOCs),
many of which are known toxins. Characterizing spatial and temporal variations
of atmospheric VOCs will complement prior studies of particulate matter and
metals, help inform studies of health disparities, and allow direct comparisons
with other urban areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The central instrument is a gas
chromatograph / mass spectrometer (GCMS) to be housed in a new science building
at Trinity Washington University, a Minority Serving Institution in Washington,
D.C. with a traditional liberal arts college curriculum for women. Encouragement
of underepresented minorities to actively participate in STEM fields serves,
demographically, the national interst.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Trinity
Washington University is a non-Ph.D. granting institution as defined in Section
IV of the NSF MRI solicitation