* 1531243
* MRI: Acquisition of an Analytical Transmission Electron Microscope for High-resolution, Rapid Nanoscale Compositional Mapping of Earth, Planetary, and Advanced Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Weigang Wang, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Leonard Spinu
* 08/31/2018
* USD 1,500,000.00

This award from the Major Research Instrumentation program and the Office of
Multidisciplinary Activities of the Mathematical and Physical Sciences
Directorate supports the acquisition of a high-resolution, analytical
transmission electron microscope (TEM) by the University of Arizona (UA). The
TEM suppports scientists in characterizing nanoscale compositional and
structural properties of natural and advanced materials of significance for
multiple federally funded research projects. These range from planetary
materials providing insight into the origins of our solar system and planet, to
nanomaterials broadly impacting the next generation of electronic, optical, and
energy-harvesting technologies central to the national interest. This regionally
unique research instrument is a showcase for modern measurement science in the
US Southwest region and serves universities with diverse and underserved student
populations. The TEM acquisition is accompanied at UA by: (a) the development of
a new undergraduate course in electron microscopy; (b) annual electron
microscopy workshops to expand the regional user base; and (c) a symposium
series to stimulate cross-disciplinary interactions between all users of this
instrument. The research, training, technology development, education and
outreach efforts enabled by this facility serve as a focal point for forming
robust partnerships and mentoring relationships that promote recruitment and
retention in STEM fields and training the next generation of highly skilled
scientists to support growth of the high-tech sector in the US
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The high-resolution, analytical transmission
electron microscope (TEM) at the University of Arizona (UA) is specifically
configured to provide rapid, atomic-scale chemical and structural information on
a wide range of materials. The instrument acquires elemental maps in minutes at
nanometer length scales. Enhancements that dramatically improve X-ray counting
statistics lead to: (a) enhanced elemental mapping; (b) negligible drift
artifacts in scanning TEM and energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy/electron
energy-loss spectroscopy; and (c) improved spatial coherence for high-resolution
imaging. The diverse research programs impacted by the new instrument include
the characterization of: presolar stardust grains and circumstellar materials;
catalyst-tipped semiconductor nanorods for solar-driven fuel formation;
electrical contacts and perovskite active layers in photovoltaics; grain
boundaries in metallic ceramics; nanopillar magnetic tunnel junctions; oxygen-
conducting electrolytes; solar water splitting materials; high-pressure
terrestrial materials; 3D-printing materials; quantum dots as new electronic
materials; and photonic materials. Each of these activities has been limited by
the lack of routine access to instrumentation that combines rapid mapping of
elemental composition on nanometer length scales with TEM imaging. This state-
of-the-art instrument establishes the essential feedback loop between
characterization and materials research, and enables cross-disciplinary science
and student training.