* 1531237
* MRI: Acquisition of cryogen-free low-temperature scanning-probe spectroscopy system for nanophotonic and nanoelectronic device characterization
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Eui-Hyeok Yang, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 08/31/2018
* USD 312,000.00

The industrialized world and the United States in particular faces a critical
Helium shortage, which threatens a multitude of industrial and medical
applications requiring cryogenic cooling. For example, Magnetic Resonance
Imagery relies on liquid Helium to cool the high-power magnets needed to create
interior body images for clinical analysis and medical intervention. Helium is
also indispensable to the U.S. space exploration program and other civilian and
military uses. This proposal requests funding to purchase an instrument called
attoDRY1100 that allows for carrying out sophisticated optical characterization
of nanomaterials and devices at extremely low temperatures and high magnetic
fields without the need for liquid Helium. This cryogen-free system completely
eliminates the current annual liquid Helium operation costs of about $50,000 at
Stevens Institute of Technology, and more importantly, avoids the annual
consumption of about 5000 liters of a precious noble gas, thereby contributing
to a "greener campus". The equipment will be incorporated into the shared-user
Nanophotonics Lab at Stevens where it will serve the needs of a growing user
base of over 30 students and staff representing 11 research groups from 5
departments at Stevens. The cryogen-free system will advance several NSF-funded
projects that address fundamental questions of the light-matter interaction of
nanomaterials at the forefront of current research. These projects also target a
broad range of photonic devices that have potential transformative applications,
such as in national security and sustainable energy. The broader impacts will
come from the fact that the requested instrument will be housed in a central
user facility which has a history of successful multidisciplinary training of a
broad range of students from high school to postdoctoral researchers addressing
forefront research in nanotechnology. The PI's will further expand their
outreach activities to currently several hundred high schools students in the
framework of the SEED program of the American Chemical Society and the ECOES
program at Stevens, that will specifically include hands-on education on various
nanotechnology tools, including the attoDRY1100.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
proposal requests funding to purchase the attoDRY1100 cryogen-free cryostat with
an integrated CFM-I scanning-probe confocal microscope insert. The cryogen-free
system will benefit several NSF-funded projects that address fundamental
questions of the light-matter interaction in nanomaterials, which include
heterostructures of graphene and transition-metal dichalcogenides, ultra-clean
carbon nanotubes, lithium-niobate microcavities, catalytic surfaces for biomass
conversion, and solution-processed hybrid inorganic-organic semiconductor thin
films. These projects target a broad range of photonic devices, including on-
chip photodetectors, all-optical modulators, quantum light sources, thin-film
organic solar cells, and Zeno-effect-based switches, which imply transformative
applications in national security, sustainable energy, and beyond. The
attoDRY1100 instrument offers a wealth of new functionalities and measurement
modes highly desirable to the ongoing research projects. These include
hyperspectral 2D-mapping of photoluminescence and photocurrent signals,
cryogenic photolithography with 10 nm resolution, magneto-luminescence studies
of confined excitons, in-situ Raman mapping of surface catalysis, and long-term
drift-free quantum-optics studies of single quantum emitters.