* 1531316
* MRI: Development of a State-of-the-art High-Resolution Tomography Facility Customized for Dynamic (4D) Imaging
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2015,12/31/2020
* Frederick Colwell, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 12/31/2020
* USD 815,768.00

1531316&lt;br/&gt;Wildenschild&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Major Research
Instrumentation (MRI) Program grant supports a two year project to develop a
customized high resolution X-ray computed tomography (CT) imaging system with
capabilities including helical scanning, region-of-interest imaging, and time
resolved dynamic (4D) imaging. The developed instrument would offer the first
time in an academic lab, the capability for sub-micron resolution, high fidelity
computed X-ray tomographic imaging of the interiors of geologic media, outside
of capabilities only now available at National Synchrotron Light Sources where
beam time is extremely limited and highly competitive to gain even limited
(multi-day) access. The project will involve collaboration with colleagues in
the Applied Math Department at Australian National University in Canberra,
Australia. The X-ray CT instrument will be managed as a shared-use laboratory,
and housed in the School of Chemical, Biological and Environmental Engineering
at Oregon State University. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The instrument will be
employed for research and research training in studies requiring non-destructive
high resolution (micron to sub-micron scale) imaging of the interiors of natural
materials and the flow of fluids through porous media including studies of
eruptive mechanisms of volcanoes based on observation of the fine-scale
vesicular structure of basaltic lavas, studies of soil mechanics to improve
mitigation strategies against landslides, liquefaction, and hydraulic collapse
of soils, and studies of the fundamental behavior of fluid (including multi-
phase fluids) flow in porous media to support environmental remediation efforts,
geologic sequestration of CO2, geothermal energy extraction, and groundwater
remediation and management. The PIs intend to develop X-ray CT image
visualization modules for outreach efforts at Oregon State?s Hatfield Marine
Science Center in Newport, Oregon. Studies of the behavior of fluids in the
subsurface have important implications of the management of groundwater
resources, remediation efforts and in characterizing subsurface hydrocarbon
reservoirs. As such this grant is congruent with NSFs mission of advancing the
national welfare.