* 1531520
* MRI: Aquisition of a Time-Resolved Confocal Microscope for Research and Education
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2018
* Edward Rosenberg, University of Montana
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 07/31/2018
* USD 323,285.00

With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) and Chemistry
Research Instrumentation and Facilities (CRIF) programs, the University of
Montana will acquire a time-resolved confocal microscope. The instrument
consists of a pulsed laser light source and a microscope. The microscope detects
the light that is emitted (fluorescence) from a sample after irradiation by the
light source. The instrument facilitates investigation of cellular complexes
down to single-molecules using time-resolved fluorescence techniques. It will be
used in the investigation of molecular and biomolecular interactions and
mechanisms in the chemical, biochemical and biological sciences. The instrument
will be used by undergraduate and graduate students in their research. This
training will assist them in future careers as fluorescence microscopy
techniques are widely used in the biotechnology and materials industry. The
acquisition will be used in outreach activities including programs to recruit
Native American students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal is aimed at
enhancing research and education at all levels, especially in areas such as (a)
studying immobilized bifunctional catalysts, photocatalysts and metal sensors;
(b) studying binding and dynamics of cytochrome c on cardiolipin nanodiscs; (c)
investigating biogenic amines, the extracellular matrix, and neuronal
development; (d) investigating the mechanisms for dynamic localization of stem
cell regulator FBF-2 in C. elegans; and (e) studying the mechanism and dynamics
of G-protein activation by Ric-8A.