* 1531991
* MRI: Acquisition of Cryo-EM for Southwest Regional Center
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Hao Yan, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 08/31/2018
* USD 2,825,509.00

An award has been made to Arizona State University to fund an electron
microscope for use in the biological sciences by many faculty and their students
in the southwestern region of the United States. The instrument will be housed
in an existing regional electron microscope facility and supported by existing
technical staff. The classroom and remote lecture courses and practical
instruction currently offered in biological electron microscopy at ASU will be
extended to include the more advanced and higher resolution cryo-electron
microscopy techniques of which this machine is capable, while the
internationally recognized ASU hands-on Winter School in high-resolution
electron microscopy, offered annually since 1984 and heavily oversubscribed,
will be expanded to cover this field. The next generation of scientists and
educators, including groups under-represented in STEM fields, will be actively
recruited and enrolled and will benefit significantly from the new research
projects and funding made possible by acquisition of this instrument. The new
cryo EM facility will provide three-dimensional images with exquisite fidelity
of the molecular machines and protein molecules responsible for life on earth.
These images will provide structural knowledge that is fundamental to attainment
of the new understanding needed to improve the development of new drugs, new
organic photovoltaics for solar energy, new sensor molecules, and better
understand how proteins function (in viruses, cells, and tissues). This profound
expansion of penetrating vision will give new eyes to scientists attempting to
understand the origin and fundamental mechanisms present in many diseases
(including afflictions such as Alzheimer's disease) and will lead to a parallel
understanding of the function of living tissues, for example, revealing deeper
understanding of how the signaling and protein molecules in human muscles work.
Further expanding this impact, cryo EM will enable research at the intersection
of state of the art science and environmentally sustainable practices through
contributions to research that monitors the safety of nanomaterials deposited in
the environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research undertaken using this new
cryo EM facility will mainly be based on "single-particle cryo-electron
microscopy", a method which allows three-dimensional images of the molecules of
life to be recorded at such high magnification that the individual atoms in the
molecules can be seen (in favorable cases). This enables proteins and other
nanoscale biological structures molecules to be imaged without having to be
first crystallized (as in conventional crystallography). When possible, leaping
beyond this tedious trial-and-error process, which sometimes takes many years,
or in some cases may never be possible, is a true game-changer in structural
biology. By studying the way atoms are arranged in molecules, scientists can
improve the effectiveness of drugs, reduce side effects, and also understand how
the molecular machines on which life is based operate. In addition, new methods
for imaging molecules will be developed including methods based on electron-beam
scattering from protein nanocrystals, the development of new phase-plates for
electron beams, and the use of new scanning probe microscopy modes to obtain
three-dimensional images of entire cells, normally considered too large to be
imaged in the electron microscope.