* 1531616
* MRI: Acquisition of a 3-Tesla Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) Scanner for Human Brain Imaging
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Jason Chein, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2018
* USD 2,371,484.00

This awards provides support for Temple University under the direction of
Principal Investigator Jason Chein to purchase a high-performance 3-Tesla (3T)
whole-body Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) scanner, required hardware and
software. The instrumentation will play a central role in facilitating the
establishment of a new,multi-modal, behavioral research imaging center on the
Temple University (TU) Main Campus.This scanner will be devoted exclusively to
research and research education, serving a large,&lt;br/&gt;multi-disciplinary,
community of investigators from Temple and neighboring institutions that
presently lack access to state-of-the-art MRI resources. MRI has become an
essential tool in behavioral and bio-behavioral science. This tool enables
researchers to study, non-invasively, both the structural organization of the
brain and the local changes in the blood oxygen level dependent (BOLD) signal
that index brain function. With this information, researchers can infer neural
activity with high spatial resolution, characterize volumetric differences in
brain tissue, accurately track the organization of connective pathways in the
brain, and decipher complex patterns represented in the brain's overall
activation profile, thus opening the door to ground-breaking new discoveries
pertaining to how humans think, remember, make decisions, and pay attention. It
provides insight into how humans process language, space, and action and how
these capabilities develop. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The instrument requested in
this application, a Siemens MAGNETOM Prisma 3T scanner, will provide industry-
leading imaging capabilities, with impressive signal-to-noise ratios, imaging
speed, and spatial and temporal resolution. Acquisition of this MRI system will
enable local scientists to extend the reach of the research they are engaged in
and to develop pioneering new lines of investigation that are not supported by
the limited imaging resources currently available. The acquisition of a new 3T
MRI system will also enhance graduate and undergraduate education on Temple?s
highly diverse, urban campus. The establishment of a main campus MRI research
center will also substantially impact efforts to attract top scientists and
studentsto the institution.