* 1531043
* MRI: Acquisition of a 400 MHz NMR Spectrometer for the Cooperating Colleges of Greater Springfield
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2018
* Ronny Priefer, Western New England University
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 07/31/2018
* USD 365,000.00

With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation Program (MRI) and
support from the Chemistry Research Instrumentation Program (CRIF), Western New
England University will acquire a 400 MHz NMR spectrometer. The instrument will
be housed at WNEU and shared for research and teaching with the Cooperating
Colleges of Greater Springfield (CCGS) consortium. The CCGS consortium is
comprised of eight member institutions within a 10-mile radius: American
International College, Bay Path College, Elms College, Holyoke Community
College, Springfield College, Springfield Technical Community College, Western
New England University, and Westfield State University. The instrument will be
used in undergraduate research projects in areas of organic, inorganic and
environmental chemistry. In general, Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR)
spectroscopy is one of the most powerful tools available to chemists for the
elucidation of the structure of molecules. It is used to identify unknown
substances, to characterize specific arrangements of atoms within molecules, and
to study the dynamics of interactions between molecules in solution. Access to
state-of-the-art NMR spectrometers is essential to chemists who are carrying out
frontier research. This instrument will be an integral part of teaching as well
as research performed by undergraduate students in the consortium institutions.

The proposal is aimed at enhancing research especially in areas such as (a)
investigating phenyl epoxyenones as potential activity-based probe templates for
protein kinases (Springfield College); (b) synthesizing and developing
hyperbranched star polymers for use as bone substitutes (WNE); (c) broadening
the scope of Montmorillonite K10 clay (WNE) ; (d) studying dynamic kinetic
resolution of substituted keto esters and ketoamides via biocatalytic reduction
(Springfield Tech Community College); (e) synthesizing and developing small
molecule sensors for the detection of organophosphate pesticides in water and
soil (WNE); (f) synthesizing and investigating the thermal stability of cubane
derivatives (WNE); (g) synthesizing and investigating polyelectrolytes (WNE);
and (h) determining secondary deuterium isotope effect on the equilibrium
constant for the iodination of alkanes (Elms College).