* 1531641
* Collaborative Research: Student Perspectives on Researcher Identity and Transformed Epistemologies (SPRITE)
* ENG,EEC
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2020
* Rachel Kajfez, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Edward Berger
* 08/31/2020
* USD 89,142.00

Undergraduate Research Experience (URE) programs have positive effects on
student understanding of the nature of science, motivation, and academic
performance. However, little is understood about how UREs affect students' views
of research, their identities as researchers, and their beliefs about knowledge
in engineering. Investigating students' researcher identities and beliefs about
knowledge (epistemic beliefs) in the context of URE is important because they
shape the students' perceptions, values, and interactions with others, which can
then be translated to their classes and future careers. The outcomes of this
study help develop meaningful ways for students to engage, function, and learn
in research spaces as well as classrooms and laboratories. Findings also expand
theories about identity and epistemic beliefs in ways that are specific to
engineering fields. The goal of the project is to address the challenge of
producing engineers who are well-equipped to tackle complex, ill-defined, and
open-ended problems similar to those encountered when doing research. The
results enable engineering educators to provide novel educational experiences,
developing students as future researchers and engineers such that these
experiences will have long term impacts. The project's broader impacts include
benefits to fields beyond engineering that engage students in research. Also, by
including diverse student populations in the study, a deeper understanding is
gained about how students from different backgrounds, engineering fields, and
types of institutions experience and benefit from participating in research.

The overarching research question for this project is: How do undergraduate
engineering students develop their identities as researchers and their ways of
knowing engineering through research experiences? There are four specific aims
of this project. The first is to understand how undergraduate engineering
students conceptualize and construct what it means to be a researcher. The
second is to discover what factors the students think affect their researcher
identity development. The third is to find out how these students describe what
it means to know something in their fields. The fourth is to understand how
students form their beliefs about the nature of knowledge and knowing during
research experiences. A grounded theory approach is used to expand existing
identity and epistemic belief frameworks to develop a theory within the context
of research experiences in engineering. The three-phase study uses open-ended
surveys and interviews to identify themes that answer the research aims and can
be used to develop workshops. The intellectual merit of the project lies in
developing an engineering-specific learning theory based on students' beliefs
about ways of knowing and their identities as researchers. This theory is used
to inform and work with engineering educators to find ways to apply research
findings in engineering degree programs and UREs. Workshops for engineering
educators focus on ways to incorporate the aspects of UREs that help build
students' ways of knowing and their identities as participants in their research
communities and their engineering fields.