* 1531944
* MRI: Acquisition of A Multiphoton Confocal Laser Scanning Microscope for Life Science and Biomedical Research and Training at SUNY Binghamton
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2018
* Eriks Rozners, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* Harsha Chelliah
* 08/31/2018
* USD 610,868.00

This proposal seeks to acquire a Zeiss LSM 880 NOL 3-channel multiphoton
confocal laser scanning microscope to upgrade SUNY Binghamton University's (BU)
eight-year-old Leica SP 5 single photon confocal microscope that has helped BU
faculty to successfully develop top-ranked research programs. The existing
microscope was originally configured for thin tissue sample and microorganism
imaging. With the expansion of BU research programs in neuroscience, stem cell
and regenerative medicine, 3D tissue bioprinting, nanomedicine, etc., the
University is in urgent need of a more advanced multiphoton confocal microscope
for live cell imaging. LSM880 NOL is a two photon confocal microscope capable of
subcellular imaging. Access to this state-of-the-art microscope will propel BU's
recent Health Science Initiative, boost faculty research capabilities in
Biomedical Engineering, Biological Science, Chemistry, and Psychology
Departments and the newly-formed Pharmacy School. It will also help more
individuals on campus obtain preliminary results to seek for NSF and NIH
funding. The outcome of this project would have a broader impact on our
fundamental understanding of how cell and protein behave dynamically in vivo.
This project address unmet needs to study cell biology, gene regulation, neuron
firing, and tissue regeneration/remodeling in live cells, tissues, and small
animals at single cell and single molecule level. Furthermore, its acquisition
will foster BU's collaboration with industries to accelerate the translation of
life science and biomedical engineering discoveries into bioproducts. A
comprehensive management plan will ensure that the instrument always runs at
peak and near peak capacity. The strong financial and management commitment from
BU and the researchers involved in this project will sustain the facility after
the project period.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal seeks to acquire a Zeiss
LSM 880 NOL 3-channel multiphoton confocal laser scanning microscope to upgrade
SUNY Binghamton University's (BU) eight-year-old Leica SP 5 single photon
confocal microscope that has helped BU faculty to successfully develop top-
ranked research programs. LSM880 NOL is a two photon confocal microscope. Its
pulsed, ultrafast infrared laser excites fluorescent dyes or proteins only at
the focal point, where photon density is high enough to produce fluorescence.
The red excitation light penetrates much deeper into tissue close to 1 mm. It
can resolve 140 nm laterally and 400 nm axially at 488 nm, allowing for
subcellular imaging. The breadth of research interests, coupled with the current
funding of investigators involved in this project poses urgent need for the
acquisition of the microscope at BU. The acquisition of this advanced
multiphoton microscope will immediately affect more than 17 research labs across
six Departments in three schools. More labs will be impacted once the system is
set up on campus. The investigators involved in this project are well funded by
NSF, NIH, etc. and have research projects that are directly related to the
microscope. The acquisition of the instrument will not only permit them to
develop more collaborative projects with researchers across the campus, state
and nation, but it will also allow faculty to pursue new directions of research
and contribute greatly to the growth of BU's research and academic programs. It
will enable investigators to study interaction between cell-cell and cell-
extracellular matrix; to track cell migration, differentiation, and
proliferation; to investigate cell recruitment during wound healing, organ
transplantation and tissue regeneration/remodeling; and to measure biochemical
reactions such as diffusion, receptors/ligand interaction within live cells,
tissues, 3D printed organoids or small animals. Knowledge gained from these
studies will significantly advance both bioscience and bioengineering. The
acquisition of the microscope will propel and accelerate these advances. It will
remarkably enhance BU's research infrastructure in life science and biomedical
engineering by providing a multiuser imaging facility that is open to all
investigators and students across the campus, state, and nation. Furthermore, it
will provide a powerful resource for teaching modern biology and bioengineering.
A new lab course focusing on live cell and tissue multiphoton microscopy will be
developed and offer to both undergraduate and graduate students. Workshops and
open house will be held to train and attract new users to access to the
microscope and to reach out to K-12 and local communities, especially those from
underrepresented groups. It will offer additional research training
opportunities for summer REU students. Finally, it will serve as an excellent
recruiting tool for attracting top-notch faculty to the university.