* 1531119
* MRI: Acquisition of a Triple Quadrupole Liquid Chromatography Mass Spectrometer System
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2018
* Michael Fitzgerald, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 07/31/2018
* USD 323,890.00

With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) and Chemistry
Research Instrumentation and Facilities (CRIF) programs, Duke University will
acquire a high performance liquid chromatograph (HP-LC) mass spectrometer (MS)
system with tandem analysis capability (triple quadrupole). The system will be
used to analyze the composition of substances obtained from various sources
including samples obtained from chemical reactions and biological sources. The
liquid chromatograph separates a mixture into its individual components. The
mass spectrometer then ionizes the components and determines their mass by
measuring the mass to charge ratio (m/z) of the ions. This is a widely used
powerful analytical tool to determine the composition of a mixture or material.
Students will be trained to use this sophisticated modern instrument in their
research, preparing them for their later careers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
instrument will be used in research especially in areas such as (a) establishing
chemical tools to manipulate metal-catalyzed oxidative stress; (b) developing
transition metal-catalyzed procedures for the addition of the H-X bond of C-,
N-, and O nucleophiles across C=C bonds (hydrofunctionalization); (c)
elucidating the mechanisms of gold(I) pi-activation catalysis; (d) developing
cobalt and manganese complexes that incorporate tricoordinate redox-active
ligands for use in directed and/or enantioselective electrophilic atom-transfer
processes; (e) developing multivalent inhibitors of long noncoding RNA using
protein interactions through a fragment-based screening library; (f) designing,
synthesizing, and using small molecules as probes of material processes in
polymers; (g) using chemical tools to understand the signaling pathways
underlying cell and developmental biology.