* 1531492
* MRI: Acquisition of SeaWulf - A Reconfigurable Computer System for Research and Education
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2018
* Robert Harrison, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Stefan Robila
* 09/30/2018
* USD 1,400,000.00

The project deploys a high-performance computer system that enhances the
research, education and training activities at Stony Brook University (SBU) and
partner institutions across the state of New York. Research topics include
modeling storm surges and associated damages to inform the design of resilient
coastal infrastructure and emergency response; genomics analysis to explore
biodiversity and how to conserve ecosystems into the future; analyzing data
motion within computer systems to enable more energy efficient designs;
development of scalable models of brain function; atomistic simulations of
materials proposed for use in fusion reactors; and simulation of supernovae and
x-ray bursts fundamental to astronomy. Over sixty graduate and undergraduate
courses at SBU regularly use the system, which also creates numerous
opportunities for undergraduate research. Through collaborations with the SBU
Center for Inclusive Education (CIE) and other organizations, the instrument
operates to substantially broaden participation in science and engineering
research by women, underrepresented minorities, persons with disabilities, and
high-school students. External partners include the SUNY system and the all-
women School of Arts &amp; Sciences at the College of New Rochelle.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The instrument supports both sophisticated and entry-level
users through command-line and web-portal access, and is reconfigurable to move
resources between batch and cloud workflows. It includes 165 nodes connected via
InfiniBand for a total of 4516 cores with 20.7TB total memory, and is supported
by a fast 1PB General Parallel File System (GPFS). The cost-effective, high-
performance and high-productivity computing accelerates and expands research,
and prepares the research projects and users to exploit the larger national
computing facilities. Once operational the system will be used for research and
training by forty NSF-sponsored research projects at SBU, and by multiple other
projects supported by industry or other agencies, including the Air Force Office
of Scientific Research (AFOSR), the National Aeronautics and Space
Administration (NASA), the Department of Energy (DOE), and the State of New
York.