* 1531127
* US Ignite: Track 1:  Enabling Connected Vehicle Applications through Advanced Network Technology
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* James Martin, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 08/31/2020
* USD 714,582.00

By the end of the decade, the US Department of Transportation (DOT) will likely
require all new vehicles to be Connected Vehicles (CV), capable of communicating
with other vehicles and roadside infrastructure through wireless communications
in order to reduce the number of crashes and save lives. The crash avoidance
applications supported by vehicle-to-vehicle (V2V) and vehicle-to-infrastructure
(V2I) connectivity exchange safety critical information such as speed, location
and direction of movement to assess the crash risk based on the proximity of
vehicles. While standards such as Dedicated Short Range Communications (DSRC)
will play a key role, other technologies such as WiFi, LTE (cellular), or other
emerging technologies, can lower overall systems cost as well as supplement the
availability, coverage, and peak data rate requirements of DSRC-based systems.
The South Carolina Connected Vehicle Testbed (SC-CVT) is located along a 10-mile
segment of Interstate I-85 near Clemson's International Center for Automotive
Research (ICAR) campus in Greenville South Carolina. Two specific example CV
applications that will be developed are traffic incident detection and queue
warning. These two applications provide a convenient starting point for
illustrating how CV applications can benefit from advanced network technology
that integrates multiple wireless technologies in a CV
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Heterogeneous networks (HetNets) are networks that
integrate and exploit multiple concurrently available networking technologies.
For critical applications requiring resource allocation optimization in order to
meet safety-driven performance requirements. This project is using a combination
of Software Defined Networking, local computing provided by GENI racks, and
control based on statistical learning theory to demonstrate optimized HetNet
operation on the SC-CVT.