* 1531779
* Understanding the Role of Credentialing in Promoting and Sustaining Innovative Engineering Practices
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2015,12/31/2017
* Jennifer Karlin, South Dakota School of Mines and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Elliot Douglas
* 12/31/2017
* USD 343,499.00

The way engineers are educated must constantly evolve as the world context and
the technologies evolve. While there are many successful efforts by individuals
and small groups, large-scale curricular changes are key to maintaining these
successes. Earlier data collected and analyzed by this team shows that one of
the barriers to large-scale curricular change is understanding how to credential
innovative educational practices, particularly those practices that do not take
place in a traditional, lecture-oriented classroom. Credentialing is an
important mark for students looking for quality education programs as well as
employers looking for quality graduates. This study uses the real experiences of
engineering degree programs that are innovative across their curriculum to learn
how they navigated the credentialing processes. The impact of the work is to
determine pathways to turn the use of credentialing as a barrier to better
engineering education into a lever for getting more engineering programs to make
large-scale innovations.

Even when engineering curricular changes are systemic, earlier data collected by
this team shows that credentialing is a key, though often misunderstood or not
explicitly acknowledged, barrier to real, sustainable improvement to engineering
education practice. Communication across implementation levels (e.g., course,
curriculum, university credentialing) and their research to practice cycles is
not straightforward, even though it is necessary to produce sustainable change
in engineering education. Therefore, the goal of this research is to answer:
What gaps exist and how do we bridge innovative curricular/pedagogical
initiatives and credentialing at the institutional, federal, and accreditation
levels? Data collection and analysis in years 1 and 2 will allow the team to
explore and describe the role credentialing plays in sustainable engineering
education change. The research team and advisory board will address ways to
expand the research-to-practice cycle so that university-level infrastructure is
included. The team will broadly disseminate the results via Implementation
Workshops that will include faculty, administrators and staff, as well as
through traditional publications and conferences.

This work will: 1) Explore the role credentialing plays in sustainable
engineering curricular change from multiple viewpoints, including faculty,
academic administrators, registrar and financial aid staff, accreditors, and
others; 2) Expand the research to practice cycle to include the infrastructure
within which both the research and the practice occur; and 3) Develop and
disseminate materials to inform change agents so they can increase the efficacy
of their credentialing efforts. The results of the project include: a model of
change that recognizes the potential infrastructure barriers to innovation in
engineering education, materials for university change agents to help them
navigate the credentialing process, and increased understanding of how to
support and sustain long term change in engineering education.