* 1531247
* MRI: Acquisition of an Isothermal Titration Calorimeter for the Characterization of Molecular Interactions to Support Research and Undergraduate Education
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Lihua Wang, Kettering University
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 08/31/2018
* USD 91,600.00

With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) Program (MRI) and
the Chemistry Research Instrumentation and Facilities (CRIF) Program, Kettering
University will acquire an isothermal scanning calorimeter (ITC). Isothermal
titration calorimetry has become a powerful technique for obtaining quantitative
thermodynamic information about molecular interactions. It does so by
sensitively measuring heat generated or absorbed by a compound upon titration
using another compound. This leads to understanding the strength and structure
of the interaction between the compounds. Binding between proteins, nucleic
acids, lipids, small molecules, metals, nanoparticles, and polymers dissolved or
suspended in aqueous or select non-aqueous solvents are accessible, making ITC
extremely versatile. At Kettering University, the instrument will also be used
by undergraduate students in their research projects. It will be incorporated
into laboratory courses to provide training to students in several disciplines.
It will be used in demonstrations and in hands on usage in outreach programs for
middle and high school students. The proposal is aimed at enhancing research
especially in areas such as (a) investigating protein-small molecule binding to
explain the molecular evolution of the Yersina phosphatase YopH; (b) elucidating
potential cytochrome c-dependent cardiovascular disease protection mechanisms
for catechins, protein-metal complex binding; (c) determining the affinity of
blood serum proteins for anti-cancer Ru(II)-mono-arene complexes; (d)
determining protein-RNA binding for RNA sequence specificity of a T. brucei
protein known to regulate gene expression and (e) studying small molecule-
nanoparticle binding to understand the thermal properties of sodium acetate
trihydrates for their use in non-electric incubating blankets.