* 1531174
* Collaborative Research: Building Supports for Diversity through Engineering Teams
* ENG,EEC
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2020
* Adam Kirn, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Christine Grant
* 08/31/2020
* USD 238,954.00

Developing students who can work effectively in cross-cultural teams is an
important part of engineering education. In our increasingly global economy,
students must be adequately prepared to meet the demands of the engineering
workforce. However, many students do not have international exposure prior to
college or the experience of interacting with others from a variety of
backgrounds. As such, understanding how to improve team interactions within
culturally diverse groups can provide novel opportunities for students to more
deeply appreciate differences in engineering teams while simultaneously
deepening their understanding of engineering concepts. This project is focused
on how students participate in diverse engineering teams in first-year courses
and how their participation impacts students' multicultural effectiveness and
diversity sensitivity. Multicultural effectiveness and diversity sensitivity
have been shown to help achieve a common group identity that is essential to
effective teams. This project is motivated by two broader goals in the
engineering education community and promoted by ABET which are complementary: 1)
to graduate students with an ability to function on multidisciplinary teams and
2) to give students the broad education necessary to understand the impact of
engineering solutions globally. Understanding the experiences of students
engaging in engineering design and the resulting shifts in attitudes will help
identify practical ways to increase students' understanding and appreciation of
people from diverse backgrounds. These interventions may change the culture of
engineering at these institutions to make it more inclusive of underrepresented
students. This project is supported by the Research in Engineering Education
program and the EHR Core Research (ECR) program, specifically the ECR Research
in Disabilities Education area of special interest. ECR emphasizes fundamental
STEM education research that generates foundational knowledge in the field. This
research project contributes to foundational knowledge about broadening
participation in STEM.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This sequential explanatory mixed
methods study will address the gap in the current literature to understand how
students interact in diverse teams. Student demographic data will include race,
ethnicity, gender, disability and other information to be used as variables in
the data analyses and interpretations of the findings. The first phase of
research will quantitatively measure effects of diverse team formation on
diversity sensitivity and multicultural effectiveness. A baseline survey of
student attitudes will be collected at the beginning of their first-year
engineering class before students are grouped into teams. Students will be
grouped into diverse teams via the Comprehensive Assessment for Team Member
Effectiveness (CATME) and surveyed mid- and end-semester to track changes in
diversity sensitivity and multicultural effectiveness based on team composition
using time series structural equation modeling. Additionally, social network
analysis will be used to understand how students work within and outside of
their assigned teams on engineering tasks to identify boundary crossing
individuals within engineering. Finally, multiple streams of data will be
collected on team interactions during engineering tasks (audio recording, video
recording, observation, and work products). The second phase of research will
conduct interpretative phenomenological interviews with students to understand
students' experiences working in diverse teams. Students participating in
interviews will also be asked to complete Implicit Association Tests to elicit
in-group preferences. The use of interpretative phenomenological interviews
allows for the creation of understanding through the analysis of students' lived
experiences while still allowing the researcher to leverage understanding from
existing literature. This qualitative methodology allows us to successfully
transfer interpretive results beyond the bounds of this work to advance the
conversations around diverse teaming in engineering. By combining the
methodologies outlined in this work we can identify members of the community who
are made "out-group" members by their peers and empirically understand the
practices of individuals that drive the creation of out-groups and these
students' experiences in engineering teaming environments. The findings of this
work can have significant impact in how students are grouped and taught within
engineering teams, which can improve students' experiences to make engineering
more inclusive and teaming skills more effective.