* 1531339
* MRI: Development of a High-Power Adaptive Phased Fiber-Array Laser System
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2019
* Thomas Weyrauch, University of Dayton
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 07/31/2019
* USD 699,998.00

The high-power laser systems currently used in various industries (automotive,
aerospace, defense, nuclear and fusion energy, gas/oil, etc.) suffer from a lack
of agile/intelligent control of high-power laser beam characteristics. They use
the brute force of kW-class laser power to melt or evaporate materials without
real-time process monitoring and intelligent feedback control. With the
increasing demand for processing and joining a variety of novel material types
and emerging development of additive manufacturing techniques, the high-power
laser energy source technology must meet stricter fit-form-function requirements
for excellent beam quality and precise spatial and temporal control of energy
flux. This project is focused on development of a high-energy continuous wave
(CW) Adaptive Phased Fiber-Array (APFA) laser system that is designed to fulfill
these requirements, leading to yet unexplored opportunities for significant
advances in laser material processing. Multi-kW power laser systems with
excellent beam quality and adaptive beam control capabilities are also required
in diverse, directed energy applications, such as long-distance battery
recharging and optical power transfer, remote demolition of infrastructure
elements in a contaminated area, future photon-assisted propulsion of
spacecraft, and distant interrogation of
asteroids.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Emerging from recent technology breakthroughs in
high-power fiber-lasers and adaptive beam control, the APFA laser instrument
includes: (a) a multi-kW CW laser energy source comprised of a seven-channel
high-power fiber amplifier system, (b) a high-power adaptive fiber-array laser
head with an advanced water-cooling system, (c) integrated sensors for adaptive
mitigation of mechanical jitter and optical aberrations resulting from laser
beam interaction with the material, and (d) a hybrid (feedback/programmable)
control system for real-time manipulation of the high-power energy flux spatial
and temporal characteristics. The proposed instrumentation combines in a novel
single laser energy source the most highly desired characteristics and
capabilities in laser material processing and directed energy applications
including: excellent (M^2&lt;1.15) beam quality at 10 kW power level, precise
(submicron accuracy) electronic beam pointing and stabilization, wide-range
focal spot steering and adaptive refocusing, adaptive compensation for
mechanical jitter and heat-induced aberrations, programmable control of laser
beam polarization, spatial and temporal coherence, and intelligent control of
energy flux spatial distribution. The APFA laser energy source will
substantially broaden research and provide an excellent opportunity for
education and training in the burgeoning areas of fiber-laser technology, laser
material processing and manufacturing, and advanced control, enhancing careers
in these multiple scientific fields. The availability of the new laser system to
both industrial researchers and University programs also helps the local area
economy in its transitioning to high-tech industry.