* 1531921
* MRI: Acquisition of Combined Spinning Disc Confocal/Atomic Force Microscopy System
* BIO,DBI
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2018
* Susan James, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 07/31/2018
* USD 638,997.00

An award is made to Colorado State University (CSU) to acquire a microscopy
system that combines multiple techniques in a single platform. This instrument
will be housed in a facility that enables secure 24-hour access for users and
will be maintained by a staff scientist. The instrument will be included in a
new module for an undergraduate lab course that serves about 100 students
annually. Students in a graduate course on microscopy will also be introduced to
the instrument. The instrument will be made available to a broad user base both
inside and outside of CSU, by including it in a Microscopy Imaging Network
(MIN). This network has a pilot grant program for new instrument users. These
pilot grants support user training and preliminary data acquisition on this and
other microscopy instruments at CSU.

The instrument will combine scanning probe and optical techniques. The scanning
probe techniques enable imaging of the topographical features and mechanical
properties of samples at very high resolution. The optical techniques include
spinning disc confocal microscopy, fluorescence recovery after photobleaching
(FRAP), and photoactivation (PA). The instrument will be configured to perform
imaging of wet samples including live cells. Combining these fundamentally
different yet complementary techniques on a single platform enables
interrogation of multiple sample properties simultaneously and in the exact same
field of view. Therefore specific measurements made with one technique (e.g.
mechanical properties) can be correlated with features (e.g. location of
chemical functional groups or biological structures) measured by another
technique. Changes in these correlations and spatial organization can be
monitored over time to observe biological phenomena. The initial user group
consists of 19 investigators in ten academic departments from three universities
(CSU, University of Colorado at Denver, and University of Denver). These
investigators will use the instrument for interdisciplinary and collaborative
research projects including biochemical and biophysical studies and for the
development of new materials for biomedical and tissue engineering applications.