* 1531887
* MRI: Acquisition of an Environmental Scanning Electron Microscope
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2016
* Gregory Dillon, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Leonard Spinu
* 08/31/2016
* USD 662,886.00

Acquisition of an Environmental Scanning Electron Microscope (ESEM) by Penn
State Erie, represents a significant investment in undergraduate focused basic
and applied research; it will enable industry-university collaborations in
fundamental science that quickly pave the way for real economic impact as the
region benefits from the application of advanced material science, biological,
health-related and chemical research. This ESEM will be a resource to the
research communities throughout the PA/OH/NY tristate area with influences
extending nationally and internationally via collaborative research efforts,
providing employment for world-class scientists and technologists in the region.
Existing robust industrial research engagement will further expand, and advanced
microscopy will no longer be outsourced from the region, eliminating a
significant impediment to economic development initiatives. An open-lab access
is expected to make the instrument available to other universities and numerous
high schools in the region. The ESEM user community will not be confined to the
research elite. This instrument will be an important new resource in an
established, far reaching K-12 STEM program to impact all levels of education in
the region. Because of the exceedingly practical and user-friendly interface of
the ESEM, programs will engage a broad user base of diverse socio-economic
backgrounds that will become exposed to regional scientific developments and
hence offered the opportunity to explore options in regional STEM-driven
industry.

The primary objective of this proposal is to facilitate increased basic and
applied research activity across the Schools of Engineering and Science at Penn
State Erie, to be a resource for other academic and industrial entities in the
region. Projects focused on polymers, plastic formulations, metals processing
technologies, fuel cell development, biological systems, environmental science,
paleoecology and many others will greatly benefit by the project. This
acquisition provides expanded scientific capability at a College where the
majority of the internal and funded research activity is executed by
undergraduate students. This relatively new model, based on an Open Laboratory
environment, provides direct exposure to real industry research and development
problems for undergraduates at various stages of their academic training. In
collaboration with faculty and industry sponsors, students will be given the
opportunity to explore fundamental material phenomena and develop viable
practical solutions based on their investigations. The instrument identified for
acquisition has unique capability to provide functionality across a wide range
of disciplines and places state of the art material characterization technology
at the direct disposal of undergraduate students. The acquisition will have
several very important broader impacts. As the range of offered courses at the
college continues to expand, new emphasis is placed on exploring fundamental
concepts, particularly in engineering and science. For instance, a new major is
planned in polymer engineering and science that will be complementary to the
long established plastics engineering technology option. The availability of an
ESEM will attract both faculty and students who are interested in the interfaces
between structure, property, and processing of materials. The ESEM will also
become an important regional resource since no such capability is publicly
available within a convenient distance of the greater Erie metropolitan area.
Many industrial relationships that would benefit from the proposed acquisition
while providing valuable research exposure to the undergraduate students.