* 1531456
* MRI: Acquisition of a shared mobile EEG for research and undergraduate training at Occidental College
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Carmel Levitan, Occidental College
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2019
* USD 126,567.00

Scientists are increasingly using neural recording techniques to study how and
when perceptual, cognitive, and emotional processes unfold in the brain over
time. Electroencephalography (EEG) is a non-invasive technique for measuring
electrical activity of the brain, with extraordinary temporal precision. With
the support from the Major Research Instrumentation Program, the investigators
will purchase a state-of-the-art high-density, mobile EEG system for shared use
by the faculty and students at Occidental College. The mobility of the EEG
system provides an exciting opportunity to investigate perception and cognition
both within a laboratory and in naturalistic settings outside of the laboratory.
The acquisition of this system will also allow the investigators to foster
unique research opportunities for a diverse group of students at the
undergraduate level. Faculty and students will be involved in a dynamic,
interdisciplinary research program, with investigations of topics such as
multisensory perception, time perception, art perception, attention, emotional
processing, language processing, and music cognition. The system will also serve
as a key instrument for establishing undergraduate training in the cognitive
neurosciences at Occidental College and will be integrated into coursework.
Participating students will develop a broad range of skills relevant for both
graduate study and participation in the STEM workforce, including strong data
analytic and computational skills. As the student population at Occidental
College is very diverse, the investigators aim to broaden participation of
underrepresented groups in the sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators
involved will launch several research programs in a broad range of areas within
the cognitive sciences, with the goal of expanding opportunities for student
research and for multi-disciplinary collaboration across the College. Research
project 1 aims to understand how sound can be used to synchronize neural
activity across a pair of individuals and whether and how neural synchronization
causally influences behavioral coordination. Research project 2 will investigate
art perception to understand a) how internal states such as current mood may
systematically drive attention toward specific features of an artwork, b) what
type of neural response is associated with profound aesthetic experiences from
viewing art compared to viewing non-art, and c) the extent to which the neural
response associated with aesthetic experience is similar across art modality
(e.g. visual art, music, literature). Research project 3 will explore mechanisms
underlying temporal perception and how information is transferred across sensory
modalities, to address fundamental questions about the multisensory organization
of the brain, and will help provide a better understanding of how the brain
represents time. Research project 4 will compare the time course of language
processing and syllabic stress encoding in English and Spanish speakers to
examine processing differences between heritage speakers and monolingual
speakers of Spanish. Research project 5 aims to understand the role of
consciousness in emotional processing by simultaneously measuring skin
conductance response, cortical event-related potentials, and conscious
expectancy of an unconditioned stimulus in a backward masking paradigm.