* 1531783
* MRI: Acquisition of a femtosecond laser system to enable multiphoton polymerization, photoporation, and laser ablation in liquids research
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2017
* George Kumi, Rutgers University Camden
* Standard Grant
* Joanne Culbertson
* 07/31/2017
* USD 523,827.00

Laser systems capable of generating ultra-short pulses have become a powerful
tool for both fundamental research and advanced manufacturing processes. This
MRI award supports the acquisition of a state-of-the-art femtosecond laser
system (FLS) capable of emitting coherent light over a broad spectral range. The
FLS enables potentially transformative multidisciplinary research leading to new
green energy technologies and enhanced medical imaging with more functional
nanoparticles, more effective gene therapy through knowledge of how to introduce
genetic material into cells, and enhanced performance of microelectronic devices
through development of new processes for fabricating ultra-small 3D devices. The
instrumentation will dramatically expand the scope and significance of laser
processing work in southern New Jersey. Students from several STEM majors will
be involved in the research and the instrumentation facilitates efforts at
Rutgers University-Camden to reach out to traditionally under-represented groups
within the STEM fields.

These projects include: (1) a fundamental study of the laser-material
interactions associated with a laser-based method for the synthesis of
nanoparticles. The benefits of this approach, dubbed laser ablation in liquids
(LAL), are its foundations in green technology and capability of producing a
wide variety of nanoparticles. This work will combine experimental and
computational efforts to better understand the mechanisms leading to particle
size and composition, both of which are critical parameters in nanoparticle
functionality. (2) An investigation of the interactions between photoexcited
particles and cell membranes found in nanoparticle-meditated photoporation. Gene
therapy is rapidly becoming one of the most powerful techniques that medical
practitioners have to fight disease. An important process in this therapy is
transfection, i.e. introduction of genetic material into the cells. This project
will ascertain how photoexcited nanoparticles generate transient pores within
the cell membrane permitting the targeted introduction of genetic material. (3)
Development of a comprehensive understanding of the factors leading to
successful formation of 3D microstructures using multiphoton absorption
polymerization (MAP). As an example, the researchers will investigate the
fabrication of micro-fluidic heat exchanges that have sub-wavelength features.
In this regard, photosensitive resins will be formulated that polymerize under
exposure to intense light with wavelengths otherwise transparent to material;
hence, allowing ultra-small 3D structures to be manufactured.