* 1531270
* MRI:  Development of Heterogeneous Cluster for Cyber-Physical System Hybrid Analytics
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2017
* Jingyi Chen, University of Tulsa
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 08/31/2017
* USD 180,674.00

&lt;br/&gt;The proposed instrument provides a foundation for new research
activities enhancing existing research efforts, and fuels new collaboration
within and the beyond institution. It comprise a uniquely capable high
performance computing resource in the state and in the region. The heterogeneous
cluster will be leveraged to yield superior modeling and understanding of
seismic events, improve neuro-image analysis capabilities, enhance cyber-
security tools, and inspire new vehicle crash-reconstruction methodologies. The
educational activities augment the offerings of the institution and provide a
template for development of a curriculum to prepare individuals for careers in
the field of heterogeneous computing. Further, access to the cluster and the
analytic tools developed for it fortify theoretic and applied courses, allowing
students to approach and study real-world problems of a larger
scale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project builds a novel computational resource
in the form of a heterogeneous cluster (CPU/MIC co-processor /FPGA), as a
platform for research and innovation spanning several lines of inquiry across
multitude fields in science and engineering. Specifically, this experimental
hybrid cluster aims to service and advance research in emerging cyber-physical
systems that have diverse computational needs. This work addresses current
computing problems that continue to grow in size and scope, and quickly exhaust
the capabilities of traditional homogeneous architectures in terms of execution
time and cost. While various computing platforms exist, including the
traditional CPU, field programmable gate arrays (FPGAs), many integrated core
(MIC) co-processors, and graphic processing units (GPUs), these problems often
possess traits that would benefit from a distribution of work based on the
algorithmic needs and the capabilities of the underlying hardware. Thus, this
development combines traditional CPUs with FPGAs, MICs, and GPUs forming a
heterogeneous architecture capable of delivering the next advance in
computational performance. The instrument allows investigators to address larger
and more complex problems through computer simulation and analysis spanning the
areas of cyber-physical system security, seismic modeling, neuroinformatics,
crash reconstruction, and chemical reaction modeling. CPUs excel at complex
multi-threaded applications with significant numbers of control (branch)
instructions; MICs excel at problems with high spatial locality and that fit the
SIMD mold; and FPGAs provide a blank canvas that can be configured to best fit
the needs of a particular problem. Current hard problems require the strengths
of each of these types of devices and this instrument provides a platform to
solve such problems and to research how best to use the proposed heterogeneous
platform. These results will advance the theoretical understanding of these
processes. The heterogeneous cluster will expand understanding in the areas of
the design of future heterogeneous clusters and interconnect architecture, in
unified programming platforms and languages, and in workload division among
diverse computational elements. Finally, the heterogeneous cluster will support
advances in the science of Honeynets for security analysis, the implementation
of bump-in-the-wire cyber-security monitoring tools, and advanced security
vulnerability discovery. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;