* 1531934
* MRI: Acquisition of a Field Emission Scanning Electron Microscope for Research and Educational Training in Microscopic Characterization of Nanomaterials
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2018
* Mahesh Hosur, Tuskegee University
* Standard Grant
* Leonard Spinu
* 08/31/2018
* USD 507,374.00

This award to Tuskegee University supports the acquisition of a Field Emission
Scanning Electron Microscope which will strengthen the university's research
capabilities in the emerging field of nanotechnology. This state of art
equipment will support the research of not only Tuskegee's faculty and their
collaborators from other institutions but also the local industry. With the
capabilities of this instrument Tuskegee researchers will develop a deeper
understanding of synthesis of various nanoparticles, including those derived
from natural sources and their dispersion in host polymers and biological cells.
Graduate and undergraduate students will be involved in cutting-edge research in
nanomaterials science and engineering. This instrument along with other state-
of-the-art facilities which exist at Tuskegee University will boost the
university's efforts to recruit and train a large number of minority graduates,
undergraduate through Ph.D. These graduates will help bring much-needed
diversity to the nation's advanced technological workforce. The proposed
research and instrumentation will have significant impact in education and human
resources development through: (1) integration of nanotechnology research with
education in all graduate programs program in Science and Engineering at
Tuskegee University; (2)development of nanomaterials research at a Historically
Black University; and (3) develop microscopy teaching modules for K-12 students
and teachers. The minority students who graduate with an exposure to the
analytical techniques using this equipment will enhance the much needed
diversity in the technological workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
supported by this instrument include: a) Force Spinning Synthesis of Nanofiber
Mats for Tissue Engineering Applications, b) Alignment of metal, metal oxide
coated carbon nanotubes in Nylon-6 polymer single fibers and study
antimicrobial/antifungal applications, c) Study the effect of alkali treatment
of natural fibers for developing biodegradable composites, d) Synthesis of
silica from natural sources such as rice husk and sugar cane bagasse for polymer
fillers, e) Use of FE-SEM in Cancer research, and f) Study of the pharmaceutical
applications of nanoparticles: Improvement of oral absorption of calcium using
nanoparticles. The acquisition of the FE-SEM will also allow faculty and
students involved in materials research to develop a better understanding of the
material behavior at the nanometer level. The equipment will also be useful in
the development of new courses in nanomaterials and various outreach activities
sponsored by the Department of Materials Science and Engineering.