* 1531195
* MRI: Development of the Robotarium: A Shared, Remote Access, Multi-Robot Laboratory
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Steven McLaughlin, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Anil Pahwa
* 08/31/2019
* USD 1,050,000.00

In the near future, robot-assisted technologies have the potential to improve
individuals' qualify of life in almost every aspect of society. However, in
order to realize this future, access to instruments that enable discovery in the
area of robotics must be ensured. In this regard, this project develops the
Robotarium, a world-class, shared multi-robot research and education facility,
remotely and locally accessible to users across different educational
institutions and age groups. Through an online, open, public interface, users
will be able to schedule and run their experiments, while being provided with
both streaming video of the experiment as well as the scientific data produced
through the experiment. The expected outcome is a first-of-its-kind multi-robot
research platform that can be utilized by researchers, educators, and students,
without incurring the prohibitive costs associated with setting up and
maintaining a suitably-equipped research facility. Even more importantly,
however, the expected outcome goes beyond access. A research instrument like the
Robotarium has the potential to build stronger networks of collaborative
research, thus making the whole significantly larger than the sum of its parts.
As such, the end result has the potential to show how remote access research
instruments can be structured in other areas beyond
robotics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Robotarium is an open, remote access multi-
robot testbed that allows researchers and educators to run robotics experiments
without having to incur the prohibitive costs associated with setting up and
maintaining an actual research facility. In order to achieve this agenda,
research instrumentation efforts in this project are pursued along three
different dimensions that will come together to produce a first-of-its-kind
open, remote access multi-robot research facility. These three dimensions are:
(1) A remote access multi-robot laboratory where researchers, educators, and
students can test and run their own coordinated control strategies; (2) Low-
cost, high-performance mobile robots designed explicitly to support remote-
access multi-robot research; and (3) Instrument development that has operational
and cybersecurity primitives built-in, which is critical since remote users can
literally take control of physical assets. The Robotarium will not only provide
local and remote access to a multi-robotics facility, but it will also
facilitate research in a number of areas that will directly benefit from the
Robotarium research instrument, such as (i) swarm robotics, (ii) visualization
and augmented reality, (iii) cybersecurity, (iv) cyber-physical systems, and (v)
formal model-checking of real-time software.