* 1531811
* MRI Acquisition: High-Resolution and Ultra-High Speed X-Ray Diffractometer for Structure, Crystal Quality, and Preferred Orientation Determination
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2017
* Julia Chan, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Leonard Spinu
* 08/31/2017
* USD 263,041.00

This award supports the University of Texas at Dallas to acquire a state of the
art X-ray diffraction tool for determination and understanding of the crystal
structure of new materials in the fields of low power electronics, energy
storage, superconductors, organic electronics, nanotechnology, flexible
electronics, photovoltaics, optoelectronics, and environmental catalysts.
Crystal structure plays a major role in each of these important applications as
it determines the mechanical, toxicity, reactivity, and electronic properties of
the new materials. The remarkable advances over the past half century in the
fields of computing, engineering, medicine, and energy would not have taken
place had it not been for the creation of "materials by design" that is only
possible when the structure of materials and their correlation to material
properties are well known. UT-Dallas has state of the art facilities for
materials synthesis by a wide range of technologically relevant processes in
addition to advanced characterization tools. Therefore, this new instrument,
which allows a precise determination of the structure of materials grown by the
PI, will allow them to study the effect of processing conditions on materials
structure and, in turn, determine the materials properties. The instrument will
also play a significant role in the education of graduate and undergraduate
students in a wide range of disciplines; it will be open to users from outside
of the university fostering new collaborations in the Dallas-Fort Worth
metropole and around the country. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The instrument is a
Rigaku SmartLab high-resolution, ultra-high speed X-ray diffractometer for the
structural analysis and crystal quality determination of bulk and thin-film
organic and inorganic materials for nanoelectronic and energy applications. The
new instrument will be housed in the Natural Science and Engineering Research
Laboratory (NSERL) and will complement existing materials synthesis and device
fabrication capabilities in dedicated labs and shared user facilities at UT-
Dallas. The new diffractometer will significantly enhance in research high
quality single crystal 2-dimensional semiconductors for high performance and low
power nanoelectronic applications, in intermetallic and oxide layered materials
that can exhibit a range of properties from unusual magnetism to
superconductivity and more. In these fields and others the quantification of
thin-film crystal quality and the orientation of grains in polycrystalline
samples in reduced dimensions are crucial to understanding the process-
structure-property relationships. The ability to determine crystal quality and
carry out high-speed pole figures for texture analysis opens new research
avenues for a wide number of investigators and students. The acquisition of a
high-resolution and ultra-high speed X-ray diffractometer will greatly enhance
the research of current and potential materials and device researchers within
UT-Dallas and across the Dallas-Fort Worth Metroplex as well as dramatically
transform important research and educational efforts. The instrument will be
used to improve student education and training through hands-on access to new
techniques and complement classroom learning.