* 1531722
* MRI:  Acquisition of In Situ TEM Probing Capability to Elucidate the Stability of Nanostructured Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2016
* Mark Weaver, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Leonard Spinu
* 08/31/2016
* USD 225,065.00

Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) is a means to characterize materials from
which connections between structure and properties are understood. Such links
allow scientists the understanding needed to engineer new materials with
superior performances. In this award, a microscopy platform for real-time
mechanical measurements in the TEM will be enabled. This platform will enable
researchers to watch how materials, such as glasses, metals, and ceramics bend
and break. From these observations, researchers gain new insights and
understanding in how materials can be engineering to withstand greater
mechanical load before failure. The instrument platform will be integrated into
the University of Alabama's (UA) TEM, which is located in a general user
facility. Over the past decade, UA's TEM has enabled over 250 users (both UA and
off-site) in their research. This has provided high-tech training needed for the
next-generation national science workforce. The new instrumentation will
continue to ensure the continuation of educational and workforce development
through course work and related workshops and conferences that will be held on
the campus of UA.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award enables new capabilities to
the University of Alabama's (UA) transmission electron microscopy (TEM) research
activities. Specifically, the platform will allow researchers to measure and
quantify in situ, real time deformation mechanisms to various loading behavior
at the nanometric length scale. This platform will substantially impact the
active and emerging research programs in deformation including those in glassy-
crystalline composites, nanocrystalline metallic grains, and those in carbide
and nitride ceramics. This toolset will be the linchpin technology that bridges
synthesis-properties-simulations by characterization of how nanostructure
regulates the hierarchy of deformation mechanisms. The in situ probe will be
coupled to an existing precession electron diffraction imaging technique where
the grain character under the in situ loading will be directly correlated.
Without this dynamical probing capability, material responses are inferred
leaving critical gaps in connecting experimental feedback to computational
materials science predictions and understanding. In the past decade, UA's TEM
has been a centerpiece microscope in its user facility (www.caf.ua.edu), being
the most used tool in the center that has enabled over 250 users on and off the
campus in their research activities. These users have graduated and are engaged
in careers that build our next-generation national workforce.