* 1531763
* MRI: Acquisition of an All Digital Multiparameter Gamma Spectroscopy System for Research and Research Training in Nuclear Physics
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2016
* Paul Voytas, Wittenberg University
* Standard Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 07/31/2016
* USD 75,000.00

The weak interaction, one of the four fundamental forces of nature, is
responsible for the type of radioactive decay called beta decay. Precise
measurements of beta decay can probe the limits of our understanding of the weak
interaction, complementing particle collider experiments in the search for new
physics while being much less costly. The recent development of facilities, such
as at the National Superconducting Cyclotron Laboratory, that can produce a
variety of beams of radioactive isotopes has created new opportunities for
improved beta decay measurements. To fully exploit the potential of these new
isotopes requires a good understanding of the response of various types of
particle detectors. Understanding the response of particle detectors is also
important for many applications in homeland security, nuclear safeguards, and
medicine. The instrument to be acquired through this grant will enable the
measurement of the response of a variety of particle detectors to a new level of
precision over a wide energy range.

Precise measurements of the shapes of spectra in nuclear beta decay are
sensitive to physics beyond the Standard Model of particle interactions. The
recent development of powerful radioactive beam facilities has created a new
opportunity for improved measurements of nuclear beta spectrum shapes through
implantation of the nuclei in detectors that fully contain the emitted
particles. In the ideal case, this provides measurements free of many of the
systematic e&#64256;ects more conventional beta spectroscopy is subject to.
Fully exploiting the potential of the new detector method, however, requires
precise knowledge of implantation detector response. This detector response
characterization is the primary research to be enabled by the proposed
acquisition of an all-digital multi-parameter gamma spectroscopy system. The
basis of the characterizations is the Wide Angle Compton Coincidence technique.
This technique uses Compton scattering with standard gamma sources of modest
strength to characterize the energy dependent electron response of essentially
any detector material relative to, for example, a High Purity Germanium
detector. The system acquired under this proposal will enable the measurement of
the nonlinearity of a wide variety of detectors to a new level of precision and
over a wider energy range than presently exists.