* 1531596
* MRI: Instrument development for deterministic implants of single ions over a nanometer scale
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2015,12/31/2017
* MengBing Huang, SUNY Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Leonard Spinu
* 12/31/2017
* USD 380,073.00

This Major Research Instrumentation award supports instrument development at
State University of New York Polytechnic Institute (SUNY Polytechnic Institute).
The successful completion of the project will help advance the fundamental
research on quantum information engineering and quantum computers, by directly
providing 9 research groups (with about 7 postdoctoral fellows and 23 graduate
students) from 5 universities in the northeast region, with the needed research
capability for nanodevice fabrication. Such deterministic nano-implant
capability is not available in an industrial setting, and thus the instrument
can also benefit the semiconductor industry in its efforts toward new
generations of semiconductor devices. In addition, the project will provide
grounds for training a postdoctoral researcher involved in the instrument
development toward the future nanotechnology instrumentalist. The project will
also offer live research examples and lab demos in teaching of 3 undergraduate
nano-engineering courses, as well as hands-on research experience for 4
undergraduate students from scientifically underrepresented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As the transistor feature size is approaching the
physical limit, novel computing paradigms using single atomic-like defects or
single dopant atoms in solids, are being considered for the future information
technology. The creation of novel quantum device structures like nano-arrays of
a single nitrogen-vacancy defect center in diamond or single dopant atom in
silicon, requires an accurate control of the number of defects/dopant atoms at
each desired nanometer scale location. This is impossible with currently
existing ion implantation tools that are used for defect generation and atomic
doping in solids. The novelties of the instrument design include: (1) the use of
a nanoscale polymer scintillator for tagging the position of single ion implants
(2) the coincidence detection of scintillation photons and secondary electrons
to ensure the accuracy/reliability for single ion implants, and (3) the
integration of the instrument with an existing accelerator to offer a large
range of implantation energies, ion species and excellent isotope separation
capabilities. The acquired knowledge and experience would also be very helpful
for developing other ion beam based instruments/techniques for probing and
processing of nanoscale materials, and the findings and results will be
disseminated to the research community through conferences, journal publications
and the Internet.