* 1531534
* MRI: Acquisition of Atomic Absorption Spectrometer for EPIC Learning
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2018
* Haifa El-sadi, Wentworth Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Harsha Chelliah
* 08/31/2018
* USD 200,845.00

This award, funded by the Major Research Instrumentation Program (MRI), promotes
the progress of scientific research and supports undergraduate education at
Wentworth Institute of Technology (Wentworth). The award enables
interdisciplinary teams at Wentworth to conduct externally-collaborative,
project-based, interdisciplinary trace metal analysis research projects and to
develop new, scientific curriculum for undergraduate students. The projects are
interdisciplinary by design and promote a comprehensive approach to trace metals
research. The research projects will enable undergraduates to study important
issues such as the effect of trace metals on public health, safety, prosperity
and welfare. Examples of topics to be studied include the identification of
metals in blood, the transport of metals in soil and groundwater, the
stabilization of metals in waste, and metals in alternative fuels. The projects
also establish undergraduate science research as a significant and sustainable
element in the new campus-wide "Externally-collaborative, Project-based,
Interdisciplinary Curriculum for Learning" (EPIC Learning) currently being
implemented at Wentworth. This award will also enable Wentworth faculty members
to develop an interdisciplinary research model that can be used to promote
science research at other undergraduate
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through this award, Wentworth will acquire a
PerkinElmer PinAAcle 900T graphite furnace/flame atomic absorption spectrometer
(the PinAAcle 900T) equipped with a PerkinElmer FIAS 400 Injection Flow System
(FIAS 400) (collectively, the "Major Research Instrumentation") in order to
identify and measure trace metals. In addition to its use in undergraduate
research, the Major Research Instrumentation will also be used in faculty
development and in external collaborations with community and private-sector
organizations. The expected outcomes of the trace metal analysis projects are
consistent with Wentworth's institute-wide learning outcomes that are envisioned
under its EPIC Learning Initiative.