* 1531855
* MRI: Acquisition of an Illumina MiSeq for Education and Research
* BIO,DBI
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2018
* Todd Jackman, Villanova University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 07/31/2018
* USD 126,349.00

An award is made to Villanova University to acquire a next-generation sequencing
platform&lt;br/&gt;focused on the Illumina MiSeq instrument. This project will
support high-impact research&lt;br/&gt;programs that span the disciplines of
Biology and Biochemistry, and will provide graduate and&lt;br/&gt;undergraduate
students with hands-on genomics experience using leading-edge
technology.&lt;br/&gt;Villanova University is a primarily undergraduate
institution committed to recruiting and retaining&lt;br/&gt;students from
underrepresented groups and disadvantaged backgrounds, and students of
color&lt;br/&gt;accounted for more than 20% of full-time students in 2013. The
University also has an impressive&lt;br/&gt;retention record, with 6 year
graduation rates above 85% for all ethnic groups as of 2013.
Ready&lt;br/&gt;access to cutting-edge sequencing technology, and to the
interdisciplinary genomics and&lt;br/&gt;bioinformatics approaches it
facilitates, will support the Biology and Chemistry departments
in&lt;br/&gt;their efforts to attract students from underrepresented groups to
STEM careers. This equipment&lt;br/&gt;will allow the transformation of
undergraduate and Masters genomics education at Villanova, and&lt;br/&gt;will be
a centerpiece of a new course in genomics. Many Villanova students go on to
attend&lt;br/&gt;professional schools or Ph.D. programs, and exposure of
students to this technology will prepare&lt;br/&gt;them for the science and
medicine of the future. The PI and co-PIs have an extensive record
of&lt;br/&gt;mentoring students, including students on peer-reviewed
publications, and preparing students for&lt;br/&gt;acceptance to top graduate
programs, and the MiSeq platform will advance this student-
directed&lt;br/&gt;research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The MiSeq platform will
advance the research of laboratories with diverse interests that
include&lt;br/&gt;phylogenomics and phylogeography, evolution and speciation,
microbial ecology in response to&lt;br/&gt;changing environmental conditions,
and the study of bacterial pathogens. This technology will
be&lt;br/&gt;routinely used in the immediate future by at least 5 research
groups in 4 main research areas:&lt;br/&gt;1) Deep sequencing of the mRNA and
small RNA transcriptomes will address fundamental&lt;br/&gt;questions about how
genes are regulated to control responses to stress,
nutrient&lt;br/&gt;availability, and hormone signaling, and to direct cellular
growth and development. These&lt;br/&gt;methods will also support investigation
of how gene regulation and nutrient signaling are&lt;br/&gt;shaped by
evolutionary forces.&lt;br/&gt;2) ChIP-Seq and RNA-seq methods will be used to
understand changes in transcription and&lt;br/&gt;identify transcription factor
binding sites in fungal and bacterial species.&lt;br/&gt;3) Targeted sequencing
of genomic DNA will be used to resolve uncertainties and increase&lt;br/&gt;the
resolution of phylogenetic relationships in a variety of squamate (reptile)
taxa. The&lt;br/&gt;results of these experiments will have important impacts on
conservation efforts for these&lt;br/&gt;groups, and will advance our
understanding of the forces that drive evolution
and&lt;br/&gt;speciation.&lt;br/&gt;4) Sequencing of both RNA and DNA will be
used to investigate soil microbial populations,&lt;br/&gt;allowing researchers
to address how changes in microbial communities impact plant&lt;br/&gt;growth
and nutrient cycling in the face of climate change and nutrient pollution.