* 1531375
* The Engineering Education Maker Identity Project
* ENG,EEC
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2019
* Vedaraman Sriraman, Texas State University - San Marcos
* Standard Grant
* Edward Berger
* 08/31/2019
* USD 299,778.00

This research effort at Texas State University, a large Hispanic Serving
Institution in San Marcos, Texas, advances the field of engineering education by
exploring the creative and novel learning environment of Makerspaces in a
university setting while benefiting current Engineering/Engineering Technology
students as well as Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (STEM)
Education students (future teachers). The research team will study issues
relating to the effects of these novel learning environments on engineering
learning and how these spaces may best leverage the real world experiences of
students as pathways to engineering, including prior work on the ranch, farm,
construction, home or military. Reaching over 900 students, University partners
and faculty will carry out design and engineering activities that value students
and their prior making skills, life experiences, and cultural funds of
knowledge. The project will examine how design courses may be restructured to
foster a positive and inclusive environment and enhance the success of students
from underrepresented populations.

Makerspace experiences have the potential to be a valuable complement to
structured classroom learning, but little is known about how and in what ways
they are effective, and what characteristics of makerspaces optimize their
effectiveness. The primary experimental work for this research aims to: 1)
discover key concepts and principles that particularly enable a more diverse
group of students to leverage creativity and innovation toward success in
engineering careers; 2) discover specific learning models that involve both STEM
university students and pre-service teachers in order to develop teamwork, self
-efficacy, communication, and identity formation in the Maker environment; and
3) validate instruments to measure the impact of such programs on students self-
efficacy, communication, and identity formation. Perspectives gained will
facilitate the retention and persistence to graduation of participating
students. The insights gained from this research will enable institutions across
the nation to be able to restructure design-based education and engineering
courses so as to enhance student success by incorporating makerspace-based
design projects. The project employs a non-cost prohibitive and replicable
approach as well as a model for scaling operation and research to a broad level.