* 1531700
* MRI: Acquisition of a Novel Assistive Robot Arm for Collaborative Research in Assistive and Rehabilitation Robotics at a Predominantly Undergraduate Institution
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2018
* Cheng Liu, University of Wisconsin-Stout
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 09/30/2018
* USD 39,339.00

This project, acquiring a shared state-of-the-art JACO-2 robot arm for
collaborative research in assistive and rehabilitation robotics, aims to improve
the quality of life of individuals with disabilities and the elderly by
increasing their independence and community reintegration. It supports research
in three areas: &lt;br/&gt;- Assistive technology and vocational rehabilitation
systems; &lt;br/&gt;- Robotics and control systems; and &lt;br/&gt;- Health
monitoring systems. &lt;br/&gt;In these areas, the participating researchers
will use the equipment collaboratively on diverse research projects. In
addition, the award should facilitate development of assistive robotics research
and training across multiple departments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This novel
instrument enables access by the research community to an instrument that will
accelerate research in assistive robotics, vocational rehabilitation, health-
care and monitoring, and home care. The proposed projects introduce a simple
robot arm manipulation scheme for enabling the incorporation of robotic systems
into home environment, thus enhancing the independence and autonomy of
individuals with disabilities, and minimizing the necessity for a caregiver. The
research projects will also contribute to assisting the elderly and persons with
disability to manipulate and communicate with the robot in complex unstructured
environments, thereby enhancing safety and reliability of the robotic system,
especially for people with lower or upper limb limitations or both lower and
upper limb limitations to perform tasks in a more complicated workplace.