* 1531972
* MRI:  Acquisition of a Liquid Chromatograph-Mass Spectrometer to Support Undergraduate Research
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2018
* William Flurkey, Indiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 07/31/2018
* USD 236,926.00

With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) and Chemistry
Research Instrumentation and Facilities (CRIF) programs, Indiana State
University will acquire an ultra-high pressure liquid chromatograph interfaced
with a linear ion trap mass spectrometer capable of data-dependent tandem mass
spectrometery. The system will be used to separate and analyze the composition
of mixtures of substances obtained from various sources including samples
obtained from chemical reactions, energy-related research and batteries used for
energy storage. In this instrument the liquid samples are allowed to pass
through columns filled with substances that interact to various degrees with the
sample components and thus the components move at different speeds through the
columns. This process allows separation of the components. These species are
then analyzed using the mass spectrometer in which the components are ionized
and their masses are determined by measuring the mass to charge ratio (m/z) of
the ions. This is a widely used analytical tool to determine the composition of
a mixture or material. Students will be trained to use this modern
instrumentation while working in their research, preparing them for their later
careers. The instrument will enable new undergraduate laboratory and research
experiences. It will also be used in the Summer Undergraduate Research
Experiences (SURE) program which engages a large number of undergraduate
students across the sciences. Besides serving multiple departments at ISU, it
will support users from neighboring institutions including St. Mary-of-the-Woods
College.

The instrument will be used in research especially in areas such as (a)
isolating, synthesizing and structural elucidating neuroactive natural products;
(b) analyzing multimodal signaling systems in sceloporus lizards; (c)
correlating analysis of organics and volatile trace elements in carbonaceous
chondrites; (d) carrying out cleavage analysis of plant and fungal tyrosinases;
and (e) carrying out applications of gas-phase ion molecule chemistry.