* 1531360
* MRI: Acquisition of an Ultrahigh Performance Liquid Chromatography Instrument to Improve the Quality and Scope of Research at Valparaiso University and Collaborating Institutions
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2018
* Laura Rowe, Valparaiso University
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 07/31/2018
* USD 223,753.00

With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) and Chemistry
Research Instrumentation and Facilities (CRIF) programs, Valparaiso University
will acquire a a ultrahigh performance liquid chromatography system with four
detectors. The instrument is approriate for analyzing samples by separating the
components using chromatography techniques. This award has an environmental and
biochemical research focus. The environmental research is directed at water
analysis. One of the projects involves water quality studies of Lake Michigan
watershed surface waters. The research will involve collaborations with The
Northwest Indiana Cluster of GLISTEN (Great Lakes Innovative Stewardship through
Education Network). This is a network of local undergraduate institutions, K-12
schools, and environmental community partners that collaborate to integrate
curriculum, stewardship, and research to protect the health of the Great Lakes
watershed. GLISTEN includes Ivy Tech Community College and Cal State Long Beach,
with many students from underrepresented groups including African American
students at the former and Hispanic students at the
latter.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal is aimed at enhancing research,
especially in areas such as (a) assesing water quality of Lake Michigan
watershed surface waters; (b) studying oxidative remediation of organic
contaminants in waste waters and transformations of organic compounds in surface
water; and (c) assessing storm-water treatment technologies for pollution
reduction.