* 1531347
* MRI:  Functional Near Infrared Spectroscopy System for Advanced Neuroimaging
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2016
* Mark McCourt, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2016
* USD 198,332.00

Dr. Mark E. McCourt, of North Dakota State University, along with departmental
colleagues, will undertake research to study the neural mechanisms of human
sensation, perception, cognition, emotion, and action using the newly acquired
state-of-the-art Functional Near Infrared Spectroscopy (fNIRS) system. fNIRS is
a non-invasive neuroimaging technique for investigating brain function through
the measurement and analysis of infrared light that has been transmitted through
the scalp, skull and cortical tissue. McCourt and colleagues will use fNIRS to
measure brain activity in neurologically normal people of all ages, as well as
in special populations such as those with schizophrenia, depression, autism, or
other psychiatric or neurological conditions. The project integrates basic
research goals with postgraduate, graduate, undergraduate, and public education.
Scientific publications based on the use of fNIRS technology have increased
exponentially over the past decade, and fNIRS neuroimaging is rapidly becoming
an essential scientific tool for understanding brain-behavior relationships.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The fNIRS system will dramatically augment the research
capability and activities of Dr. McCourt as well as six additional junior and
senior researchers. Researchers will use the fNIRS system to compare audiovisual
multisensory integration (MI) within the dorsal (action) and ventral
(perception) processing streams; measure how the neural representation of real-
world objects (e.g. faces) changes over the course of development in children
ages 6 months-5 years; discover the cortical mechanisms responsible for encoding
the retinal intensity distribution to represent brightness (the apparent
intensity of a region of space) versus lightness (the apparent reflectance of a
surface); examine the neural basis for learning homophones (words with different
meanings that are perceptually equivalent) in preschool-age children; study the
neural mechanisms of selective attention and visual working memory in
neurologically normal participants as well as in those with a diagnosis of
schizophrenia; use the fNIRS system to disclose the origin of the smooth pursuit
eye movement signal which is essential for obtaining unambiguous depth
information from motion parallax; and study the neural mechanisms that make
visual perception of objects near the hands quantitatively different than the
perception of the same objects at other locations. The availability of fNIRS
technology will greatly enhance training opportunities and research
competitiveness for faculty and students alike.