* 1531980
* MRI: Acquisition of an Electron-beam Lithography System for Nanofabrication and Nanoscience Research and Education
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2017
* Jay Switzer, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Leonard Spinu
* 08/31/2017
* USD 840,000.00

Electron beam lithography is a high-vacuum technique that writes nanoscale
patterns on a surface using an electron beam. At Missouri S&amp;T, electron beam
lithography will be used for the nanomanufacturing of materials, and for the
characterization of nanostructured materials produced by other methods. Possible
transformational results that will be enabled by the instrumentation include the
demonstration of the size limit of an emerging solid-state memory known as
resistance random access memory, measuring the efficiency of metal-oxide-metal
diodes for converting infrared light into electrical energy, and providing the
fundamental science necessary to build a topological quantum computer. The
requested instrument will serve as a regional resource to academia and industry.
It will be used directly by graduate students and postdoctoral associates under
the guidance of a Ph.D. instrument specialist. The instrument will also be
invaluable for educational outreach. The Materials Science and Engineering
Department annually hosts the ASM/Missouri S&amp;T Materials Camp for 50+ high
school juniors and seniors. During this week-long camp, the students will be
shown demonstrations of the electron beam lithography facility, and they will
use the equipment on select individual projects. As part of their studies, these
groups make a presentation to their fellow
campers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Electron beam lithography will be used for the
nanomanufacturing of materials, and for the characterization of nanostructured
materials produced by other methods. The requested instrument offers sub-5 nm
linewidth using electron beam lithography resists, and sub-7 nm linewidth using
electron-beam induced deposition. It features a high-precision X-Y-Z stage with
laser interferometer for X-Y positioning. A gas injection system allows for
direct-write, electron-beam induced deposition. The instrument will be fitted
with a single gas injection system for the deposition of either tungsten or
platinum lines. In addition to nanomanufacturing capabilities, the instrument
will be fitted with four nanoprobes that can be used for transport measurements
on nanostructured materials such as nanowires. This capability will obviate the
need for a clean room. Specific topics of research that will be enabled with the
instrumentation include, i) nano-manufacture features for studying the physics
and applications of nanophotonics and optical metamaterials, ii) generate nano-
cavities for fundamental studies of laser crystallization phenomena, iii)
produce bio-MEMS devices to study the interaction between plant roots and root
zones, iv) grow nanowire and nanotube arrays through confined electrodeposition
on lithographically patterned nanoelectrodes, v) produce nano-crossbar arrays of
metal oxide materials to determine the scalability of an emerging solid-state
memory known as resistance random access memory, vi) nanomanufacture metal-
oxide-metal diodes for energy harvesting, vii) fabricate arrays of meta-atoms on
superconducting thin films to examine the tunable magnetic response of the
medium, and viii) perform fundamental measurements on topological insulators and
superconductors. Possible transformational results from the proposed research
include the demonstration of the size limit of resistance random access memory,
measuring the efficiency of metal-oxide-metal diodes for converting infrared
light into electrical energy, and providing the fundamental science necessary to
build a topological quantum computer.