* 1531281
* NeTS:  Medium:  Collaborative Research:  Optimizing Network Support for Cloud Services: From Short-Term Measurements to Long-Term Planning
* CSE,CNS
* 01/16/2015,04/30/2017
* Nicholas Feamster, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 04/30/2017
* USD 400,278.00

Online Service Providers (OSPs) host a wide range of application services,
including email, Web search, video streaming, and multiplayer games, on servers
in data centers all over the world. Each service has specific performance
requirements. For example, Web search and multiplayer games need low latency,
whereas video streaming and bulk file transfers need high throughput. Clients
access these services from a wide variety of geographic locations over access
networks with wildly different performance. Offering good performance to these
diverse clients at a reasonable cost is the life blood of any
OSP.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;OSPs affect client performance by controlling content
routing (selecting which data center should serve a client request) and network
routing (selecting interdomain paths to clients, or paths within the OSP's own
backbone), and by longer-term planning of future data centers and relationships
with upstream ISPs. Unfortunately, OSPs have relatively poor visibility into
end-to-end performance and do not adapt both content and network routing to
maximize performance; in addition, OSP operators lack good models for deciding
where to place the next server or data center, or which ISPs to select as
neighbors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To address the wide-area networking needs of
online services, this project is designing, implementing, deploying, and
evaluating practical techniques that allow OSPs to perform content and network
routing (and make longer-term placement decisions), based on timely and accurate
information about end-to-end performance and transit costs. The project is
developing techniques to help OSP operators measure, control, and plan the wide-
area connectivity between distributed services and their clients, and between
the servers themselves. The project tasks include: (1) designing performance-
measurement techniques and conduct measurement-driven studies of OSP traffic
management; (2) designing, modeling, and prototyping protocols for joint
optimization of content and network routing, and traffic management within an
OSP backbone; and (3) driving long-term planning of server placement and ISP
peer selection based on models of transit costs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To
evaluate our algorithms together, and "in the wild", the project will use
experimental platforms for network monitoring (BISmark, M-Lab, and, where
available, measurement servers in ISP backbone networks), content and network
routing (DONAR and Transit Portal), cloud computing (VICCI), and programmable
networking (OpenFlow). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact:&lt;br/&gt;The PIs
are working with industry to evaluate and deploy the solutions on operational
networks. They will also continue their close collaboration on graduate
networking curriculum development to include the research topics and
experimental platforms in this project. As part of the project outreach, the PIs
are organizing "summer camps" (drawing on their earlier experiences with summer
camps for the VINI and BISmark projects) to bring under-represented students to
their institutions for summer internships. The PIs will also work with under-
represented regions and institutions to deploy their infrastructure and engage
faculty and students in research projects using the platforms.