* 1531814
* MRI: Acquisition of a High Performance Computing System for Science and Engineering Research and Education at the University of Houston
* CSE,OAC
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2019
* Eric Bittner, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Alejandro Suarez
* 07/31/2019
* USD 950,000.00

This Major Research Instrument (MRI) project provides for the acquisition of a
high-performance computing (HPC) instrument to support research from the
University of Houston (UH) system as well as other minority-serving institutions
in the Houston region. It enables cross-disciplinary research efforts in:
multiscale biomolecular simulations; atomistic molecular dynamics simulations;
computational chemistry for alternative energy; simulations of gas-phase,
condensed-phase and nanostructured materials; and large-program restructuring
for multicore and graphics processing unit (GPU) based systems. This facility
also develops simulations of early universe cosmology; simulations of stochastic
networks; quantum chromodynamics lattice simulations for particle physics; space
radiation analysis and simulations; seismic characterization of wave functions;
evolutionary simulations; computational analysis of genomic data; and cloud
computing and image processing. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The instrument
significantly increases resources available to researchers in science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) disciplines at the participating
organizations. On-campus access to a heterogeneous computing platform fosters
collaboration between computational scientists and programming experts to
advance the use of graphics processing units (GPUs) for scientific computing.
Training materials and strategies are developed to support code development and
fully exploit the performance benefits. A new generation of open-source,
directive-based GPU-enabled application codes are created that demonstrate
scalability and portability. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project greatly enriches
the university research infrastructure and increases the use of new HPC
techniques and systems at the University of Houston, a Hispanic Serving
Institution, and collaborating institutions. UH partners with two Historically
Black Colleges (HBCUs) to broaden the participation of students from
underrepresented groups in STEM disciplines. The impact is particularly
pronounced for undergraduate research. Students and researchers are exposed to a
vibrant and multi-disciplinary research environment and receive valuable,
advanced training in HPC - skills that are readily transferrable between
scientific domains. Aspects of algorithms, computer codes, and data sets
developed under this award are made publicly available.