* 1531417
* MRI: Acquisition of Mass Spectrometry Technology for Research and Training
* BIO,DBI
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2018
* Craig Vierra, University of the Pacific
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 07/31/2018
* USD 579,135.00

An award is made to the University of the Pacific to do proteomics research
through the acquisition of mass spectrometry technology. The research integrates
comprehensive mentoring programs, workshops, and provides training for students
pursuing careers in science and engineering, as well as health-related
professions. The instrumentation will provide investigators with the opportunity
to train students across a broad range of educational tiers, including high
school, undergraduate and graduate student levels. By implementing curricular
additions, hands-on proteomic activities in genetics and molecular biological
technique courses will provide students with powerful opportunities to learn how
to combine genomic and proteomic approaches to solve scientific questions.
Additionally, outreach activities that target local high schools, will enable
students to collect cobwebs from the environment with glass rods, wash the
fibers with water, and learn how to use mass spectrometry to identify
biomolecules in real-life materials. Investigators will also promote the
engagement of underrepresented groups by encouraging economically disadvantaged
and minority high school student participation through Project SEED
(Scholarships for Education and Economic Development). The impact of the
instrumentation on student learning and STEM education will be assessed by
electronic pre- and post-assessment questionnaires. Results from the research
will enhance scientific literacy for members in the community, highlighting
important concepts in materials development as well as conservational biology.

Activities of the research project are innovative and cutting-edge, involving
expertise that spans biology, chemistry, biochemistry, bioengineering, and the
health sciences. These scientific investigations will advance our knowledge on
the molecular mechanisms that govern spider silk assembly, leading to new
strategies for synthetic fiber production for industrial and commercial
applications. It will also provide insight into the chemical properties of
biopolymers resembling the active sites of proteins as well as the machinery
governing cell movement and developmental processes in vertebrates.
Additionally, it will identify novel factors that regulate protein secretion in
eukaryotic cells, providing protein chemist with new approaches to make
recombinant protein expression systems more robust. Lastly, they will elucidate
constituents that modulate the metabolism of human toxins, identify pathogenic
factors that contribute to human cancer formation, and provide answers to
important evolutionary and environmental questions in biology. As a collective
unit, these studies will be highly transformative for students, faculty, and the
community, leading to the development of new biomaterials for engineering and
nanotechnology, better methods for recombinant protein expression for academia
and industry, increased comprehension with cellular migration mechanisms, and
advances in knowledge to fundamental themes in evolution and conservation
biology.