* 1531620
* MRI: Acquisition of a 600 MHz NMR Spectrometer for Chemistry
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2018
* Lanny Liebeskind, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 07/31/2018
* USD 629,930.00

With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation Program (MRI) and
support from the Chemistry Research Instrumentation (CRIF) and Chemistry of Life
Processes (CLP) programs, Emory University will acquire a 600 MHz NMR
spectrometer. This instrumentation will advance research activities spanning the
fields of synthetic organic chemistry, catalysis and new methodology
development, natural products and materials characterization, inorganic
chemistry, biomolecular chemistry, and the integration of spectroscopic
information with theoretical studies. In general, Nuclear Magnetic Resonance
(NMR) spectroscopy is one of the most powerful tools available to chemists for
the elucidation of the structure of molecules. It is used to identify unknown
substances, to characterize specific arrangements of atoms within molecules, and
to study the dynamics of interactions between molecules in solution or in the
solid state. Access to state-of-the-art NMR spectrometers is essential to
chemists who are carrying out modern research. This instrument will also be an
integral component in training undergraduate and graduate students. It will
advance the teaching and research training mission of the department by
providing hands-on NMR experience in applying advanced NMR topics covered in
core academic and supplemental summer courses.

The award is aimed at enhancing research in areas such as (a) studying natural
product synthesis; (b) studying reactivity, catalysis and synthetic strategy, to
drive pharmaceutical and materials innovation; (c) developing stereoselective
methods and their applications in total synthesis and drug discovery; (d)
discovering reactions with a particular aim to apply to transition metal
chemistry; (e) understanding signaling pathways involved in human health and
disease; (f) exploring functional and well-defined macromolecular structures
with various applications; (g) studying polyoxometalate (POM) complexes and POM-
based materials, and their uses as catalysts; (h) developing synthetic methods
in contexts ranging from selective activation and functionalization of
traditionally inert starting materials; (i) developing small molecular
radiotracers for positron emission tomography; (i) studying antimicrobial
principles in medicinal plants; and (j) discovering therapeutic agents and the
structural basis for their interactions with target proteins.