* 1531388
* MRI: Acquisition of a Ground Penetrating Radar for Interdisciplinary Studies in Anthropology and the Geosciences
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2016
* Mark Groover, Ball State University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2016
* USD 43,419.00

"Seeing the unseen" is an increasingly important aspect in the application of
science and technology to the management of cultural and natural resources.
Using geophysical instruments, anthropologists, geologists, and resource
managers can directly measure properties of the buried environment without
damaging our shared resources. The acquisition of a Utility Scan System, SIR
4000 ground penetrating radar (GPR) with NSR-MRI funds by the Departments of
Anthropology and Geological Sciences at Ball State University (BSU) allows the
Investigators and community partners to identify hidden aspects of the
environment at the intersection of geoscience and the study of the human
condition. This acquisition advances both the practical student education and
research aims for several projects. This complements existing geophysical
equipment, streamlines and improves several existing course offerings,
diversifies and strengthens hands-on training, and expands the services that are
provided to the University, industry, and regional communities. The researchers
have a record of active engagement and recruitment of underrepresented groups.
BSU, with +21,000 students, is a Carnegie Research University with High Research
Activity that emphasizes a diverse and dynamic student body. BSU is a proven
leader in diversity, including engagement of veterans, minority ethnicities,
international students, and first-generation college
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers on this NSF-MRI project
incorporate faculty and professional staff expertise that straddles academic,
government, and private sectors. The GPR will be maintained by the Applied
Anthropology Laboratories, a university-designated Knowledge Unit that engages
in externally-supported research, as well as cultural and environmental resource
contracts with the mission of advancing student training in mastering of
marketable skills. A sample of research activities and services that will be
enhanced by this GPR acquisition include:&lt;br/&gt;- Investigation of
Midwestern historic landscape and battlefield archaeology features,&lt;br/&gt;-
Investigation of Middle Woodland settlements structure around the unique
Anderson Mounds complex (12M2),&lt;br/&gt;- Investigation of Fort Ancient
village structure in southern Ohio and southeastern Indiana,&lt;br/&gt;- Mapping
of historic saltpeter mining operations in caves of the Midwest and the
Appalachians,&lt;br/&gt;- Identification of shallow karst features, in the young
carbonates of Florida and the Bahamas,&lt;br/&gt;- Mapping the freshwater lens
and the magnitude of tidal pumping in coastal carbonate aquifers,&lt;br/&gt;-
Assist with utility locates during maintenance, construction projects, and
historic preservation projects in coordination with BSU Office of Facilities
Planning and Management and local governments,&lt;br/&gt;- Locating the lost
caves of Mounds State Park, Anderson, Indiana, and&lt;br/&gt;- Evaluating
cultural resources (NHPA Section 106, NEPA) in consultation with local,
regional, and federal agencies.