* 1531003
* US Ignite: Track 1: Remote Management of Deep Brain Stimulation (DBS) Patients Using Utah Telehealth Network (UTN)
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2018
* Christopher Butson, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 08/31/2018
* USD 595,370.00

Deep brain stimulation (DBS) is a therapy that has been shown to be effective
for the treatment of Parkinson's disease and essential tremor, and is now being
assessed for a wide range of other disorders such as Alzheimer's disease,
depression and traumatic brain injury. Hence, patients with a wide range of
neurological disorders could benefit from DBS. However, these patients face an
access problem because DBS devices are almost exclusively implanted and managed
in major cities at academic medical centers. While it is reasonable for a
patient to travel once or twice for surgery, it can be infeasible for them to
travel long distances for post-operative management of their DBS devices in the
months and years following surgery. We envision a new model in which patients
travel once or twice for surgery and then are managed in their home area by
community neurologists or family practice physicians who use expert decision
support tools to choose DBS device settings. The purpose of this grant is to
test the use of an app-based decision support platform that runs on iOS devices,
and provides predictive, patient-specific computational models over a high-
bandwidth network that was developed for healthcare applications. We believe
that this system can drastically reduce the amount of time necessary for DBS
programming, and in the future it may enable patients to be post-operatively
managed without the need to travel to DBS surgical centers. We anticipate that
if this study is successful then it will achieve a critical step by providing a
system that runs on mobile devices, and can be used to manage DBS patients
across a wide range of neurological disorders. Hence, we feel that the
technology developed and tested in this application could have transformative
effects on large numbers of patients.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In recent years there
has been substantial growth in the use of patient-specific computational models
to predict and visualize the effects of neuromodulation therapies such as deep
brain stimulation (DBS) to treat movement disorders including Parkinson's
disease (PD) and essential tremor (ET). These models have been clinically
validated, and their utility in DBS programming has been demonstrated in several
studies. However, translating these models from a research environment to the
everyday clinical workflow has been a major challenge, primarily due to the
complexity of the models and the expertise required in specialized visualization
software. In this application we propose to deploy an interactive visualization
system, ImageVis3D Mobile (IV3Dm), which has been designed for mobile iOS
computing devices such as the iPhone or iPad, to visualize patients-specific
models of Parkinson's disease (PD) patients who received DBS therapy. Selection
of DBS settings is a significant clinical challenge that requires considerable
expertise to achieve optimal therapeutic response, and is often performed
without any visual representation of the stimulation system in the patient. This
issue is compounded by a catch-22 in the management of these patients: very few
clinicians outside academic medical centers will manage DBS patients because
they lack the tools and expertise to do so; no one has developed remote, mobile
tools because there is a perception that providers outside academic medical
centers will not use them. The purpose of this application is to break this
deadlock by providing a decision support system that can provide clinicians with
the tools necessary to manage DBS patients in rural areas. We have previously
tested the utility of IV3Dm for programming DBS patients in a controlled
clinical setting and have shown that it can drastically reduce the amount of
time necessary to choose good therapeutic settings. In this application we
proposed to add several key enabling technologies and test the use of IV3Dm on
PD patients in remote areas of Utah. These include: integrating a previously
developed GPU-based solver; adding remote volume rendering capability to IV3Dm
to enable a wide range of possible DBS settings; testing IV3Dm over the Utah
Telehealth Network (UTN), a broadband network in the State of Utah that is
dedicated for use in healthcare. We anticipate that if this study is successful
we will show that PD patients can receive care that is comparable to that
provided by specialists at major medical centers but with far less patient
burden (i.e. travel time). The intellectual merit of this application lies in
the delivery of patient-specific computational models of DBS patients over a
broadband telehealth network to improve the care of PD patients.