* 1531833
* MRI: Development of a Microscope with Simultaneous  Electrical and Optical Measurement of Single Molecules
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Gregory Weiss, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Leonard Spinu
* 08/31/2018
* USD 294,903.00

Optical techniques for watching single molecules received the 2014 Nobel Prize
in Chemistry because of the way they are revolutionizing research in the life
sciences. In laboratories around the world, the use of fluorescence to "see"
individual molecules undergoing chemical changes is helping to reveal how
complex molecules like proteins really work or when these proteins become
disabled by genetic mutations or pharmaceutical drugs. Recently, researchers at
UC Irvine have invented a new, all-electronic method for "listening" to single
molecules. Instead of looking at fluorescent light coming from a protein, the
electronic technique is sensitive to the movement of charges on a protein's
surface. The goal of this MRI project is to develop a new type of microscope
that can combine this new, electronic listening technique into the more
conventional platform of single-molecule fluorescence microscopy. Specifically,
the project will take apart a fluorescence microscope, modify the microscope to
be compatible with the electronic technique, and build up a single, integrated
instrument that can simultaneously watch and listen to single proteins as they
do their work. For example, some proteins require one portion to bend before
another portion can become chemically active. Other proteins can be disabled
when a drug binds and blocks a particular motion. Being able to monitor two
different portions of the same protein will be an exciting new capability for
understanding cause and effect in the biochemical processes that are fundamental
to healthy lives. The instrument developed in this project will add to the
capabilities of two major research centers located at UC Irvine and serve as a
proof-of-principle for future commercialization efforts. In addition, the
instrument will contribute to the ongoing, interdisciplinary mentoring and
training of undergraduates, graduates, and postdoctoral researchers, any of whom
could contribute to similar development and commercialization efforts in the
microscope industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Single-molecule fluorescence
techniques are exposing the complex structure-function relationships among
proteins, peptides, and biopolymers. Direct observation of mechanical
organization and real-time recordings of single-molecule kinetics are helping
reveal how complex biochemical processes work and how they are affected by
mutations and co-factors. To complement light-based techniques, researchers at
UC Irvine have recently exploited the sensitivity of nanometer-scale field
effect transistors to create a new single-molecule technology that is sensitive
to the movement of charges on a protein surface. The electronic signals
generated by these movements represent a physical mechanism that is independent
of conventional single-molecule fluorescence, suggesting that a promising
combination of two degrees of freedom can be used to probe individual molecules.
The goal of this MRI project is to demonstrate a microscope that validates this
premise. By combining the nano-transistor electronic technique with total
internal reflection fluorescence imaging, the project aims to enable new types
of single-molecule science that take advantage of two modes of simultaneous
monitoring. For example, synchronized monitoring may distinguish between cause
and effect among complex processes involving energy transfer, substrate binding,
bond cleavage, and domain motions, each occurring at different sites within one
protein.