* 1531128
* MRI: Acquisition of Shared High Performance Compute Cluster for Multidisciplinary Computational and Data-Intensive Research
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2018
* Dana Brunson, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Stefan Robila
* 09/30/2018
* USD 951,570.00

Under this Major Research Instrumentation project, the Oklahoma State University
(OSU) High Performance Computing Center is engaged in acquiring, deploying and
maintaining a cluster supercomputer, named for OSU's mascot Pistol Pete, to
support computing- and data-intensive research and research training, across a
broad range of Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (STEM)
disciplines. As a campus-wide shared resource, Pistol Pete's mission includes
being available at no charge not only to all OSU faculty, staff, postdocs,
graduate students and undergraduates, but also to researchers and educators
across Oklahoma. This project focuses on enabling substantial transformative
STEM research across a broad variety of disciplines.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;In
particular, Pistol Pete's mission revolves around facilitating areas of research
in over 20 departments, via many collaborating research teams, including 66
faculty with over 320 postdocs, graduate students and undergraduates. A broad
spectrum of research and research training activities are covered, including but
not limited to: bioinformatics (including genomics, metagenomics, and
transcriptomics); biomolecular model development; crop modeling, environment and
ecosystem modeling; classical and quantum calculations of liquids, proteins,
interfaces and reactions; design and discovery of organic semiconductor
materials; cybersecurity and social network modeling; commutative algebra;
graph-based data mining; renewable energy research; seismology; sociopolitical
landscape modeling; and high energy and medical physics.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;OSU jointly co-leads the OneOklahoma Cyberinfrastructure Initiative
(OneOCII), which encourages Oklahoma researchers and educators to use centrally
owned Cyberinfrastructure resources - at OSU, the University of Oklahoma, the
Tandy Supercomputing Center, Langston University, and the University of Central
Oklahoma - including supercomputers, storage resources, research clouds, an
emerging multi-institution 'Science DMZ' research-only network, and education,
outreach, training and workforce development activities.