* 1531851
* MRI: Acquisition of a Liquid Chromatography-Mass Spectrometry System for Research and Research Training
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Sundeep Rayat, Ball State University
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 08/31/2018
* USD 196,968.00

With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) and Chemistry
Research Instrumentation and Facilities (CRIF) programs, Ball State University
will acquire a liquid chromatography-mass ppectrometry (LC-MS) system. The
system is used to determine the composition of mixtures of materials obtained
from various sources including samples obtained from chemical syntheses,
environmental or biological sources. In this instrument the liquid chromatograph
(LC) separates the complex mixture into its individual components, then mass
spectrometer (MS) is used to determine the mass of the components by measuring
the mass to charge ratio (m/z) of ions produced from the components. LC-MS is a
powerful analytical tool for finding out what the components are in a complex
sample. The instrument will be used by students in their research, training them
for its usage in their careers. It will also be used in outreach to disabled
students and underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
instrument will be used in research especially in areas such as (a)
characterizating nitrogen heterocycles for materials and medicine; (b) designing
RNA nanovehicles for drug delivery in phototherapy; (c) studying photochemistry
of organic pollutants at air-water interface; (d) determining the role of
mammalian CDC42 in cell signaling pathways with implications in bacterial
infections; (e) understanding of the mechanism of apolipoprotein beta
degradation with relevance to cholesterol related pathologies; (f) studying
nanoparticle catalyzed photodegradation of organic compounds for environmental
remediation; and (g) enabling the elucidating chemistry emanating from highly
reactive aryl nitrenes and oxypyridinium salts to access synthetically useful
motifs.