* 1531206
* MRI:  Acquisition of a Mobile Robot System to Support Research on Robotic-Assisted Locomotion and its Effect on Development of  Executive Function
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2017
* Nancy Rader, Ithaca College
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2017
* USD 77,834.00

This award will permit Dr. Sharon Stansfield and Ithaca College to acquire
instrumentation that will support ongoing research into the effect of locomotor
experience in typically developing infants. It has been suggested that infants'
movements, such as reaching, crawling and walking, may be important for the
development of certain aspects of cognition and perception. The purpose of this
research is to a) further develop a mobile robot platform and associated
software that lets a baby "drive" a robot by leaning in the direction that the
baby wants to travel and b) to then use this robot system in research to examine
the effect of locomotor experience on cognitive development in typically
developing, pre-crawling infants. If enhanced locomotor experience leads to
enhanced cognitive development in typically developing infants, these results
would provide the impetus for future research using the robot system to provide
mobility to children with conditions that involve motor impairment, such as Down
syndrome, developmental coordination disorder, spina bifida, and cerebral palsy.
Children with such impairments often also exhibit cognitive developmental
delays. This research may lead to the development of technology that provides
mobility to very young children with delayed or limited independent locomotion,
thus providing an avenue for mediating these cognitive development
delays.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The hypothesis of the current research is that
infants who have experience with independent locomotion using the robot will
show higher levels of cognitive development than those without this experience.
Five-month old infants will be randomly assigned to an experimental group that
drives the robot during each session or to a control group that does not.
Infants will complete twelve 20-minute sessions, followed by a battery of tasks
including versions of a Depth Perception, Means-End, A-not-B, and Switch Task
that assess aspects of cognition related to movement. Findings from this
research will provide insight into the basic mechanisms involved in the
cognitive development of both typically developing infants and infants with
motor impairment, and may lead to the creation of an assistive technology that
will benefit children with motor impairment in the course of their daily lives.