* 1531312
* Constraining the Structure and Dynamics of the Upper Layers of the Convective Zone Using Accurate High Spatial Degree Modes Derived from GONG Observations
* GEO,AGS
* 05/01/2016,03/31/2022
* Sylvain Korzennik, Smithsonian Institution Astrophysical Observatory
* Continuing Grant
* Lisa Winter
* 03/31/2022
* USD 383,598.00

Our modern society is highly dependent on technology for all of its critical
activities, including navigation, commerce, transportation, communication, power
provision, and security. As a magnetic star, our Sun has disrupted, and will
continue to threaten disrupting, these technology-dependent activities. In order
to mitigate the inevitable risks, it is vital that we advance our understanding
of the processes behind events such as flares and coronal mass ejections (CME).
The solar magnetic field that underlies all of these phenomena arises from the
flows present in the solar plasma. These flows are produced by the transport of
energy through the solar interior. This 3-year research project is expected to
improve our knowledge of the structure, dynamics and flows immediately below the
surface of the Sun. This region is key to understanding and predicting solar
activity. This research project features not only important academic research,
but also promises a tangible and concrete benefit to our technologically powered
society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This 3-year project is aimed at a better
characterization of the Sun's near-surface layers (outermost 5% of the solar
interior) using helioseismic techniques. A key question that this work will
contribute to answering is: how and why does the Sun (and other Sun-like stars)
vary? Using helioseismology, the project team will be able to infer and
constrain changes in the structure and dynamics of the solar interior by
extending the precise characterization of p-mode (or pressure-mode) oscillations
to higher spatial degrees and tracking their changes with time. The technical
aspect of this project is to derive accurate characteristics of high-degree
modes, i.e., precise and unbiased estimates of mode frequency, line width,
asymmetry and amplitude for spherical harmonics degrees in the range 200-900,
using NSO's Global Oscillations Network Group (GONG) observations. The research
work to be carried out would enhance the scientific return of the GONG mission,
which has been supported by the NSF. Therefore, the project supports the
Strategic Goals of the AGS Division in discovery, learning, diversity, and
interdisciplinary research.