* 1531482
* MRI: Acquisition of a powder X-ray diffractometer (XRD) system to enhance research at a primarily undergraduate institution.
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2017
* Jordan Katz, Denison University
* Standard Grant
* Leonard Spinu
* 08/31/2017
* USD 105,300.00

This Major Research Instrumentation program (MRI) award will support the
acquisition of a bench-top powder X-ray diffractometer (XRD) system at Denison
University. This instrument will be used in the research of at least five
faculty members at Denison. The breadth of the research includes development of
new types of liquid crystals for use in organic electronics and solar cells,
novel bio-sensors for disease detection, new catalysts for the generation of
solar fuels, and understanding water transport in waxy layers related to
hydration control in plants. Denison University is a primarily undergraduate
institution, meaning that the research supported by the the new instrument is
carried out exclusively with undergraduate researchers mentored directly by
faculty. Undergraduate students will be trained as independent users of powder
XRD, gaining significant hands-on experience and enhanced research training. In
addition, the instrument will be incorporated into several classes in the
science curriculum, including classes in general chemistry, inorganic chemistry,
materials chemistry, and geoscience. The use of cutting edge equipment across
Denison's curriculum promotes an increased student awareness of the critical
role fundamental science plays in technological innovation and in finding
solutions for many of the critical issues facing the Nation.

With a compact bench top design and advanced capabilities such as incorporation
of the ALTK-450 variable temperature (VT) stage, the ADX-8000 powder XRD system
will have significant and immediate impact on multiple ongoing research areas in
the department in diverse areas of functional materials research. These include
(1) research in novel columnar liquid crystalline materials with potential to
serve as components in a range of organic electronic applications, including
low-cost photovoltaics; (2) research on low-cost solar energy conversion, with
the development of mixed metal-oxide nanomaterials; (3) research in well-ordered
organo-silicate materials with the potential to serve as biochemically active
materials and sensors; (4) research on the complex phase behavior of wax layers
mimicking natural boundary layers.