* 1531910
* MRI: Acquisition of a Fluidigm BioMark HD system for research and training at Humboldt State University
* BIO,DBI
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2018
* Sean Craig, Humboldt State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 07/31/2018
* USD 457,101.00

An award is made to Humboldt State University (HSU) to acquire a Fluidigm
Juno/Biomark system. The Juno/Biomark consists of a real-time Polymerase Chain
Reaction (PCR) instrument and a controller designed to load a variety of
microfluidic arrays. PCR is a fast method of copying small segments of DNA
critical to molecular and genetic analysis. The instrument supports a diverse
set of applications, including gene expression, SNP genotyping, mutant
detection, and absolute quantification of nucleic-acid sequences utilizing
digital PCR. The key feature of the instrumentation are microfluidic arrays that
allow thousands of nanoliter reactions to be run in parallel. Several different
microfluidic arrays are available, thus the instrument can support users with
low as well as high-throughput needs. The instrument will be housed in the
College of Natural Resources and Sciences Core Facility, a shared-use laboratory
for teaching and research. The Juno/Biomark will serve as a centerpiece for
training undergraduate and graduate students in the sciences, including those in
the Stem Cell Biology training program and laboratory sections of Behavioral
Neuroscience, Cellular Neuroscience, Conservation Genetics, Genetics, and Animal
Physiology. Since HSU is a Hispanic Serving Institution, and has a high
concentration of Native American students, this project will enable education
and training of underrepresented groups with advanced genetic techniques.
Collaboration with local teachers and their students at Hoopa High School (in
the Hoopa Tribal Nation), McKinleyville High School, and the Redwood Science
Institute, an institute which provides training for high school teachers, will
provide opportunities for high school students to use this cutting-edge
instrument.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Juno/Biomark system will be used by a broad
range of researchers across multiple departments and scientific disciplines
(Biology, Fisheries, Wildlife, and Psychology) at HSU. The hallmark of the
instrumentation is its capacity to support a diversity of applications and its
versatility to accommodate different throughput needs, including high-throughput
options. Researchers Andrew Kinziger, Sean Craig, Ehtan Gahtan, Micaela Szykman
Gunther, Brian Tissot, Darren Ward, Margaret Wilzbach, Jianmin Zhong and
colleagues will use the instrumentation to conduct investigations in the areas
of conservation and management of fishes, ecology and evolution of invasive
species, behavioral neuroscience, behavior and social interactions of mammals,
conservation ecology of marine fishes and invertebrates, and detection and
control of tick-borne diseases. The new instrumentation will enhance existing
research programs and allow investigations that are essentially impossible with
existing equipment. The Juno/Biomark system will substantially improve research
infrastructure at HSU and the region by providing access to high throughput
genetic capabilities to a rural area of northern California far from other
universities with comparable instrumentation.