* 1531923
* MRI: Acquisition of High Performance Computer Cluster for Multidisciplinary Computational Research and Education
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Nikolai Priezjev, Wright State University
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 08/31/2018
* USD 150,000.00

This project, acquiring a high performance computer cluster, aims to enable
discipline-specific and inter-disciplinary computing intensive scientific
research in the areas of, but not limited to, chemical physics, material
science, bioinformatics, ecological research, genomic research, morphological
sciences, ocean modeling, mathematical cognition analysis, and many more. It
will also be used for the education of new generation computational researchers.
The instrument will be used by more than 12-faculty members from Physics,
Mathematics, Biological Sciences, Materials Engineering, Psychology and
Community Health, and, will impact hundreds of students in the STEM disciplines.

Numerous discipline-specific and interdisciplinary research programs will
leverage this instrument to further their research goals. Efforts in
computational chemical physics provide insights into new mechanisms to improve
combustion modeling. Materials modeling, methods and software development will
generate improved ways to model device failures. Microfiltration, nanofluidics
research, and, 3D ocean modeling will advance oil exploration research. High-
throughput annotation and analysis of large-scale microbial ecology data will
provide insight into the role of gut microbes in human health, and prediction
models for craniofacial growth will improve current practices within clinical
orthodontics. This instrument strongly impacts the integration of research into
STEM education, thus, providing an intellectual platform for researchers and
students. The cluster will be the primary educational tool for WSU's newly
developed Interdisciplinary Applied Science and Mathematics PhD program,
potentially impacting hundreds of students at both the undergraduate and
graduate levels across many disciplines. It will be the first of its kind in the
Dayton region to provide education and training on the basic tools and
techniques of multiprocessor computing for computational scientists A student-
centered, research-based, pragmatic multi-disciplinary course, co-taught by the
proposal team, based on an investigative learning approach will provide an
educational platform for teaching computational concepts and tools for applying
numerical methods in STEM research. The project contributes to developing a
computationally skilled workforce, thus, building a stronger computing community
at WSU and strengthening WSU's partnerships in computing education with other
universities in the area. Access to the cluster benefits efforts to develop and
deploy computational/computing-infused courses and consequently broadens
participation in the area of scientific