* 1531940
* MRI: Acquisition of a Variable Field (X-, Q-band) Pulsed EPR Spectrometer for Research and Training
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2018
* Jonas Peters, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 07/31/2018
* USD 1,073,388.00

With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation Program (MRI) and
support from the Chemistry Research Instrumentation Program (CRIF), Professors
Jonas Peters, Theodor Agapie and colleagues from the California Institute of
Technology aquire an X-, Q-band pulsed electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR)
spectrometer and related accessories including electron nuclear double resonance
(ENDOR). This instrument allows research in a variety of fields such as those
that provide insight on how biologically relevant species with unpaired
electrons behave. In general, an EPR spectrometer yields detailed information on
the geometric and electronic structure of molecular and solid state materials.
It may also be used to obtain information about the lifetimes of free radicals,
short-lived, highly reactive species involved in valuable chemical
transformations as well as the initiation of pathological tumor growth. In a
standard ENDOR experiment, a sample is placed in a magnetic field and irradiated
sequentially with a microwave followed by radio frequency. The changes are then
detected by monitoring variations in the polarization of the saturated electron
paramagnetic resonance transition. These studies impact a number of areas, from
the synthesis of inorganic and organic molecules to the development of new solid
state materials to compounds of magnetic and biological interest. Employing
examples inspired from ongoing research, this instrument is an integral part of
research and teaching at the undergraduate and graduate levels at Caltech.
Additionally, the investigators have identified a significant number of
interested users from the area outside of this institution and also identified a
lot of enthusiasm for a hands-on workshop on EPR/pulsed-EPR that is expected to
grow the regional user base.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award is aimed at
enhancing research and education at all levels, especially in areas such as: (a)
the iron-molybdenum co-factor (FeMoco) and nitrogen fixation; (b) models of
iron-mediated nitrogen fixation; (c) oxygen-evolving complex in photosynthesis;
(d) nickel-catalyzed cross-coupling; (e)photoredox catalysis; (f) spin-active
metal-dihydrogen and metal-hydride species; (g) metallonitrenes in catalysis;
(h) using C1 and C2 precursors for carbon-carbon couplings; and (i) site
directed spin labeling (SDSL) for the study of biogenesis of membrane and
secretory proteins.