* 1531389
* MRI: Acquisition of a Versatile Cryogen-Free Dilution Refrigerator for Materials and Condensed Matter Physics Research
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* S. James Allen, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Leonard Spinu
* 08/31/2018
* USD 543,856.00

Measurements of the physical properties of materials at ultralow temperatures
are key to discoveries in condensed matter physics, the science of new and
emerging materials, and future technologies, such as quantum computing and new
detectors. The Major Research Instrumentation program supports the acquisition
of a versatile dilution refrigerator system with an integrated magnetic field
capability for an interdisciplinary, multi-user facility at the University of
California, Santa Barbara (UCSB). The system will be housed in the Low
Temperature Facility at UCSB, which already serves a diverse and
interdisciplinary user community. It will be available to all members of the
University community, to researchers at other academic institutions, and to
industry throughout Southern California and beyond. The instrument will greatly
expand the training opportunities for graduate and undergraduate researchers,
who are the primary hands-on users. Both formal (course work) and practical
training will be provided, while the facility's staff will be responsible for
student training, safety, day-to-day oversight, and routine maintenance. In
addition to its central role in the training of the next generation of
scientists and engineers, the dilution refrigerator will be ideally suited for
undergraduate design and research projects, and serve to expose undergraduate
researchers to low temperature science and measurement techniques.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The instrument addresses critical needs in
materials characterization at ultra-low temperatures within a wide range of
interdisciplinary research programs at UCSB that focus on low-dimensional
materials, quantum computing, the realization and discovery of new quantum
phenomena and phases, the development of new measurement techniques, and the
characterization of the electronic structure of low-mobility materials. The Low
Temperature Facility at UCSB already serves a diverse and interdisciplinary user
community, who will have access to the dilution refrigerator system. The
dilution system takes advantage of recent developments in technology that
greatly facilitate its operation as a multiuser facility. These include recent
advances in pulse-tube technology, allowing for cryogen-free and fully automated
operation. The system is load-locked, which increases the number of samples that
can be analyzed per instrument time. These features facilitate accessibility and
ease of operation, dramatically reduce maintenance and operating costs, and
allow for a high throughput of samples.