* 1531277
* MRI: Acquisition of a transmission electron microscope for multi-disciplinary research and training.
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Joanne Dannenhoffer, Central Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 08/31/2018
* USD 492,285.00

An award is made to Central Michigan University to acquire a Hitachi high-
contrast/high-resolution digital transmission electron microscope (TEM). The new
microscope will enable the training of the next generation of scientists in
modern methods using TEM for analysis of biological and materials science
samples. Undergraduate and graduate students will be exposed to the new TEM in
courses that are required for the Biology/microscopy majors and that serve the
doctoral students in the interdisciplinary Science of Advanced Materials Ph.D.
program. The interdisciplinary team of faculty will attract underrepresented
students to their research teams, and introduce high school students to cutting
edge methods in STEM research, by participating in campus-wide programs that
serve underrepresented students. The new TEM will also be incorporated into
outreach activities for K-12 students, including "Grandparents University", a
program to bring grandparent/grandchild pairs to campus for educational
experiences in a university setting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The acquisition of the
new Hitachi TEM will enable biology researchers to continue a long history of
performing research using TEM, and at the same time, provide a new capability
for materials science researchers at CMU. The new TEM has state-of-the-art
imaging technology that will allow biology researchers to substantially increase
the quality and quantity of images of low-contrast biological samples. The
biology research projects that will benefit from the new TEM span a broad range
and include the analysis of membrane remodeling that occurs in eggs in response
to stress and aging, and the characterization of a novel cell type in corn
endosperm. The new TEM will be configured to allow faculty and student
researchers working with nanomaterials and polymers to collect data on campus
instead of traveling to outside institutions. The materials science research
projects include the characterization of the superlattice structure of
ferroelectric nanoparticles that can be used in exciting applications such as
energy conversion and data storage, and characterization of edge-defined
graphene nanoribbons that have applications for lithium-ion battery electrodes.
The new TEM will enhance the growing research capabilities at CMU, serve
students in many programs, and attract new researchers to CMU.