* 1531682
* Facility Support: Continued capture of postseismic deformation using GPS instrumentation on the Andaman Islands due to the great 2004 and 2012 earthquakes
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2016
* John Puchakayala, University of Memphis
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 12/31/2016
* USD 52,298.00

1531682 Puchakayala

This grant supports one year of continued operations and maintenance of a five-
receiver, continuously operating GPS network in the Andaman Islands that was
established soon after the 2004 Boxing Day (December 26) mega earthquake (Mw
9.3) near Sumatra that resulted in over 200,000 casualties across the region
largely resultant the tsunami that was generated. GPS data collected from this
network can be used to address a fundamental yet unresolved debate about crustal
deformation following very large earthquakes, namely whether fault afterslip or
viscoelastic relaxation of the crust and upper mantle are the main driving
forces of observed postseismic transient deformation.

The Boxing Day 2004 earthquake is arguably one of the three most important
earthquakes available for modern geodetic study in the historical record.
Continuity of GPS observations can result in advanced knowledge of the
earthquake deformation cycle and fault behavior that has tremendous potential
benefit for hazards mitigation in seismogenically active areas of the world
including the U.S. Data from this GPS network have been and would continue to be
made freely available through the UNAVCO GPS Data archive. Operation of the
network would involve collaboration with scientists and staff at a local
academic institution (JNCASR, Bangalore). This support is congruent with NSFs
mission of promoting the progress of science and may advance the national
prosperity and welfare through advancing knowledge of the earthquake cycle and
promoting sound earthquake hazard mitigation strategies.

***