* 1531683
* MRI: Acquisition of CARS Microscope
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2018
* Michael Levin, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Harsha Chelliah
* 08/31/2018
* USD 844,724.00

This proposal seeks to acquire a state-of-the-art multimodal microscope that
will enable visualization of biological tissues at very high resolution without
the need to section them. One of the imaging modalities, coherent anti-Stokes
Raman scattering (CARS) microscopy, has emerged as a unique non-invasive
visualization tool for monitoring changes in the lipid and mineral composition
of biological samples. The ability to study these aspects of the samples in
combination with surrounding cellular and extracellular components will have a
significant impact on a wide range of important biomedical problems, such as
diabetes, cardiovascular disease, obesity, cancer, and brain function. Thus,
there are important potential societal benefits. In addition, this will be a
unique shared resource facility for Tufts University and will be made available
to the broader academic and industry community of the Boston area for research
purposes. Finally, this microscope will serve as an outstanding educational tool
that will be incorporated in laboratory courses and workshops to train
undergraduate and graduate students as well as other members of the academic and
research community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed multi-modal confocal/two-
photon/ CARS microscope will be used to address key questions in which dynamic
changes in the mineral, lipid and potentially water content of biological tissue
specimens in response to interactions with their surrounding environment play a
key role. One of the main properties of CARS that enables these studies is its
ability to provide strong, chemically specific signals without the need for
exogenous dyes. The latter may be tedious or impossible to incorporate in a
three-dimensional specimen or the agent specificity may change over time leading
to artifacts. CARS also offers inherent optical sectioning capabilities, needed
to examine in vitro, ex vivo and in vivo tissue specimens. In fact, because of
the highly scattering nature of lipids, CARS is needed for detailed studies of
even two-dimensional cell specimens. Finally, compared to confocal Raman for
example, CARS offers superior signal to background, which in turn enables fast
imaging. As a result, we expect that the requested CARS microscope will provide
important insights in: a) identifying and monitoring distinct adipose tissue
type depots in response to anti-obesity interventions, b) understanding the
effects of different engineered extracellular matrices and bioelectric signaling
mechanisms on neuronal growth and repair, c) regulating lipid droplet dynamics,
metabolism and obesity, d) understanding lipidoid-mediated biomacromolecule
delivery, d) dental tissue development and regeneration, e) mineral deposit
accumulation during calcific aortic valve disease, f) adipose cell-matrix
interactions during breast cancer development and in response to novel
treatments, and g) characterization of the pericellular brush of cancer cells.