* 1531632
* MRI: Acquisition of a Cryogenic Probe and Modern Console for Outstanding NMR Sensitivity to Benefit Research and Education at Cornell University
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2018
* William Dichtel, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 07/31/2018
* USD 349,300.00

With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation Program (MRI) and
support from the Chemistry Research Instrumentation Program (CRIF), Professor
Yimon Aye from Cornell University and colleagues Linda Nicholson and William
Dichtel will upgrade the console of a 500 MHz NMR spectrometer and acquire a
cryoprobe and autosampler for this spectrometer. This spectrometer will allow
research in a variety of fields such as those that accelerate chemical reactions
of significant economic importance, as well as allow study of biologically
relevant species. In general, Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) spectroscopy is
one of the most powerful tools available to chemists for the elucidation of the
structure of molecules. It is used to identify unknown substances, to
characterize specific arrangements of atoms within molecules, and to study the
dynamics of interactions between molecules in solution or in the solid state.
Access to state-of-the-art NMR spectrometers is essential to chemists who are
carrying out frontier research. The cryogenic probe will provide a significant
increase in sensitivity relative to standard NMR probes. The results from these
NMR studies will have an impact in synthetic organic/inorganic chemistry,
materials chemistry and biochemistry. This instrument will be an integral part
of teaching as well as research performed by undergraduate and graduate students
and future female and minority faculty at Cornell University. It will also be
used in the introductory chemistry courses by incoming students with poor
chemistry backgrounds through an intensive summer bridge course with a long-term
goal of retaining them in science, technology, engineering and mathematics
(STEM) majors. The instrument will be featured in educational outreach programs
to K-12 students and teachers in central New York, and its superior sample
throughput enabled by the automatic sample changer will allow multinuclear NMR
experiments to be incorporated into undergraduate laboratory curriculum for the
first time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award is aimed at enhancing research and
education at all levels, especially in areas such as (a) modulating
macromolecular self-assembly and enzymatic activity with small molecules; (b)
probing chemical signaling mechanisms that regulate life span; (c) tracking the
fate of small-molecule phosphorylated compounds that alter proteolytic
processing of the amyloid precursor protein; (d) studying allosteric modulation
of glutamate receptors through small molecule-induced dimerization; (e) using
bottom-up synthesis of graphene nanoribbons and other nanostructured carbon
materials; (f) developing polymerization catalysts to prepare polymers with
improved properties; (g) characterizing the structure and selectivity of
lithium-based Evans enolates; (h) characterizing aggregation behavior of sodium
amides and enolates; (i) synthesizing surugatoxins and other complex natural
products; and (j) characterizing the structure and reactivity of multimetallic
coordination compounds.