* 1531068
* MRI: Acquisition of an Inductively Coupled Plasma Optical Emission Spectrometer for Interdisciplinary Research and Undergraduate Research Training
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2018
* Helen Boylan, Westminster College
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 07/31/2018
* USD 90,225.00

With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) Program and the
Chemistry Research Instrumentation (CRIF) Program, Westminster College will
acquire an inductively coupled plasma optical emission spectrometer (ICP-OES).
This instrument is used to analyze samples especially to determine the presence
of metals and their concentrations. It operates by creating an energetic hot
plasma that vaporizes the sample and produces ions. The ions of interest emit
spectral fingerprints (emission spectra) enabling their identification and
concentration. This is a widely used instrument for analysis of environmental
samples (water, soil, waste, etc.). The instrument will be used by undergraduate
students in research and in laboratory training courses. It will also be used in
research by students at Allegheny College and Thiel College. High school
students at the Wilmington Area High School will use the instrument to continue
and expand ongoing efforts to monitor heavy metal contamination in local water
sources. Westminster College will further its goal of providing the most current
instrumentation needed for research and training in Chemistry, Biology, Physics,
Environmental Science, and Material Science and expanding regional STEM research
and training capabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal is aimed at
enhancing research especially in areas including (a) developing methods to
synthesize commercially-relevant rare earth silicates; (b) recoverying rare
earth oxides from scrap and end-of-life tech products; (c) recoverying manganese
from passive water treatment systems; (d) using chemometrics to predict metal
concentrations in frack water; (e) analyzing environmental stressors on aquatic
vertebrates; (f) quantifying nutrient availability in forest soils receiving
chronic nitrogen amendments; and (g) measuring metal contamination in compost.