* 1531065
* US Ignite: Collaborative Research: Track 1: Industrial Cloud Robotics across Software Defined Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Shaun Edwards, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 08/31/2019
* USD 424,261.00

Currently, industrial robots are cost-effective for repetitive and high-volume
tasks such as welding and painting, but not for lower-volume, mixed-part
production. The need for robotic part handling for unstructured industrial
applications is diverse. In manufactured-goods distribution centers, where
multiple bins are presented to an operator, a human is required to handle a
range of parts that must be boxed and shipped. In the reclamation and recycling
industry, humans sort waste streams of mixed products on conveyor belts.
Assembly and kitting operations in manufacturing are termed robotic
opportunities but they require a solution for handling many part types in the
same work-cell. This project will research and integrate technologies to enable
the use of industrial robots for low-volume mixed-part production tasks. The
proposed solution will include 3D image sensors and high-speed flexible
networking, cloud computing, and industrial robots. The inclusion of cutting-
edge new software such as the Robot-Operating System Industrial (ROS-I) and
Cloud Computing platforms offer excellent educational opportunities for both
undergraduate and graduate students. The software developed in this project will
be widely distributed to enable further innovations by other teams.

The project objective is to develop cloud robotics applications that leverage
high-performance computing and high-speed software-defined networks (SDN).
Specifically, the target applications combine big-data analytics of sensor data
(of the type collected from factory floors) with the control of industrial
robots for low-volume, mixed-part production tasks. Cloud computers located at a
remote facility relative to the factory floor on which industrial robots operate
can be used for compute-intensive applications such as object identification
from 3D sensor data, and grasp planning for the robots to perform object
manipulation. The project methods will consist of (i) integrating ROS-I
components and developing new software as required to transmit the 3D sensor
data to remote computers, running the object identification and grasp planning
applications, and returning robot instructions to the original site, (ii)
running this software on geographically distributed compute clouds, (iii)
collecting measurements and enhancing the software to meet real-time delay
requirements. The technical challenge lies in meeting these stringent real-time
requirements. For example, high-speed networks with the flexibility to connect
arbitrary factory floors and datacenters are needed to transfer the 3D sensor
data quickly to the remote cloud computers and to deliver the computed robot
instructions(hence, SDN).