* 1531562
* MRI: Acquisition of a Liquid Chromatograph-Mass Spectrometer to Support Multidisciplinary Research and Undergraduate Education at Towson University
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2018
* Shannon Stitzel, Towson University
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 07/31/2018
* USD 382,737.00

With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) and Chemistry
Research Instrumentation and Facilities (CRIF) programs, Towson University will
acquire a liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS) system. The system
will be used to analyze the composition of complex materials obtained from
various sources including samples from environmental sources, chemical reactions
or biological origins. In this system, the liquid chromatograph (LC) separates
the mixture into its individual components. Then the mass spectrometer (MS)
ionizes the components and determines their mass by measuring the mass to charge
ratio (m/z) of the ions. This is a widely used analytical tool to identify what
is the composition of a mixture or material. The instrument will be used by
students in their research, training them with sophisticated, modern
instrumentation. Students in laboratory courses will be trained to use it
including students in the only BS Forensic Chemistry program in
Maryland.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award will be used in research projects, such
as (a) investigating the formation of disinfection by-products in drinking water
resulting from reactions between so-called inert constituents of herbicide
formulations and chemical disinfectants; (b) analyzing chemical composition of
atmospheric aerosols; (c) improving polymer-based controlled-release technology
for anti-herpetic drugs; and (d) improving traceability of cocoa through
chemometric analysis of chemical signatures.