* 1531322
* MRI: Acquisition of a Heterogeneous Networked Instrument for Aquatic Exploration and Intelligent Sampling
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2016
* Ryan Smith, Fort Lewis College
* Standard Grant
* Mahmoud Fallahi
* 08/31/2016
* USD 392,140.00

The goal of this project is to address water-related issues in the Four Corners
Region through an automated, robotic monitoring system composed of multiple
cooperating and communicating autonomous robots that serve as an integrated
monitoring system. Aquatic observation and monitoring is key to understanding
and ultimately predicting long-term effects of urbanization, water storage and
climate change. Effective observation and monitoring requires simultaneous
measurement of multiple water properties, which must be made rapidly to capture
variations in both space and time. Autonomous aquatic vehicles provide a cost-
effective, non-intrusive, and a repeatable way of observing aquatic ecosystems
up close, and at an unprecedented resolution. With these modern robots having
such amazing capabilities, the main challenge in this project is to determine
where and when to deploy the robots to gain the most understanding of our water
resources. Through this research effort, the research will not only learn more
about water resources in the Four Corners Region, but it will additionally
develop algorithms and intelligent sampling strategies that can be utilized for
studying any aquatic environment around the world, e.g., oceans, lakes, rivers,
etc. Aquatic wireless sensor networks are instrumental to a better scientific
understanding of aquatic ecosystems, environmental monitoring, surveillance for
defense applications, homeland security, and aquaculture, providing a wealth of
applications to the community beyond those directly studied in this
proposal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Effective observation and quantification of
spatiotemporally dynamic processes occurring in aquatic environments, e.g., the
ocean, requires simultaneous measurement of diverse water properties, which must
be made rapidly to capture the both the spatial and temporal variability of
multiple simultaneous interactions. This cannot be done by traditional
oceanographic methods involving infrequent and sparse measurements from ships,
buoys and drifters. The research must employ an adaptive-sampling, heterogeneous
team of robotic assets that can perform in situ feature recognition and event
response with accurate localization to plug a substantial gap in understanding
of a range of processes: physical (e.g., tidal mixing and seasonal overturn),
chemical (e.g., nutrient upwelling and hypoxia), and biological (e.g., harmful
algal blooms). Successfully orchestrating a multi-vehicle, deployment
additionally requires a robust, rapid and cost-effective communication network.
Only when all these components, which form an aquatic robotic, sensing system,
are in synchronous operation can scientists begin to improve our overall
understanding of the complex aquatic environment. This project will acquire and
implement a heterogeneous networked instrument composed of three complementary
aquatic robots; two autonomous surface vehicles and one autonomous underwater
vehicle. These networked robots will enhance a program of research in marine
robotics, networking, and deliberative planning to address fundamental questions
in marine biology, oceanography, and aquatic biogeochemistry by addressing
critical water quality issues within the Four Corners Region. The proposed
instrument acquisition will provide a cost-effective test bed for the validation
of planning and sampling strategies for large-scale, heterogeneous robotic
networks. Specifically, the proposed system will enable researchers to
efficiently and cost-effectively develop, test and validate coordinated, multi-
vehicle control algorithms and strategies for intelligent aquatic sampling.