* 1531468
* MRI: Acquisition of a Computer Cluster for the Computational Chemistry Program at the University of North Texas
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2018
* Weston Borden, University of North Texas
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 07/31/2018
* USD 400,000.00

With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) Program and the
Chemistry Research Instrumentation and Facilities (CRIF) Program the University
of North Texas will acquire a computer cluster with central processing and
graphical processing units (CPU and GPU). The acquisition will enable graduate
and undergraduate students to perform computational chemistry research projects.
Using existing computer code and improvements to be developed, the students and
researchers will provide insight about the properties of chemical compounds and
materials. Reactions and properties, in collaboration with experimentalists,
will be analyzed, explained or predicted. The computer cluster will be a central
resource in the Center for Advanced Scientific Computing and Modeling (CASCaM).
This center places significant emphasis on research training from beginning to
advanced workshops, or via one-on-one consultation including outreach to
undergraduate institutions and high school students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CASCaM
research spans a wide range of chemical topics including inorganic,
organometallic and biological catalysis, materials and biomaterials chemistry,
atmospheric chemistry, surface/molecule interactions, and methodology
development, to name but a few. Particular areas to be investigated include: (a)
modelling of nanostructures; (b) developing high accuracy theories for heavy
element chemistry; (c) studying the role of negative cooperativity in the enzyme
human glutathione synthetase; (d) correlating structure and properties for
bioactive glasses; (e) investigating the role of biradicals in organic
reactions; (f) studying iodine chemistry in the marine boundary layer and its
relevance to ozone depletion; and (g) studying the chemistry of organometallic
clusters relevant to catalysis.