* 1531491
* MRI:  Acquisition of PI2, a CAVE2-Inspired Display for Discovery Science, Creativity, and Education
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Michael Summers, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 08/31/2019
* USD 377,994.00

A hybrid-reality environment, named PI2, is expected to become an integral and
vital part of a long-term vision for complex data analysis at this institution,
in effect, a human-computer symbiosis in which humans guide computers to
identify features of potential interest that the computer then locates and
displays. Developing this vision requires advances in multiple areas, including
semi-automatic feature detection, visual representations, and interaction, where
traditional display modalities limit what can be displayed and perceived.
Moreover, the instrument also facilitates broad interdisciplinary research and
provides an innovative teaching and research environment for a diverse student
population. It contributes to train future generations of researchers in state-
of-the-art interactive visual computing for data analysis and enables broader
activities and courses and expands research to outreach new applications (e.g.,
digital humanity for the American Indian population by working with the
Smithsonian Museums). Expectations include:&lt;br/&gt;- Advancing multiple
avenues of creative inquiry currently blocked or severely restricted will
advance rapidly. (The instrument encourages visual thinking among researchers in
sciences, healthcare, biomedicine, national security, humanities, and
education); &lt;br/&gt;- Establishing appropriate levels of technologies needed
for different classes of knowledge discovery analysis; and&lt;br/&gt;-
Assembling a set of research projects to investigate the use of the instrument
with the expectation of creating a novel, demonstrably useful, rich, and
expressive set of techniques for many cyber-physical and cyber-human systems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI2, a hybrid-reality environment, aims to support
research in interactive computing and digital humanities. The omni-stereo and
mono-modalities of the instrument breaks the traditional barriers between
virtual reality (VR) and tiled wall displays. The ability of PI2 to synthesize,
capture, create, and analyze visual information in unprecedented detail can
transform the way analysts interact with visual information. Leveraging many
important characteristics: immersion, hybrid reality, high resolution, large
field of view, large space and size, body-centric human-computer interaction,
and support for heterogeneous data fusion, it benefits multiple projects in
research areas (e.g., brain connectome, woodland ecology, interpersonal
experiences, biomedicine, universal access, engineering physics, simulations,
systems biology, education, digital humanities, green technologies, and
unmanned-vehicle studies). The instrument brings together disparate fields:
natural language processing, wearable computing, visualization, data mining, and
interaction.