* 1531850
* MRI: Acquisition of a High-Resolution Micro-Computed Tomography System for Multidisciplinary STEM Research and Undergraduate Training
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Robert Olberg, Union College
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 08/31/2018
* USD 379,130.00

An award is made to Union College to acquire a high-resolution micro-computed
tomography (µCT) system. µCT provides a nondestructive method to visualize
complex internal structures of a sample ranging from micro to macro scales.
Analysis of µCT images can address fundamental structure-function questions in
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM). The accessibility to
structure-function relationships combined with the lack of complicated sample
preparation makes µCT research a clear entry point to engage undergraduates in
meaningful STEM research. This project will have broad impacts on STEM fields.
First, it will enhance both multidisciplinary and interdisciplinary STEM
research at Union College that will influence external researchers and build
future collaborations. Second, the project will provide 18 undergraduate
research opportunities across STEM fields each year. Access to research training
will increase student interest in pursuing graduate STEM study and improve the
scientific and technical research infrastructure of our country. Third, each
year approximately 260 Union College students will interact with cutting-edge
µCT technology and its capabilities through a wide variety of STEM classes.
Finally, Union College has established K-12 outreach programs aimed at
encouraging students from traditionally underrepresented groups to enter STEM
fields and an undergraduate program (DUE-1356398) that provides scholarships and
intensive cohort mentoring with educational enrichment activities to increase
undergraduate retention and achievement in STEM disciplines. This project will
enhance the work of these groups by leading students through exciting, hands-on
µCT imaging with associated 3D printing modules. The goal of these outreach
activities is to help students see themselves as future scientists and
engineers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Union College biology, computer science, and
engineering faculty have developed collaborative and integrative research across
diverse STEM fields to understand how structural properties at one level of
organization affect organismal function at another. The µCT will enable
researchers to nondestructively visualize complex internal anatomy and provide
insight into how organismal structures: 1) impact developmental physiology, 2)
respond to external mechanical stimuli during bone fracture healing, 3) lead to
speciation through visual communication, 4) inform development of biomimetic
soft robots, 5) support the evolution of morphogenesis, and 6) explain water
balance in plants critical to the global carbon cycle. Furthermore, when
combined with Union's multi-material 3D printer (CMMI-1337768), researchers can
isolate interior regions of a µCT scan, generate a volumetric model in the µCT
software, and print a corresponding physical model in a matter of hours for
further analysis. These diverse projects represent just the beginning of the
innovative µCT STEM research at Union College. Furthermore, since the closest
similar µCT is located over three hours away, Union is poised to be a regional
µCT center that fosters innovative collaborations with investigators at nearby
institutions.