* 1531466
* MRI: Acquisition of 400 MHz NMR Spectrometer with Solid State Capabilities to Serve the Region Surrounding Memphis
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2018
* Theodore Burkey, University of Memphis
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 07/31/2018
* USD 339,585.00

With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation Program (MRI) and
support from the Chemistry Research Instrumentation Program (CRIF), Professor
Theodore Burkey from the University of Memphis (UM) and colleagues Tomoko
Fujiwara, Daniel Baker and Xuan Zhao will acquire a 400 MHz NMR spectrometer
with solid state capabilities. This spectrometer allows research in a variety of
fields such as those that accelerate chemical reactions of significant economic
importance. The instrument also allows study of biologically relevant species.
In general, Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) spectroscopy is one of the most
powerful tools available to chemists for the elucidation of the structure of
molecules. It is used to identify unknown substances, to characterize specific
arrangements of atoms within molecules, and to study the dynamics of
interactions between molecules in solution or in the solid state. Access to
state-of-the-art NMR spectrometers is essential to chemists who are carrying out
frontier research. The cryogenic probe provides a significant increase in
sensitivity relative to standard NMR probes. The results from these NMR studies
have an impact in synthetic organic/inorganic chemistry, materials chemistry and
biochemistry. This instrument is an integral part of teaching as well as
research performed by undergraduate and graduate students. Seven faculty members
at UM serve as research project leaders comprising the primary user team. The
NMR increases productivity, enables new areas of investigation, and enhances UM
as a regional resource for industry. Since the NMR solids capability is not
available in the region it has become a resource for regional research-intensive
institutions including the University of Mississippi. The automatic sample
changer along with internet connectivity allows real experimental results to be
integrated in lab curricula for UM and local four-year
colleges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award is aimed at enhancing research and
education at all levels, especially in areas such as (a) studying cancer
phototherapy using multifunctional nanocomplexes; (b) studying chemical
modification of smart chitosan implants; (c) analyzing chain exchange kinetics
and mechanism of tri-block copolymer micelles during sol-to-gel transitions; (d)
investigating functional nanoporous membranes; (e) designing of metal complexes
for catalytic splitting of water; (f) developing sub-picosecond photoresponsive
organometallics; (g) investigating halogen bond-driven assemblies in pi-
conjugated oligomers for materials applications; (h) designing sphingosine
kinase and diacylglycerol kinase assays; and (i) studying autotaxin inhibitor
optimization.