* 1531313
* MRI: Acquisition of hydrogeophysical downhole nuclear magnetic resonance instrument to support research and student training
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2015,12/31/2017
* Andrew Parsekian, University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 12/31/2017
* USD 285,799.00

1531313&lt;br/&gt;Parsekian &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Funding from this Major
Research Instrumentation (MRI) Program grant will enable an early career
investigator to acquire a wireline, borehole nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR)
well logging tool to be used for investigations of subsurface hydrologic
properties. NMR spectroscopy is sensitive to Hydrogen nuclei and has long been
used for hydrocarbon exploration. The proposed NMR instrument is designed to fit
into standard groundwater wells and is tuned to pick up the resonant frequencies
specific to Hydrogen nuclei. The borehole NMR instrument would become part of
the Facility for Imaging of the Near &amp; Subsurface Environment (FINSE), an
established Instrument facility at UW managed by trained staff and would support
the field analytical capabilities of the Wyoming Center for Environmental
Hydrology and Geophysics (WyCEHG), a center of excellence in hydro geophysics
funded by NSF/EPSCoR. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NMR well logging tool will offer
greatly improved spatial ( &lt; 0.5 m) and temporal resolution of subsurface
hydrological parameters over conventional methods that typically aggregate
subsurface hydrological observations over 10s of meters so the knowledge gained
has the potential to be transformative and therefore supports NSF mission of
promoting the progress of science.. The investigators intend to deploy the NMR
tool for studies in vadose zone hydrology of interest to Critical Zone
Observatories supported by NSF Division of Earth Sciences and studies of
permafrost in the high Arctic; the instrument will be useful for groundwater
resource assessment thus promoting the national welfare. The instrument will
support hands on experiential learning by students using the NMR tool for
studies of regional interest thereby fostering their future employability in
fields that routinely engage in subsurface hydrologic studies, another aspect of
the proposal that is congruent with NSFs mission of promoting the national
welfare.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;***