* 1531320
* MRI: Acquisition of a Direct-Write Laser System for Innovations in Electronic &amp; Photonic Device Design
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2017
* Satish Kandlikar, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Eric Johnson
* 08/31/2017
* USD 345,000.00

A direct-write laser (DWL) is a system used to pattern fine features without the
need for a photomask or reticle. This proposal requests funds for the
acquisition of a DWL system for innovations in electronic and photonic device
design that will be used for a variety of research applications at RIT. The DWL
system will positively impact the quality and productivity of research in
several projects that are currently funded by NSF, as well as other agencies and
industrial partners. There are several application areas under investigation
including thin-film electronics, nanophotonics &amp; micro-optics, III-V /
silicon integration, photovoltaics, MEMS, microchannels &amp; 3D integration;
each of which will utilize specific advantages and capabilities of the DWL
system. Participants will include undergraduates and graduate students in
several programs at RIT, including PhD programs in Microsystems Engineering and
Imaging Science. The DWL system will also be a resource for laboratory courses
in photolithography, thin-film processes, and microfabrication which provide
research training to students that feed into the graduate programs. The DWL
system will be housed in a user facility which promotes collaborative
multidisciplinary research. A number of undergraduate and graduate students
majoring in science and engineering will use this instrument for research
including capstone senior design projects, MS and PhD theses. The laboratory
courses impacted are available as elective courses to all undergraduate and
graduate students in engineering and science, and may count towards a 5-course
minor in microfabrication. This broadens the student base that gains experience
with the DWL system and will help to further increase the number of students
that are retained for graduate study and participate in research activities.
Results from the DWL system will provide a significant contribution to the
literature in relevant and emerging scientific fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
DWL system fills an important niche in R&amp;D for pattern optimization prior to
committing to a fixed photomask design. Depending on the laser source wavelength
and optical design, a DWL system offers resolution comparable to projection
optical lithography. There are several advantages that a DWL system has over
traditional proximity or projection optical lithography that makes it an
attractive alternative including the ability to handle a variety of substrate
shapes and sizes, make on-demand pattern changes, and implement pattern
variations within a sample. These advantages support a significant increase in
the efficiency of experimental design. Exposure levels using a DWL system with
fine pattern alignment can be intermixed with e-beam or traditional optical
lithography levels, providing design flexibility on several levels of pattern
transfer in a process sequence. The DWL system will also provide capabilities in
backside alignment and grayscale imaging, offering researchers new options in
microfabrication which are generally not outsourced due to the associated
engineering required for implementation.