* 1531859
* MRI: Acquisition of a  Multi-functional Near-field Scanning Optical Microscopy (NSOM) System to Establish a Cross-disciplinary  Nano-imaging/spectroscopy Laboratory at CCNY
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* John Lombardi, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* Leonard Spinu
* 08/31/2018
* USD 376,218.00

This Major Research Instrumentation award to City College of New York (CCNY)
supports the acquisition of a state-of-the-art Near Field Scanning Optical
Microscope (NSOM). NSOM is a critical and complementary nanoscopytechnique,
which will immediately enable a wide range of important leading-edge, cross-
disciplinary research projects at CCNY between the Chemistry, Physics, Chemical
Engineering, Electrical Engineering and Biology departments. This
multifunctional NSOM system will become a key component instrument of a "Nano-
imaging/spectroscopy Laboratory" that will be established for use by a cluster
of researchers who will comprise a so-called "Nanoscopy Cluster". The instrument
will facilitate the acquisition of new knowledge, promote new experimental
approaches, and promote cross-disciplinary collaborations. In addition, the
instrument will be integrated into CCNY's "Shared Imaging Core Facility" and
will create well-equipped research environments that integrate research with
education of students, many of whom will be underrepresented minority students
as CCNY is a recognized minority-serving institution. More than 20% of Ph.D.
graduate students in the physical sciences and engineering would benefit from
acquisition of the requested instrument. Undergraduate training and use of the
tool will be integrated within the scope of the facilities goals, impacting
multiple members of the large undergraduate research community at CCNY. In
addition, through the non-profit organization, International Research
Experiences, Inc. (iREs), NSOM techniques will be presented in a summer research
program for high school students and teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal is
to establish a cross-disciplinary Nano-imaging/spectroscopy Laboratory at City
College of New York (CCNY). The instrument will enable the pursuit of 16
research projects in highly diverse research areas/thrusts ranging from (1) Bio-
inspired Self-assembled Nanomaterials, (2) Plasmonic &amp; Photonic Materials,
(3) Semiconductor Nanomaterials, (4) Natural Bio-Materials as well as (5)
Materials for Frontier Applications. It will be used in answering a diverse set
of both fundamental and applied scientific questions such as "nature of energy
transport processes within and between nanoscale systems", "control of light-
matter interaction in two-dimensional atomic crystals", "engineering melanin-
derived polydopamine coatings and biosensors" as well as "development of high
sensitivity Raman spectroscopy tools", and "understanding the failure modes in
supercapacitors".