* 1531435
* MRI: Acquisition of High performance Liquid Chromatography and Mass Spectrometry Instrumentation to Support Research and Training at the University of Puget Sound
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2018
* Megan Gessel, University of  Puget Sound
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 07/31/2018
* USD 347,120.00

With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) and Chemistry
Research Instrumentation and Facilities (CRIF) programs, the University of Puget
Sound will acquire a liquid chromatography mass spectrometer system (LC/MS). The
system will be used to analyze the composition of samples obtained from various
sources including those obtained from environmental and biological origins.
Liquid chromatography (LC) separates a mixture into its individual components.
Mass spectrometry (MS) then ionizes the components and determines their mass by
measuring the mass to charge ratio (m/z) of the ions. This is a widely used
analytical tool to identify what is the composition of a mixture or material.
The instrument will be used by students in their research, training them with
sophisticated, modern instrumentation. Students in laboratory courses will be
trained in its use. In addition to its impact on the scientific curriculum at
Puget Sound, the instrument will play a central role in a planned collaboration
between Puget Sound and the Tacoma Science and Math Institute (SAMI), a magnet
STEM high school.

This award has a environmental and biochemical research focus. The proposal is
aimed at enhancing research especially in areas such as (a) probing changes in
lipid expression in biofilms exposed to antimicrobial peptides; (b) quantifying
illicit drugs and pharmaceutical metabolites in wastewater; (c) carrying out
comparative transcriptomic and proteomic analysis of phytochrome responses in
plants; (d) examining the role of bisphenol A in the modulation of the
reproductive neuroendocrine system; and (e) assessing the correlation between
trophic level and bioaccumulation of persistent organic pollutants at abandoned
sawmill sites in the Puget Sound.