* 1531834
* MRI: Acquisition of an X-ray Photoelectron Spectrometer for the Development of Materials and Catalysts for Next Generation Energy Solutions
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* John Morris, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 08/31/2018
* USD 525,000.00

With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) and the Chemical
Research Instrumentation and Facilities (CRIF) programs, Virginia Polytechnic
Institute &amp; State University will acquire an X-Ray Photoelectron
spectrometer (XPS) for use in energy related research and education. XPS
quantitatively determines the elemental/chemical composition, empirical formula,
and electronic state of elements within materials. The data from this analytical
technique will be used to explore emerging energy technology and significantly
improve the understanding of the effect of surface chemistry on efficacy. This
will impact the energy field from storage to generation. The award will also
enhance the education and training students in energy solutions. A multi-level
education plan will introduce the fundamentals of XPS and its application to
solve current scientific problems through laboratory modules and a summer short-
course. It will be used in a collaborative relationship with Radford University
and Roanoke College. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The instrumentation will enhance
research across disciplines, especially in areas such as (a) preparing low cost,
high efficiency solar cells; (b) studying artificial photosynthetic metal
organic framework thin films; (c) producing hydrogen photocatalytically from
methanol; (d) investigating pseudocapacitors and solid oxide fuel cells; (e)
studying conducting soft materials for energy storage and conversion; (f)
developing flexible solar cells; and (g) preparing polymer-supported water
reduction photocatalysts.