* 1531283
* MRI: Acquisition of a PILATUS3 X CdTe 1M for ChemMatCARS and GSECARS at the Advanced Photon Source
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2017
* Mark Schlossman, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Leonard Spinu
* 07/31/2017
* USD 500,500.00

This Major Research Instrumentation award to the University of Illinois at
Chicago supports the acquisition and implementation of a state-of-the art
cadmium telluride (CdTe) pixel array area detector for advanced X-ray
synchrotron applications in the areas of chemical, materials, and earth
sciences. The instruments will support research at ChemMatCARS and
GeoSoilEnviroCARS (GSECARS) the Advanced Photon Source (Argonne National
Laboratory). ChemMatCARS and GSECARS are national user facilities with a broad
impact on the nation's research and educational infrastructure and serve about
1400 users annually. Studies of materials using this detector will provide the
foundation for our scientific understanding of materials at the atomic level.
This detector is particularly well suited to the high energy X-ray source at the
Advanced Photon Source. Over half of these researchers are students, who are
trained in state-of-the-art X-ray techniques. ChemMatCARS and GSECARS conduct
workshops and other training, including a focus on training and outreach for
women and under-represented minority students. Training the next generation of
scientists in the use of the proposed state-of-the-art detector keeps our
scientific community up to date and provides them with the experimental tools
needed to best address the challenging problems in their research. In addition
to Major Research Instrumentation funds from the Division of Materials Research
and the Division of Earth Sciences, this award is supported using funds from the
Chemistry Division and The Office of Multidisciplinary Activities in the
Mathematical and Physical Sciences Directorate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;X-ray
detectors are used to record the interaction of X-rays with materials, thus
yielding the atomic-level structure of the material. The capabilities of the new
detector, the Pilatus3 X CdTe 1M, which include its large active area, high
efficiency at high energies, speed, large dynamic range, and low-noise photon
counting, will transform crystallography and other measurements at ChemMatCARS
and GSECARS. Within ChemMatCARS, the detector will be used primarily by the
advanced crystallography station in research areas that include solar energy
conversion, photo-excitation, catalysis, hard inorganic materials, metal-metal
bonded complexes, and processes within metal organic frameworks. Within GSECARS,
the new detector will be used in research to advance knowledge of the
composition, structure and properties of earth materials, the processes that
produce them and the processes they control. The unique capabilities of GSECARS
will continue to allow groundbreaking experiments to be conducted in research
areas that include high pressure and high temperature mineral physics in the
diamond anvil cell and multi-anvil press, non-crystalline and nano-crystalline
materials at high pressure and high temperature, including studies of liquids at
conditions that simulate the Earth's deep mantle, and mineral-water interface
reactions.