* 1531782
* MRI: Dual-Energy X-Ray Absorptiometry
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2018
* Amy Lanou, University of North Carolina at Asheville
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2018
* USD 116,450.00

The acquisition of the iDXA instrument will enable researchers to examine basic
behavioral factors which have the potential to effect health behavior change
(dietary habits, physical activity, and sedentary behavior) and thereby, improve
key physiological markers (body composition and bone density) related to chronic
disease. The iDXA uses x-ray technology to differentiate between tissues in the
body which provides measures of bone density (total, neck of femur, lumbar
spine), site-specific body fat and lean muscle mass, and type of body fat
(subcutaneous or visceral). Researchers will use the iDXA for trials of novel
dietary pattern treatments (e.g. those high in protein from plant sources) to
support bone health, increase lean mass, and reduce site-specific adiposity.
Projects will also include controlled trials to examine innovative strategies
(e.g. using commercially-available activity monitors and standing desks) to
increase physical activity and reduce sedentary behavior and examine the impact
of these interventions on visceral body fat and lean muscle mass. Furthermore,
worksite wellness programs targeting underserved, local small businesses will
also include the use of the iDXA to measure physiological changes and to
encourage behavior change. Researchers will also examine the impact of strength
training on lean muscle mass and balance among individuals with diabetic
peripheral neuropathy. In sum, access to the iDXA will allow a highly trained
team of researchers to effectively address critically important outcomes with
research into health behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators'
institution is nationally recognized for leadership in Undergraduate Research,
hosting the first National Conference on Undergraduate Research (NCUR) and set
to host the 30th Anniversary NCUR conference in 2016. At least seven
undergraduate researchers will be trained yearly on use of the iDXA for
collaborative research, and findings will be disseminated internationally
through publication in scientific journals and to North Carolina communities
through reports from the NC Center for Health and Wellness and the Osher
Lifelong Learning Institute.