* 1531947
* Understanding and Reshaping Systemic Communication Patterns in Engineering Education
* ENG,EEC
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2019
* Joachim Walther, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Edward Berger
* 12/31/2019
* USD 338,174.00

Engineering faces persistent challenges in recruiting and retaining students,
particularly from underrepresented groups. The field is often perceived as an
arcane, highly technical domain, an image that studies show does not resonate
with all potential students and does not do justice to the potential
contribution that this profession could make to solve 21st century problems. In
addressing these connected challenges, engineering educators and professional
bodies have invested considerable efforts towards changing perceptions of the
field through research and public information campaigns. This project is
examining where these perceptions, or narratives, about engineering come from,
and in what ways do they exert an influence on the culture and educational
practices of the field. The project draws on theory from complex systems
sciences and the field of media studies to empirically investigate how
collective, self-definitional narratives implicitly and pervasively shape the
shared beliefs, explanations, and values that underpin the culture of
engineering. By identifying and describing such exclusionary narratives, the
project lays the empirical foundation for future work aimed at empowering
engineering administrators, educators, and students to reach beyond the confines
of narrow and limiting narratives about engineering and broaden the conversation
about what engineering is, could be, and who participates in the important
societal role of the profession.

Despite ongoing efforts to diversify engineering, undergraduate programs
continue to be characterized by a predominately white, male, and privileged
population with a preference for objective, convergent, and quantitative ways of
thinking. Drawing on complex systems theory, this project explores this apparent
systemic resistance to change as rooted in mechanisms of social autopoiesis;
that is, the tendency for complex social systems to reproduce themselves through
self-definitional, persistent cultural patterns. According to systems theorists,
these patterns are created and maintained through communication flows that are
told, retold, and enacted in the system. Leveraging prior work on perceptions
and public messages of engineering, this project combines a systems thinking
theoretical framework with a narrative methodology to empirically examine how
engineering narratives autopoietically shape, demarcate, and otherwise influence
interactions at an institutional level.

The research design comprises the collection and narrative analysis of publicly
available news articles and engineering education and practice reports published
by key professional bodies, and the exploratory ethnographic observation and
narrative analysis of information exchanges about engineering in an
institutional context. The project will generate an empirically grounded,
theoretically coherent understanding of the engineering education system as it
is embedded in larger communication networks. More specifically, the goal is to
develop a systemic understanding of the communication patterns that function to
privilege certain understandings of engineering over others. By empirically
identifying and explicitly naming these patterns, the transformative potential
of this work lies in empowering engineering educators and other stakeholders to
critically examine and consequently change the dominant narratives that shape
the culture of our engineering programs, in their individual interactions and
ultimately at the collective national level.