* 1531823
* MRI: Development of a High-Resolution Charge Detection Mass Spectrometer with MS/MS Capabilities
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Martin Jarrold, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 07/31/2019
* USD 696,964.00

With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI), the Chemistry
Research Instrumentation and Facilities (CRIF) and the Chemical Measurement and
Imaging (CMI) programs, Professor Martin Jarrold from Indiana University will
develop a high resolution charge detection mass spectrometer (MS) with tandem
capabilties (MS/MS). Mass spectrometry is a powerful analytical tool used to
identify the composition of a mixture or material. It determines the mass of the
components by measuring the mass to charge ratio (m/z) of ions produced from the
components. It is broadly used to analyze chemical, biological and environmental
samples. A second generation charge detection mass spectrometer (CD/MS) will be
built which will incorporate performance upgrades and add new capabilities. The
mass resolution will be improved by at least an order of magnitude and the
ability to perform MS/MS (where selected ions are broken up and analyzed by
CD/MS) will be added.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Upon development, the spectrometer
will be used in research including projects that study (a) kinetically trapped
intermediates in the assembly of hepatitis B virus, (b) scaffolding protein in
bacteriophage P22 procapsids, (c) DNA packaging in adeno-associated virus, and
(d) non-icosahedral polymorphs in the self-assembly of Woodchuck hepatitis virus
(WHV) capsids.