* 1531350
* MRI: Acquisition of instrumentation to advance our understanding of environmental processes through characterization of the organic compounds in different environmental reservoirs
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2016
* Lihini Aluwihare, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 07/31/2016
* USD 333,108.00

This project will purchase an off-the-shelf instrument that has an unprecedented
capability to separate individual molecules found in complex matrices and more
precisely access their composition (through accurate measurement of mass). The
environmental matrices that will be studied in this research and the innovative
sample processing methods that will be employed to reduce the natural complexity
of relevant samples represents a novel application of this instrument. Examples
of new knowledge that will be created include a better understanding of how
contaminants are transformed in the environment, how microscopic organisms
regulate bloom dynamics through communication, and how known biochemicals are
transformed into molecules that can be preserved on long timescales, thus
contributing to the production of oxygen and the sequestration of carbon
dioxide. Such a molecular-level understanding of these processes is essential
for determining the environmental factors that regulate them and how these
processes may respond in the future. The data produced with this instrument will
be publically available as a mass spectral library that will be of use to other
fields including drug discovery, petroleum research, and metabolomics. In
addition, several graduate students and post doctoral researchers will receive
hands-on access to this instrument, providing valuable training that will
prepare them well for careers in both academia and
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will acquire a comprehensive gas
chromatograph (GCÃ—GC) coupled to a Pegasus HRT (High Resolution TOF) Mass
Spectrometer (MS), which will be initially utilized to examine the diversity of
organic molecules accumulating in aquatic environments and also to identify
degradation products of chemical contaminants accumulating in various
environment matrices. Organic geochemistry and environmental chemistry
necessarily deals with complex matrices where thousands to millions of compounds
derived from various sources, acted upon by abiotic and biotic processes,
accumulate on short to millennial (and beyond) timescales. Chemical structures
of these compounds carry critical information regarding source, mechanisms of
transformation and residence time. Access to advanced analytical instrumentation
continues to increase access to such information. Comprehensive gas
chromatography, together with advanced mass deconvolution afforded by the high
scan rates of the identified instrument (200 full mass range mass spectra per
second) enables unprecedented ?separation? of complex mixtures of organic
molecules. Additionally, the sub-ppm mass accuracy greatly enhances the
likelihood of unknown compound identification. Together these two features make
this instrument unique. Knowledge about the processes that shape the chemical
composition of various environmental reservoirs will scale with the extent to
which these complex samples can be chemically described. As such, there is a
significant reward associated with comprehensively characterizing the chemical
composition of such samples.