* 1531785
* MRI: Development of a Dynamic Material Processing and Testing Instrument
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2015,09/30/2021
* Glenn Daehn, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Wendy C. Crone
* 09/30/2021
* USD 354,200.00

This Major Research Instrumentation Award will support the development of a
dynamic materials processing and test instrument that will allow the safe and
detailed examination of highly dynamic materials processing in a conventional
laboratory environment. This is intended to dramatically increase access to
dynamic materials testing and allow innovation in dynamic processes. Highly
dynamic processes that rely on intense pressures over short time are uncommon in
research laboratories and almost unknown in manufacturing processes. It is
important to understand dynamic material behavior both for fundamental reasons
and because it is common in ballistics, shock and processes like machining.
Also, dynamic processes can allow the development of materials structures and
properties that are difficult or impossible to access with conventional
processes. This can lead to energy efficient processes and lighter weight
transportation components; both outcomes can reduce atmospheric carbon emission.
This program will also have positive impact on the STEM workforce by
demonstrating to K-12 students that very creative, even disruptive,
opportunities exist in engineering and providing the broad technical community a
platform for innovation and training.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The new instrument
will be based on the Vaporizing Foil Actuator (VFA) method of developing high
pressures (&gt;1 GPa) and high sample speeds (&gt;1km/s). The velocity field
during launch, impact or forming can be measured at up to 16 points using a
multiplexed photonic Doppler velocimetry system that is integral to the
instrument. This system will find application in a wide variety of experimental
studies on topics including: high pressure phase transformations, impact
welding, dynamic powder consolidation, residual stress and springback reduction,
dynamic formability, dynamic embossing and shock hardening. Impact welding, for
example, can weld metals that cannot be joined by fusion methods and this
instrument can encourage the commercial deployment of this technique. The
instrument will also dramatically reduce the difficulty and expense in
fundamental studies of material behavior (plasticity, spall, fracture, etc.) at
high strain rates and short times.