* 1531014
* Planning Project for the STEM Center for Research and Development - Increasing Minority Students in STEM Disciplines
* EHR,HRD
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2017
* Freddie Dixon, University of the District of Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Claudia Rankins
* 08/31/2017
* USD 419,900.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities -Undergraduate Program (HBCU-
UP) provides support to design, implement, and assess strategies that can lead
to comprehensive institutional efforts to increase the number of students
receiving undergraduate degrees in science, technology, engineering and
mathematics (STEM) and enhance the quality of their preparation by strengthening
STEM education and research. The project at the University of the District of
Columbia seeks to establish the foundation for a "STEM Center for Research and
Development - Increasing Minority Students in STEM Disciplines". The goals of
the project are: to provide STEM students with information and active support
designed to retain them and prepare them for graduate school or the workforce;
and to provide faculty with support that will expand their teaching and research
skills so that they will be better prepared to impart knowledge and assist in
the development of students' skills as they forge successful mentor/mentee
relationships. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Activities that are part of this project
are: support for students in such areas as study skills, academic scoping
skills, graduate school and fellowship application preparation, research
opportunities during the academic year, as well as summer internships; one-year
mini-grants to faculty members to give them the support needed to initiate and
advance research and curricular reforms, train students, and promote
professional development. The project will be guided by an on-going evaluation
and by external and internal steering committees.