* 1531533
* Examining the Effect of Entrepreneurial Education Pedagogy on the Development of Women in STEM
* ENG,EEC
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2019
* Aileen Huang-Saad, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Edward Berger
* 08/31/2019
* USD 463,822.00

The importance of entrepreneurship and innovation is becoming more widely
recognized. Recently, higher education institutions have recognized their
responsibility in creating a more entrepreneurially minded workforce and have
begun to broaden entrepreneurship education beyond the traditional business
school model of business fundamentals, case studies, and start-­up companies. In
doing so, new approaches to teaching entrepreneurship have been developed,
encouraging students to take a more active role in and outside of the classroom.
How these aspects of entrepreneurship education influence women's engagement and
involvement has yet to be studied. In many instances, these approaches involve a
combination of competition and problem-based, team-­oriented learning.
Integration of these approaches may influence students in different ways, and
there may be differential effects based on gender, race, culture or
socioeconomic class. Educational programs are relying on students to
self-­select into these highly competitive non-­traditional learning
environments. The purpose of this grant is to explore the influence of these new
learning environments on student engagement, particularly for women. Results
from this research are critical as the nation moves to find ways to develop a
diverse, innovative workforce for the 21st century. These results will help
higher education institutions understand how women choose to engage in
entrepreneurship educational programs and how programs influence women to become
involved in innovation after graduation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
engage in a mixed methods study to examine relationships between
entrepreneurship pedagogy and women's engagement in entrepreneurship education
and innovation post-­graduation. This study will leverage UM Learning Analytics
student learning data. Four research questions will drive the work: 1) Who are
the students that choose to engage, or not, in particular entrepreneurship
educational opportunities and how do these choices differ with gender?; 2) Why
do students choose to engage, or not, in particular entrepreneurship educational
opportunities, and how do these choices differ with gender?; 3) What are the
benefits to students of particular entrepreneurship education activities, and
how do these benefits differ with gender? This includes how students perceive
their fit within the entrepreneurship program as well as their general
perceptions of the program; 4) How do particular entrepreneurship educational
opportunities impact the current work of former students, including development
of entrepreneurial skills and mindsets, and how do impacts differ with gender?
The unique ability to use institutional learning analytics data and large scale
alumni surveys to inform targeted in-­depth interviews will offer the most
comprehensive look at the impact of engineering entrepreneurship education on
gender to date.