* 1531176
* US Ignite: Track 2: Mozilla Hive in Gigabit Cities: Living Laboratories for Next-Generation Learning Applications
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2015,12/31/2018
* Ben Moskowitz, Mozilla Foundation
* Cooperative Agreement
* Deepankar Medhi
* 12/31/2018
* USD 3,564,090.00

This project demonstrates the value of high-speed networks and, consequently,
seeds demand for further network investment. The project is a three-year, five-
city program of capacity building activities and collaborative application
development focused on tools that leverage high-speed, next-generation networks
for education and workforce development. Building on current NSF-funded
activities in Kansas City and Chattanooga where Mozilla has fostered and piloted
17 gigabit apps in collaboration with more than 30 local partner institutions,
this project directly complements the gigabit ecosystem-building work of the US
Ignite organization and its efforts to bring online and link new gigabit
innovation test beds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To create a national gigabit
innovation community, the project moves the work of gigabit technologists out of
the lab and into the communities where high-speed networks are now coming
online. It provides gigabit technologists deeper and sustained exchanges with
lead users so they can refine their applications based on observations and user
testing. It also increases visibility for early-stage applications and
facilitates deployment in brick-and-mortar settings in order to test and
validate app benefits with representative users. The support provided through
the Mozilla Hive project helps new entrants to the gigabit innovation community
mature into productive contributors to the ecosystem by promoting the continuous
development, iteration, and deployment of gigabit apps and celebrating
successful apps on the national stage. To accomplish these goals, the project
(1) establishes "Hive Learning Networks" in five gigabit cities, providing
sustainable grassroots social organizations that can test and iterate gigabit
applications at greater speed; (2) catalyzes local, community-based gigabit
application pilots in each city through the "Gigabit Community Fund," which
provides grants and project support; and (3) facilitates knowledge transfer
between developers, institutions, and cities to speed the spread and impact of
gigabit apps.