* 1531549
* MRI:  Development of An Airborne Infrared Spectrometer (AIR-Spec) for Coronal Emission Line Observation
* GEO,AGS
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2018
* Leon Golub, Smithsonian Institution Astrophysical Observatory
* Standard Grant
* Carrie E. Black
* 07/31/2018
* USD 1,200,591.00

Total solar eclipses offer unique opportunities for scientific explorations and
discoveries, and also for people of all walks of life and ages to witness one of
Nature's most fascinating displays of beauty. On August 21, 2017, a rare total
solar eclipse event will occur that will traverse the continental United States,
starting in Oregon and ending in South Carolina. The previous such occasion was
on 29 July 1878. The purpose of this major research instrumentation project is
to design, build, test, and fly a highly advanced imaging spectrometer to make
measurements during this eclipse, for the first time, of the solar corona in the
infrared spectrum. This opens a new wavelength window for observation of the
solar corona that has exiting potential for advancing our understanding of this
hard-to-observe region. The Airborne Infra-Red Spectrometer (AIR-Spec)
instrument will include a novel image stabilization system to allow it to be
deployed on NSF's Gulfstream V aircraft operated by the National Center for
Atmospheric Research (NCAR). Flying at an altitude above 49,000 feet makes it
possible to get measurements without disturbances from local weather and
avoiding most of the absorbing water vapor in the atmosphere that poses a
challenge for observations at the ground. The completion of this program will
see the delivery to NCAR of a stable commissioned instrument that is certified
and available for other scientist to fly on the GV for future research missions.
The GV can travel almost anywhere and re-flights at other future eclipses are an
obvious possibility to pursue. The July 2, 2019, South Pacific eclipse will be
the first chance for another eclipse flight. In addition, the stabilized high
resolution observing capability can be used by other experiments for solar and
atmospheric observations throughout the world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
will be carried out in collaboration between the scientists and engineers at the
Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory (SAO) and NCAR's High Altitude Observatory
(HAO), each contributing essential expertise and experience to ensure its
successful completion. The project will directly contribute to training the next
generation of instrumentation scientists while fostering diversity. A Harvard
graduate student from the School of Engineering and Applied Sciences will be
involved in all aspects of the project, including design, fabrication and test
of the AIR-Spec instrument, as well as analysis of the observations, if
scientific data are acquired during the eclipse. This will form the basis for
her thesis and she will enjoy the benefits of mentoring from scientists and
engineers at both SAO and HAO. In addition, the 2017 US solar eclipse is
expected to generate a huge amount of interest amongst the general public and
the project team will work closely with partners at the National Air and Space
Museum, the Boston Museum of Science and the Eclipse Mega-Movie group at HAO on
pre and post eclipse outreach events. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The AIR-Spec
instrumentation includes an image stabilization system, a feed telescope, a
grating spectrometer and a slit-jaw imager. It will measure emission line
intensity, FWHM, and Doppler shift a set of magnetically sensitive coronal
emission lines at a range of coronal positions during the August 21, 2017 "Great
American Eclipse". Although high resolution, high sensitivity coronal imaging
spectroscopy has never been performed between 1.4 and 4um, this spectral region
has great potential for coronal plasma diagnostics, for coronal hole
spectroscopy, and as a path finder for observations of coronal magnetic fields.
Infrared coronal emission lines are well suited for measuring magnetic field
properties using the Zeeman and Hanle effects, but such measurements require
high precision spectro-polarimetric instruments that cannot be designed until
the candidate emission lines have been characterized. The 2017 eclipse provides
a unique opportunity to survey these lines, and AIR-Spec observations can help
provide guidance for future ground-based Infrared observations. The AIR-Spec
commissioning flight during the 2017 eclipse will target three science goals:
(1) Search for high frequency waves in multiple lines at multiple locations in
the corona. These waves are candidates for heating and acceleration of the solar
wind. (2) Identify large-scale flows in the corona, particularly in polar
coronal holes. Three of the lines to be observed are expected to be strong in
coronal hole plasmas because they are excited in part by scattered photospheric
light. Line profile analysis will probe the origins of the fast and slow solar
wind. (3) Complement ground based eclipse observations to provide detailed
plasma diagnostics throughout the corona. AIR-Spec will measure IR emission of
ions also observed in the visible, giving insight into plasma heating and
acceleration at radial distances inaccessible with existing or planned
spectrometers. On the technology side, the AIR-Spec stabilization system removes
a significant obstacle to airborne observations. The system relies on inertial
measurements to stabilize the platform to &lt;1.4 arcsec RMS for the planned 0.3
sec exposure (1.7arcsec RMS per sec), allowing it to be used for a wide range of
solar and atmospheric imaging experiments. Finally, for the future there is the
possibility for AIR-Spec to be modified to add linear polarization optics for
direct measurements of coronal magnetic field direction.