* 1531585
* MRI: Acquisition of an X-Ray Diffraction (XRD) System
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2015,02/28/2017
* Saion Sinha, University of New Haven
* Standard Grant
* Song-Charng Kong
* 02/28/2017
* USD 197,376.00

The University of New Haven (UNH) will purchase a multipurpose X-Ray
diffractometer (XRD) system capable of identifying the crystalline phase of
solid materials, determining the thickness of thin films and measuring particle
sizes. The instrument will be used by faculty and students in several academic
programs at UNH including Chemistry, Electrical Engineering, Environmental
Engineering, Mechanical Engineering, Forensic Science and Environmental Science,
with a focus on undergraduate and graduate student research training. Faculty
and student researchers will investigate topics such as chemical sensing,
catalysis, green chemistry, environmental remediation and biomedical research.
The acquisition of a modern XRD system at the University of New Haven will have
significant impact on the greater University community. Activities that include
the XRD will be developed for UNH programs with the Engineering and Science
University Magnet School (ESUMS) a grade 6-12 school with a diverse population
drawn from the greater New Haven area. Availability of the XRD system on campus
will enable faculty at UNH to build partnerships and strengthen existing
collaborations with faculty at nearby institutions such as the Yale British Art
Gallery and the New Haven Mineral Club. UNH is primarily an undergraduate
institution and the instrument will also be available to the faculty for use in
laboratory courses.

Acquisition of a multipurpose XRD system, with capabilities for small angle
x-ray scattering (SAXS) and X-Ray Reflectivity measurements will have a
significant effect on the scholarly activity of the faculty and students at the
University of New Haven. The XRD will be able to analyze samples in the standard
Bragg Brentano geometry used for powder XRD measurements as well as in a
parallel beam mode, which will enable the X-ray reflectivity measurements
necessary for the study of thin films. In addition, the instrument will be
equipped with a SAXS accessory for the study of small particles, whether in
solid or solution form. The proposed research projects cover a wide range of
scientific and engineering disciplines. These projects include: 1) Investigation
of electrospun and mesoporous oxides for application in separations, chemical
sensing and catalysis (Chemistry), 2) Characterization of nanomaterials, such as
CVD-graphene and tunable thermal interface materials (Electrical Engineering),
3) Particle size measurements of polymer nanobeads used in drug delivery
(Chemistry), 4) Crystal structure determination of green catalysts (Chemistry),
5) Determination of the mechanism of atrazine dechlorination in water through
the structure and speciation of the surface bimetal catalysts (Environmental
Engineering), 6) Identification of changes in mineral compositions of soil that
result from the in situ chemical oxidation process used to treat organic
contamination (Environmental Engineering, 7) Study of the protein fouling of
medical devices 8) Building a diffraction pattern library of automotive paint
chip samples (Forensic Science), and 9) Collection of powder diffraction
measurements of mineral samples, with the intent to cross-reference with Raman
spectroscopic measurements (Environmental Science). Undergraduate and graduate
students, through their participation in one of these research projects, will
receive a unique, specialized research training on advanced instrumentation not
normally available at similarly sized institutions.