* 1531382
* MRI: Acquisition of a Multi-Beam SEM/FIB for Multidisciplinary Materials Study and Training
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2019
* Ashton Hamme, Jackson State University
* Standard Grant
* Joanne Culbertson
* 09/30/2019
* USD 559,660.00

The multi-beam scanning electron microscope (SEM) coupled with a focused ion
beam (FIB) has the capability to cut materials and to provide nano-scale images
with very high resolution. Acquisition of this instrumentation will enable
fundamental multidisciplinary research at Jackson State University (JSU) by
researchers from civil engineering, electrical engineering, chemistry, biology,
material science, and physics. Key research activities include efforts to
advance knowledge on 1/ new microbial technologies to strengthen soils to reduce
damage from earthquakes 2/novel approaches to treat the multi-drug-resistant
bacteria Salmonella with magnetic nanoparticles and 3/ enhanced fuel cell
development, which reduces pollution. The instrumentation will become a key
element of JSU's research infrastructure. The SEM/FIB will be used in
undergraduate and graduate courses and will promote partnerships and
collaborative activities with surrounding universities and national engineering
research centers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This advanced SEM/FIB instrumentation has
a milling depth up to 100nm, with image resolutions of 2.5 nm. This capability
will allow geotechnical engineering researchers to determine the 3D micro- and
nano-scale structure of bio-mediated soil materials, enabling discovery of
microbial induced calcite precipitation not visible from the surface.
Researchers will monitor the change in micro-structural features of stratified
silt-sand-gravel mixtures after dynamic triaxial tests, improving understanding
of the liquefaction behavior of stratified contractive soil composites. The
SEM/FIB will be used to characterize the interfacial bonding between geopolymer
composites and reinforcing steel coated with enamel under extreme environmental
conditions. The SEM/FIB will allow chemistry researchers to characterize the 3D
structure of bacteria and the interaction between bacteria and nanoparticles
with hybrid graphene oxide for label-free biosensing. Researchers in biology
will use the equipment to study the health effects of engineered nanomaterials.
Physicists, electrical engineers, and material scientists will use the SEM/FIB
to study the 3D internal morphology and related mass/charge transport behavior
of fuel cell components to develop a new generation of fuel cell.