* 1532061
* MRI: Development of an Integrated Neuroimaging Instrument with Temporal and Spatial Alignments for Brain Research
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2021
* Naphtali Rishe, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 08/31/2021
* USD 3,955,110.00

This project, developing a new integrated instrument for neuroimaging and brain
mapping, based on specialized software and unique hardware designs, aims to
elicit new understanding of the functional mappings of the brain in its normal
and pathology states focusing on key neurological disorders. Envisioning the
brain in terms of the structural, functional, and brain connectivity maps under
fully integrated recording modalities breaks the barriers of very challenging
time and space alignments. This also bridges scientific premises in building
system designs and novel software techniques that improve the delivery of
patient-care in terms of enhanced diagnosis as well as well-thought-out
treatment protocols. The work focuses on challenging neurological disorders of
epilepsy, Alzeimer's disease and Attention Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder (ADD-
ADHD) and related cognitive challenges so as to provide effective subject-
centric care. The general construct of the software algorithms and the hardware
components of this instrument facilitates research endeavors and applications
that extend to other neurological disorders (such as Parkinson) to be addressed
using novel hardware interfaces and related software modules and protocols.

This project utilizes a unique approach at collecting data in a fully integrated
setting across different recording modalities to elicit new understanding of the
functional mapping of the brain and in delineating normal state from the
specific pathology state of these challenging neurological disorders. It
performs pioneering work on integration in a same setting of non-invasive
navigated transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) for mapping the eloquent
cortex and instigating new protocols with embedded alignments and full
registration to - Neuro-navigation and pre-surgical evaluation, - Anatomical and
functional MRI for MRI/fMRI-guided magnetic stimulation, and - Microcoil designs
embedded into MRI and fully integrated with EEG electrodes for pinpointed TMS-
MRI-fMRI and EEG integration, all of which are to yield a fully integrated
instrument with the ability to augment capabilities for mapping, analysis, and
diagnosis, followed by elaborate intervention and treatment protocols for these
different neurological disorders.