* 1532224
* MRI: Acquisition of a High-resolution X-ray Microscope for Nondestructive 2D, 3D and 4D Characterization of Microstructures in Cross-Disciplinary Research
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2016
* Anthony Kovscek, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Joanne Culbertson
* 08/31/2016
* USD 779,547.00

X-ray computed tomography (CT) is an approach to nondestructive examination of
objects based on reconstructing three-dimensional (3D) images of the external
and internal features of an object from a series of two-dimensional X-ray images
taken at a large number of viewing angles. Medical CT imaging is commonly used
as a diagnostic tool, and similar approaches using higher X-ray intensities can
allow very detailed imaging of non-living samples for a wide range of research
applications across many fields of science and engineering. This Major Research
Instrumentation (MRI) award supports the acquisition of a high-resolution, 3D
X-ray microscope capable of producing images with three-dimensional resolution
smaller than 1µm (about 100 times smaller than the width of a human hair). This
system will be located in the Stanford Nano Shared Facilities, a core facility
providing researchers across Stanford University and from nearby institutions
with state-of-the-art instruments for specimen characterization and analysis.
This instrument will advance innovative research by investigators from multiple
disciplines across Stanford's Schools of Earth Energy &amp; Environmental
Sciences, Engineering, Humanities &amp; Sciences, and Medicine, as well as
investigators from San Jose State University and the California Academy of
Sciences, a museum, educational center and research facility in San
Francisco.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The high-resolution X-ray microscope will
improve Stanford's ability to conduct leading-edge research in materials
science, earth science, and life science by filling the gap in length scale (0.4
to 40 µm) within which no equipment currently at Stanford can generate non-
destructive 3D tomography images. It will support leading-edge basic research in
materials science, earth science, and life science. Researchers will use the
instrument to analyze the microstructure of shale rock, which contains pores and
other features at a range of sizes, enabling studies on more efficient
extraction of petroleum and sequestration of anthropogenic carbon dioxide. The
ability to image large samples with high resolution at a long working distance
will be exploited to study silicon microparticle anodes coated with self-healing
polymers for optimal design of longer-lasting batteries. The instrument will be
used for high-resolution imaging of inner-ear bones and the tympanic membrane of
mammals ranging from mice to humans to aid in more detailed modeling of the
mechanics of hearing and development of novel devices for correcting hearing
abnormalities. Researchers on improved fabrication of micro-electro-mechanical
systems (MEMS) devices will use the microscope to nondestructively examine the
internal structure of devices designed to minimize or eliminate fatigue
(repeated loading) failure, dramatically extending the useful life of devices
and sensors for a wide range of applications. The dual-energy imaging capacity
will allow simultaneous collection of high-resolution images of cartilage, bone
and vasculature in a single scan, providing new insights into the processes of
skeletal development and healing. Researchers at the California Academy of
Sciences will take advantage of the instrument's high-resolution, phase contrast
imaging capabilities for detailed examination of tissue interfaces as part of
studies on the anatomical and physiological effects of evolutionary
miniaturization. Through these and many other projects, this instrument will
become a key part of Stanford University's research infrastructure and enhance
the scope and impact of research across a wide range of science and engineering
disciplines.