* 1532232
* MRI: Acquisition of a Solid-State NMR Spectrometer for Chemistry Research Education and Training
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2018
* Richard Kaner, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 07/31/2018
* USD 997,720.00

With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation Program (MRI) and
support from the Chemistry Research Instrumentation Program (CRIF), Professor
Miguel Garcia-Garibay from University of California at Los Angeles (UCLA) and
colleagues Louis Bouchard, Richard Kaner, Alexander Spokoyny and Jeffery Zink
aquired a 600 MHz NMR spectrometer with solid state capabilities. This
spectrometer allows research in a variety of fields such as those that
accelerate chemical reactions of significant economic importance, as well as
those that allow study of biologically relevant species. In general, Nuclear
Magnetic Resonance (NMR) spectroscopy is one of the most powerful tools
available to chemists for the elucidation of the structure of molecules. It is
used to identify unknown substances, to characterize specific arrangements of
atoms within molecules, and to study the dynamics of interactions between
molecules in solution or in the solid state. Access to state-of-the-art NMR
spectrometers is essential to chemists who are carrying out frontier research.
The results from these NMR studies impact synthetic organic/inorganic chemistry,
materials chemistry and biochemistry. This instrument is an integral part of
teaching as well as research performed by undergraduate students at the
University of California at Los Angeles. This new high-field NMR spectrometer,
to be placed in an open-access, shared instrumentation facility, enriches the
research experiences of the many graduate students, postdoctoral fellows, and
undergraduate researchers who pursue research projects utilizing solid-state
NMR. The research supported by the use of solid-state NMR is very broad-based,
encompassing materials characterization, chemical synthesis, toxicology, and
instrumental analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award is aimed at enhancing
research and education at all levels, especially in areas such as: (a)
amphidynamic crystalline materials based on inertial rotors and dipolar arrays;
(b) in situ imaging of chemically reacting flows; (c) high throughput screening
of anti-fouling and anti-bacterial coating films; (d) naturally occurring
proteins and other biomolecules that act as robust and generalizable dispersing
agents for metal oxide nanoparticles; (e) cationic surface coatings on non-toxic
nanoparticles that enhance cellular uptake especially those where the toxicity
increases with the molecular weight on the polymer coating; (f) the unexpected
effect of the aspect ratio of nanorods on cellular uptake; (g) cerium dioxide
nanowires of precisely controlled length that can be synthesized using
hydrothermal methods; (h) metallic surface states in thalium compounds; (i)
robust thin films for desalination; (j) polymers produced from boron-rich
clusters; and (k) nanoparticle-based machines for trapping and releasing
molecules from mesopores.