* 1532136
* CAREER: Electroactive Graphene-Polymer System with Extreme Actuation and Tunable Properties
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2014,01/31/2018
* Xuanhe Zhao, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 01/31/2018
* USD 355,241.00

The research objective of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Program
award is to understand and exploit the large deformation, instabilities, and
microstructure evolution of electroactive graphene-polymer systems (eGPS) to
achieve extremely high actuation stress and strain, along with other novel
properties such as superhydrophobicity and tunable wettability. Subject to
voltages, existing polymers can reach relatively high levels of either stress or
strain, but not both. This imbalance in actuation stress and strain greatly
limits the energy density of these polymers and hampers their promising
applications. The proposed eGPS innovatively laminates films of polymer blends
and large-area graphene with hierarchical patterns. The polymer blends integrate
merits of different polymers, while the patterned graphene acts as lightweight
transparent electrodes with novel tunable properties. The proposed study will
take an integrated experimental and theoretical approach. A multi-field
microscopic system invented by the PI will be used to explore electromechanical
properties and instabilities of eGPS, and a multi-scale theoretical model will
be developed to quantitatively guide the design of new materials and structures.

Electroactive graphene-polymer systems represent a new type of soft active
material with multiple performance parameters that are superior to natural
muscles. These so-called artificial muscles are enabling diverse technologies
ranging from robotics and drug delivery to energy harvesting and storage. In
particular, artificial muscles promise to greatly improve the quality of life
for millions of disabled people by providing affordable devices such as
lightweight anthropomorphic prostheses and full-page Braille displays. The broad
impact of new artificial muscles is potentially analogous to the impact of
piezoelectric ceramics on the global society in the twentieth century. The
integrated educational objectives of the project include integration of soft-
active-material design into the engineering curriculum, a Research Experience
for Teachers program on artificial muscles, and a K-12 program. In addition,
students from underrepresented groups will be actively engaged in the project.