* 1532097
* MRI: Acquisition of a Multicollector Inductively Coupled Plasma Mass Spectrometer for Earth Science Research at the University of Texas at Austin
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2015,06/30/2018
* Alison Koleszar, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* David Lambert
* 06/30/2018
* USD 609,429.00

This award provides funding for the acquisition of a new generation multi-
collector inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometer (MC-ICP-MS). This
instrumentation would replace the aging MC-ICP-MS currently used by the Jackson
School of Geosciences, University of Texas, Austin. Acquisition of a new MC-ICP-
MS will expand the research directions and capabilities offered by the Jackson
School of Geosciences and enrich educational opportunities for students. JSG
faculty are engaged in a variety of outreach activities, and research involving
the new instrument will be integrated into an ongoing REU (Research Experience
for Undergraduates) program, GK-12 outreach program partnering K-12 teachers and
STEM graduate students, and GeoFORCE (a successful college preparatory outreach
program targeting Texas minority high school students).&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Numerous scientists at UT-Austin have both current and planned
research projects requiring a new generation MC-ICP-MS analyses. These
analytical needs include the development of new techniques in addition to
applying existing methodologies to answer new and innovative research questions.
These include U-series measurements to determine ages on carbonates. This will
be applied to a variety of research topics including studies of cave, pedogenic
and lacustrine carbonate deposits and dating of ostrich egg shells to
investigate the timing of human evolution. A modern MC-ICP-MS would also
facilitate the concurrent measurement of Hf and Pb isotopes and allow us to
identify both the isotopic fingerprint and age within a single growth zone in
zircons, crucial to investigations of magma chamber evolution and sediment
provenance. Additional research applications include high spatial resolution in
situ Sr isotope measurements in a) biogenic carbonates in fishes to reconstruct
migration histories, b) speleothems in karst hydrologic systems to reconstruct
drip-water evolution and climate, and c) feldspar phenocrysts to track magma
mixing and crustal assimilation. The new instrument will also be used to measure
a variety of isotopes including Li, Os, and Pb for isotopic fingerprinting of
mineral phases and bulk rocks and Fe and Zn isotopes to investigate metal uptake
in cells.