* 1532179
* MRI: Acquisition of a coupled optical and scanning probe microscopy facility for advanced materials research
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2015,12/31/2018
* Keith Neeves, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Harsha Chelliah
* 12/31/2018
* USD 245,878.00

The PIs will create a self-sustaining scanning probe microscopy (SPM) facility
with unique capabilities for advanced materials research at the Colorado School
of Mines (CSM). This instrumentation request includes an atomic force microscope
(AFM) coupled to an optical microscope for simultaneous imaging and physical
properties measurements at the nanoscale for a wide range of advanced materials
in renewable energy and life sciences. The proposed facility is designed for a
multi-user environment and will be operated in a shared-use facility, with
participation from the majority of departments across campus as well as our
regional partners the National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL) and Children's
Hospital Colorado (CHC). The PIs will organize and host an annual Rocky Mountain
Scanning Probe Microscopy Workshop to provide training opportunities and attract
new regional users to the facility beyond our partners at NREL and CHC.
Undergraduates will be introduced to SPM through our existing summer REU
programs.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The PIs will create a self-sustaining scanning
probe microscopy (SPM) facility with unique capabilities for advanced materials
research at the Colorado School of Mines (CSM). This instrumentation request
includes an atomic force microscope (AFM) coupled to an optical microscope for
simultaneous imaging and physical properties measurements at the nanoscale for a
wide range of advanced materials. The unique feature of the proposed SPM
facility is its ability to measure electrical and mechanical properties of
materials in direct registry with topography at nanoscale resolution under their
designed operating conditions (e.g illumination of photovoltaics and hydrated
conditions for biological). The measurement of interfacial physical properties
at small length scales is essential to the development of the next generation of
materials for renewable energy and life sciences. This facility will transform
the current empirical understanding of these complex materials into true
science. Specific advanced capabilities beyond standard SPM modes (contact,
tapping, phase) include optical microscopy, electro/mechanical property
measurement, and environmental control. The microscope facilitates quick
identification of the specific region of interest and enables optical
stimulation to obtain properties such as a photoconductivity or fluorescence in
registry with topology. Spatially resolved measurements of critical material
properties such as conductivity, modulus, and viscoelasticity can be made as a
function of temperature, humidity, and illumination intensity/wavelength.