* 1532264
* MRI: Development of a Pulsed Laser Source for Deep in Vivo Imaging, a Synergy of Physics and Brain Science
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2019
* Anna Devor, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 08/31/2019
* USD 790,100.00

This is a development project to construct a scanning two- and three-photon
microscope for deep imaging in the brain in support of activities related to
neuronal circuit analysis and neurovascular coupling. The ability to image ever
deeper in the brain with optical methods is a key enabling technology in our
ability to decipher neuronal anatomy and circuit function as well as
neurovascular function. Optical tools, together with labels of specific brain
structures, are the only means to probe the geometry and state variables of
single cells, e.g., voltage and second messengers, and the dynamics of brain
vasculature in a noninvasive or partially invasive manner in vivo. The current
method of choice for in vivo imaging makes use of two-photon microscopy with a
100-femtosecond pulsed laser sources to observe structure and dynamics
throughout the upper ~ 500 micrometers of cortex of mice. Yet there is a clear
need to image throughout the full depth of cortex, 1.0 to 1.2 micrometers in
mice, to determine the complete flow of information in cortical processing.
There is also a need to image deeper still into hippocampus and other
subcortical structures without excavated overlying tissue, as well as to
determine the loci of vascular control throughout gray and while matter. The
initial proposed experiments, all of which depend on the proposed instrument,
address topics in fundamental brain science as well biomedicine. Fundamental
issues revolve around neuronal plasticity and memory formation and include: the
formation of motor memories, where the learning of a behavioral task is believed
to follow from the formation of patterns of correlated neuronal output in motor
cortex; the transformation of sensory signals in cortex into memory traces, such
as learned fear via the amygdala and induction of depression via the habenula;
the role of specific gene products, known as inducible transcription factors, in
synaptic plasticity; and understanding how the prodigious adult neurogenesis in
the olfactory bulb is integrated into ongoing olfactory function. More applied
issues concern the role of exposure to nicotine alone in changing the basis for
memory formation, as well as issues in vasodynamics, including the locus for
neuronal control of its own nutriment supply through the cortical vasculature
and the impact of microinfarctions on cell death within the white matter, where
myelinated fibers traffic information from sensory to motor areas that span the
cortical mantle. Realization of this system will permit training of graduate
students and postdoctoral fellows in state of the art in vivo optical imaging.
UC San Diego, along with the greater La Jolla scientific community, supports a
large and highly collaborative neuroscience community with graduate students and
fellows who will pursue careers at institutes throughout the county, even the
world. They will be inspired to think of new experiments based on the
capabilities of imaging new vistas in the brain, as well as new associated
technologies, particularly in the design of optical probes of yet unmeasured
variables. Lastly, the high density of potential users within this community
will facilitate unanticipated refinements of deep imaging and perhaps transform
the proposed development project into a turn-key design for the benefit of the
global neurosciences communities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI
proposes to build an instrument, whose design is motivated by three threads of
work, that enables two- and three-photon imaging throughout the full depth of
cortex and into deeper structures. First is the use of 100-fs pulsed laser light
at wavelengths of 1.3 or 1.7 micrometers, where scattering is minimized but
absorption by water is still weak; second is the use of an optical amplifier to
increase the energy per pulse and drive fluorescence at greater depths, and
third is the use of aberration corrective optics to counteract distortion of the
incident beam with increasing depth into brain tissue.