* 1532345
* Adaptive Memory
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2018
* James Nairne, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Gottlob
* 07/31/2018
* USD 377,287.00

Identifying and understanding factors that improve human memory is one of the
central aims of human memory research, with important societal implications for
education, training, enhancing cognitive performance, and rehabilitating the
memory-impaired. This project investigates a recently discovered means of
improving memory known as the survival processing effect, whereby thinking about
an item in terms of its potential survival utility in an imagined survival
scenario greatly improves memory for that item relative to other known mnemonic
techniques. This project is aimed at understanding why the survival processing
benefit to memory occurs. Specifically, what are the underlying mechanisms
responsible for the dramatic levels of memory improvement shown over other known
memory-enhancing techniques? Is a deeply ingrained evolutionary basis
responsible, or can the effect be explained by factors such as increased
encoding variability brought on by the type of elaboration involved in imagining
the survival scenarios? Understanding this will increase understanding of the
overall operation of human memory more generally, including the basis of
dramatic memory improvement in certain situations. Based on this understanding,
this project will additionally attempt to identify and investigate other ways in
which memory for particular items might be improved over and above the
improvement shown using well-established mnemonic techniques.

The research team will investigate hypotheses concerning the possible proximate
mechanisms that produce the enhanced memory in imagined survival situations. For
example, survival processing may naturally lead to variable encodings, or
connections to other things in memory, that benefit later retrieval. To test
this hypothesis, experiments are proposed that limit (or not) the extent to
which people can use variable encodings to aid retrieval after survival-based
processing. In addition to attempting to identify the proximate mechanisms of
the survival processing effect, the research team will also explore a new area
by investigating the mnemonic consequences of potential imagined contamination--
do people remember objects that are said to have been touched by a sick person
better than those said to have been touched by a healthy person? Avoiding
contamination is extremely relevant to survival, and preliminary research
suggests that people preferentially remember potentially contaminated objects;
thus, this is a promising new area to explore beyond survival processing.