* 1532271
* MRI: Acquisition of an Integrated Data-Assisted Research and Training Scalable Storage System (IDARTs3) at Washington State University
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2017
* Brian Lamb, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 08/31/2017
* USD 360,000.00

The instrument enables high performance data analysis, transfer, and sharing at
a level that is not possible with current platforms, tools, and approaches. In
the areas of genomics, genetics, breeding, and bioinformatics, access to the
IDARTs3 platform offers the ability to dissect the genomic basis of diversity
and answer questions that range from disentangling the evolutionary history of
organisms to linking genomic changes to phenotypic changes with direct
application in breeding. Moreover, improvements in transfer rates of large data
afforded by the proposed IDARTs3 platform will advance the field of Big Data
biology, by facilitating the development of sophisticated computational tools
that not only are scalable to large data sizes, but are also capable of enabling
new kinds of scientific inquiries only possible through the integration of the
heterogeneous data sets. In the area of atmospheric and environmental research,
the instrument enables researchers to expand the boundaries for the support of
resource management science through efforts such as Earth System modeling and
related decision support systems, and serves as the basis to launch modeling
initiatives with high-density sensor network technology (for example in
monitoring meteorological and atmospheric chemistry). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project, acquiring and deploying a shared and integrated high performance data
transfer platform instrument across two campuses, initially addresses areas of
genomics, genetics, breeding, and bioinformatics, as well as atmospheric and
environmental research. Given that these areas generate a significant amount of
data and their need for a high performance data storage and transfer, they are
most appropriate for the deployment of IDARTs3. Once operational, IDARTs3 will
enhance other research areas and serve as a cyberinfrastructure platform to
support existing collaborative networks and forge scientific partnerships. The
design and operation of IDARTs3 represents a singular partnership between the
WSU academic and research community and the Information Technology (IT)
organizations - a partnership that fully integrates the needs of the WSU Pullman
and Spokane campuses and is responsive to these needs by closing critical
capabilities gaps.&lt;br/&gt;