* 1532038
* Lightning Initiation Studies
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2016
* Thomas Marshall, University of Mississippi
* Standard Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 08/31/2016
* USD 198,952.00

Despite decades of lightning research, there is still much to be learned about
the initial sparks of a lightning flash and how lightning creates a path through
the sky. This award will provide researchers the opportunity to set up an array
of electrical sensors in northern Mississippi to collect important data that can
be used to investigate and gain a better understanding of the mechanisms that
start a lightning flash. Increased understanding of lightning is important due
to significant societal impacts that lightning has on people and property each
year. The award will also contribute to the education and training of the next
generation of scientists through the support of a postdoctoral researcher and a
graduate student.

This award will fund the deployment of a suite of electrical sensors at nine
different sites across northern Mississippi. Each site will contain an E-charge
sensor, a VHF sensor, and a dE/dt sensor. In addition, the PIs will deploy two
high speed video cameras, one with the ability to operate at 50,000 frames per
second. The instrumentation setup is designed to allow the researchers to
address the following questions: 1) What events begin and amplify an initial
E-charge (IEC) and how do these events cause the IEC? 2) When and how does the
transition from non-conducting air to a hot conducting channel occur? 3) What do
initial breakdown pulses of intracloud flashes look like optically and are they
similar to initial breakdown pulses of cloud-to-ground flashes? 4) Why do some
flashes have multiple sets of IB pulses? 5) Why do some Narrow Bipolar Pulses
initiate intracloud flashes while others do not?