* 1532125
* MRI: Acquisition of an Ultrafast Amplified Laser System
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Nien-Hui Ge, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Leonard Spinu
* 08/31/2018
* USD 443,022.00

This Major Research Instrumentation award supports the acquisition of an
ultrafast multimodal spectroscopy system. This system enables advanced time-
resolved spectroscopy experiments, a key capability in material and molecular
research. The system will be placed in the Laser Spectroscopy Facility (LSF),
housed in the Department of Chemistry of the University of California Irvine.
Traditionally, ultrafast lasers and spectroscopy have not been part of user
facilities because former ultrafast laser technologies were too complex and
unreliable to support many users. Consequently, the user community of ultrafast
technologies has remained small, and the unique research capabilities of
ultrafast optical techniques have remained inaccessible to an audience
interested in such capabilities. In this Program, a state-of-the-art ultrafast
laser system is made accessible through a three-pronged model based on optimized
facility conditions, strong user support and a partnership with industry. This
model addresses past limitations to make ultrafast laser technology and its
research capabilities accessible to a much broader community of researchers. In
making the technology available to a much larger user base, the impact of
ultrafast spectroscopy is significantly amplified. The Program ensures broad
exposure and dissemination of ultrafast spectroscopy capabilities. On the UCI
campus alone, the Laser Spectroscopy Facility (LSF) in which the system will be
housed supports more than 300 users, and serves 13 departments on campus. By
leveraging strong connections with institutions and companies neighboring UCI, a
large community of researchers will have access to the ultrafast spectroscopy
capabilities offered through the facility. The impact of the requested
technology is further fortified by a strong user training program, established
channels of dissemination, and an outreach program designed around the ultrafast
spectroscopy instrument &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The most fundamental processes in
matter evolve on ultrafast time scales. Examples include the making and breaking
of chemical bonds, conformational motions of molecules, evolution of optical
excitations, and electron transfer processes. These phenomena form the
mechanistic basis of scientific challenges in chemistry, biology and materials
science: designing efficient catalysts, understanding nature's solution to light
harvesting materials, and optimizing the efficiency of solar cells, to name a
few. Ultrafast laser technologies have proven indispensable for meeting these
challenges, as they provide direct recordings of such fast fundamental
processes. Consequently, the demand for ultrafast spectroscopy is growing, as an
increasingly expanding pool of chemists, chemical engineers, physicists, and
biologists come to rely on this technology. The goal of this Program is to bring
the unique capabilities of ultrafast laser science to a broad community of
researchers. This goal is achieved by implementing a three-pronged model: 1)
Acquisitions of a commercial ultrafast laser light source and nonlinear optical
spectrometer, with unprecedented performance, versatility, stability, and
simplicity of operation. The system is made available through a staffed user
facility at the University of California, Irvine (UCI); 2) A partnership with
Newport Optics, the supplier of the instrument. The partnership establishes a
push-pull mechanism between technology and application for impacting a broad
community beyond the users at UCI; 3) The Ultrafast Consultation Board (UCB), a
team of experimental and theoretical ultrafast spectroscopists who provide
general assistance, technical guidance, mentoring and help with the
interpretation of data. By providing depth to the analysis of acquired
spectroscopic data, the UCB bolsters the scientific impact of measurements made
by non-experts, expands the user base, and magnifies the breadth of research
topics supported by this Program.