* 1532266
* MRI: Acquisition of a liquid chromatography system to enhance interdisciplinary biochemistry research at Linfield College
* BIO,DBI
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2018
* Anne Kruchten, Linfield College
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 07/31/2018
* USD 83,177.00

An award is made to Linfield College to support biochemical research with
undergraduate students in the chemistry and biology departments with the
acquisition of a fast purification liquid chromatography (FPLC) system. A
research-grade FPLC system will support cross-disciplinary research and training
for a diverse group of undergraduate students, especially in the research areas
of mitochondrial transcription protein interactions and protein folding
patterns. This cutting edge instrument will strengthen the already robust
molecular and cellular biology facilities and encourage the recruitment and
retention of high quality faculty teacher-scholars, including those from
underrepresented groups. The FPLC instrument will also allow for the development
of a research-intensive biochemistry course that has at its core fundamental
research into the structure and function of proteins. Thus, acquisition of a
FPLC system will allow the chemistry and biology departments to support the
education and training of students from biology, chemistry, and biochemistry and
molecular biology majors in courses and participate in independent research and
summer research as part of Linfield's Student-Faculty Collaborative Research
Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has two research areas: 1)
understanding regulatory mechanisms of mitochondrial transcription, and 2)
investigating how distinct protein folding patterns may affect cellular
function. Protein purification is essential to the methods of this project, and
the FPLC system from this award will allow for the reproducible purification of
the proteins of interest. Specifically, this includes mitochondrial proteins
involved in transcription which are then used in an in vitro transcription
assay, and conformational variants of the cortactin protein analyzed for
functionality in an actin polymerization assay. Multiple methods of protein
purification chromatography will be used including anion exchange
chromatography, size exclusion chromatography, and metal ion affinity
chromatography.