* 1532229
* MRI: ACQUISITION OF A CAVITY RING DOWN SPECTROSCOPY ANALYZER FOR RESEARCH IN WETLAND CARBON CYCLING BY FACULTY AND UNDERGRADUATES AT CHAPMAN UNIVERSITY
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Jason Keller, Chapman University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 08/31/2018
* USD 200,785.00

An award is made to Chapman University to acquire a cavity ring down
spectroscopy (CRDS) analyzer for research in wetland carbon cycling. The
acquisition of a CRDS analyzer will increase opportunities for research training
by leveraging a number of existing mentoring and teaching programs at Chapman
University, an undergraduate-serving institution in Orange, California. These
include mentored undergraduate research; integration into an existing Ecosystem
Ecology laboratory course; use in an established research training program for
local high school students; and training of community college students supported
by an ongoing NSF REU-Site program. These training efforts will continue a
successful track record of engaging females and underrepresented minorities in
cutting edge scientific research using world-class instrumentation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Wetlands are among the most important ecosystems in the
global carbon cycle because of their large soil carbon pools and high methane
emissions. Given their importance in the global carbon cycle, wetlands have been
important drivers of climate change in the past. A pressing question in global
change biogeochemistry remains whether a significant fraction of the large
carbon pool in wetland soils will be released as methane in future climates. A
more complete mechanistic understanding of the complex microbial processes that
mediate wetland carbon cycling is necessary to accurately model the response of
wetland decomposition and methane dynamics to ongoing global change. Stable
isotopes are a powerful tool for exploring wetland carbon cycling and can
provide important insights into the production and consumption of methane in
wetlands. The acquisition of a cavity ring down spectroscopy (CRDS) analyzer
will allow for the measurement of stable isotopic composition of carbon dioxide
and methane. The acquired instrument will provide important insights into the
processes of decomposition, methane production and methane consumption in
wetland ecosystems to better understand their role in the global carbon cycle.