* 1532528
* Summit on Predictive Modeling of Ductile Failure; Austin, Texas; March 2-3, 2015
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2015,09/30/2016
* Krishnaswamy Ravi-Chandar, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* kara peters
* 09/30/2016
* USD 8,250.00

Modeling of ductile fracture in structural materials has been a problem of
longstanding interest in engineering. The assessment of the durability,
reliability and failure of structures and structural components through crack
growth relies critically on the ability to offer predictive solutions to these
engineering problems through such modeling. The goal of the Summit is to bring
together researchers in the area of predictive modeling of structural failure to
assess the capabilities of state-of-the-art predictive modeling tools.
Discussions will focus on the ability to generate blind predictions of failure;
the results will be disseminated to the community through an open-access peer-
reviewed journal article. The impact of this workshop lies in the generation of
a group-based consensus on the open issues that remain in ductile failure
modeling that can be used as a basis to guide future investments in failure
modeling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Currently, ductile failure in structural
materials is modeled through many different methods, incorporating various
aspects of deformation and failure processes in models of the microscale
response. The discussions at this Summit will be focused around blind
predictions of response, made without prior knowledge of failure modes. The
Challenge problem posed by the Sandia National Laboratories provides a vehicle
for assessing the capabilities of the community to provide such solutions. In
this Challenge, fourteen teams made predictions of the response and failure in a
complex geometrical part, made of an important engineering alloy - Ti6Al4V -
exhibiting complex constitutive behavior; these predictions will be compared to
laboratory experiments from three independent laboratories. The discussions will
focus on the capabilities of the different models in predicting ductile failure,
and more importantly identify gaps in our modeling capability and provide
directions/challenges for future research in this area. Participation is open to
researchers who provided blind predictions and to interested researchers to
participate as observers.