* 1532269
* MRI: Acquisition of a 500 MHz NMR for Faculty Research and Undergraduate Training at Western Washington University
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2018
* Sergey Smirnov, Western Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 07/31/2018
* USD 502,500.00

With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation Program (MRI) and
support from the Chemistry Research Instrumentation Program (CRIF), Western
Washington University will acquire a 500 MHz NMR spectrometer with a triple
channel nitrogen-cooled probe. The spectrometer will allow research in the areas
of biochemistry, inorganic and synthetic organic chemistry, and the material
sciences among others. The research will impact areas of biological and
environmental interest such DNA stability and structure, blood substitutes, fuel
cells and carbon dioxide mitigation. In general, Nuclear Magnetic Resonance
(NMR) spectroscopy is one of the most powerful tools available to chemists for
the elucidation of the structure of molecules. It is used to identify unknown
substances, to characterize specific arrangements of atoms within molecules, and
to study the dynamics of interactions between molecules in solution. Access to
state-of-the-art NMR spectrometers is essential to chemists who are carrying out
frontier research. This instrument will be an integral part of teaching as well
as research performed by undergraduate students and masters degree students at
Western Washington University. The equipment and associated training will be
available free-of-charge to faculty and students at regional
institutions,including Seattle University and others from the Seattle
area.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award is aimed at enhancing research
especially in areas such as studying (a) structure/dynamics and function of the
cytoskeleton modulating proteins of the villin/supervillin family; (b) reduction
of the carbon dioxide molecule into useable C1 sources utilizing earth abundant
metals as catalysts; (c) structure/dynamics investigation of permutein
myoglobins and single-strand hemoglobins as potential synthetic blood
substitutes; (d) enantioselective synthesis of environmentally- and
biologically-relevant natural products; (e) structure/dynamics of sortase
enzymes complexed with their polypeptide substrates; (f) probing the design of
conductive biomaterials; and (g) polymer-directed synthesis of multimetallic
nanoparticles for fuel cell catalysis.