* 1532007
* MRI: Development of an Integrated Gas Monitoring and Source Identification Unmanned Aircraft System for Exploration, Compliance and Assessment
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Ahmed Mahdy, Texas A&M University Corpus Christi
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 08/31/2021
* USD 539,998.00

This project, developing an integrated gas monitoring and source identification
unmanned aircraft system (UAS), aims to explore, check environmental compliance,
and assess critical activities to enable a wide range of appropriate multi- and
inter-disciplinary activities with emerging developments in UAS and sensor
technologies. These activities address regional and national oil and gas
industry needs. Gas exploration and environmental compliance and assessment are
critical activities for the energy industry. New sensor technologies for
detecting emissions from land and water have improved the ability to detect
gases and flux (such as helium, methane, carbon dioxide, and oil).
Unfortunately, use of these technologies in gas exploration and source
identification by the energy industry and regulatory agencies is limited (due to
operation, deployment and effectiveness issues). The proposed instrument
addresses these issues by integrating advanced gas sensing and imagery (SAR and
EO-IR) technologies on a UAS. The instrument features flexible operation and
configuration on an aerial platform that can be rapidly deployed and can easily
survey large and remote areas. The UAS-based instrument enables predetermined
surveying missions and provides a more effective detection based on a combined
geocoded imaging-sniffing data that is presented in a user friendly format
including overlay maps. The instrument will enable the &lt;br/&gt;- Energy
industry to make well-informed decisions for efficient and cost-effective
exploration, environmental compliance and assessment, and &lt;br/&gt;- Research
and academic community with a novel and effective sensing
platform&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The institution, located in a socio-economically
and educationally isolated region, has one of the six Federal Aviation
Administration (FAA) test sites in the nation, the Lone Star UAS Center of
Excellence and Innovation (LSUASC). Moreover, the institution is committed to
expanding research and academics among HSIs in these critical fields by
enhancing infrastructure, faculty, and scholarship. This instrumentation
promotes the social and economic development for the region enabling researchers
to capitalize in the expanded opportunities offered by the center, RCN CE3SAR
and industries in the Gulf. The project broadens the participation of and
provides research and training opportunities for a large number of
underrepresented students).