* 1532078
* MRI: Acquisition of a cryoprobe- and autosampler-equipped AVANCE III 500 MHz solution NMR
* BIO,DBI
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2018
* Valerie Copie, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 07/31/2018
* USD 504,140.00

An award is made to Montana State University to purchase a Bruker AVANCE III 500
MHz NMR spectrometer equipped with a sensitivity-enhanced Prodigy TM broadband
cryoprobe. The new instrument will enhance research and education at all levels.
It will strongly benefit student education at both the graduate and the
undergraduate level by enabling student training in new, powerful small molecule
NMR analytical techniques. MSU provides direct, hands-on training to students in
state-of-the-art instrumentation, which is taught in venues ranging from summer
undergraduate research programs to sophomore organic laboratory courses to
graduate level instructional programs. The new AVANCE III 500 NMR with its
enhanced capabilities will also enable them to enhance participation of minority
Native American students through remote instrument access that will provide NMR
spectra to students enrolled in sciences classes at remote Montana Tribal
Colleges and at other small colleges across the state.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
cryoprobe-equipped AVANCE III 500 NMR will allow researchers to use NMR for
chemical structure elucidation and the global analysis of small molecule
metabolites (e.g. metabolomics) research, will enhance usage by permitting
higher throughput data collection, and will facilitate studies in applications
with inherently low selectivity. In addition, the new instrument will be the
workhorse NMR spectrometer for the university and will greatly expand Montana
State University's NMR research capabilities for acquisition of multidimensional
(1D, 2D, 3D/nD) heteronuclear (1H, 13C, 15N, 31P) NMR spectra of small
molecules. The new instrumentation, which will replace MSU's aged 500 NMR
spectrometer, will boost research productivity and student education. The new
instrument is absolutely essential to maintain the university's research
productivity, educational quality, and outreach mission, and for successful
recruitment of new faculty.