* 1532133
* MRI: Development of an Urban-Scale Instrument for Interdisciplinary Research
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2020
* Charles Catlett, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Alejandro Suarez
* 09/30/2020
* USD 3,110,488.00

This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) grant will enable the creation of a
new tool - The Array of Things - for continuously measuring many aspects of the
physical environment of urban areas at the city block scale. Data collected will
fill gaps in understanding across many disciplines such as how air pollution is
controlled by urban form and traffic patterns, how different materials and
surroundings affect the magnitude of the urban heat island, what correlations
exist between weather, noise, pollution and traffic and social and behavioral
trends, and how urban infrastructure faults and failures can be better detected
and predicted. The instrument opens an opportunity to experiment with new
sensors and data collection strategies such as will be critical to understanding
the urban microbiome or tracking disease outbreaks. Ultimately, the objective is
to not only better understand elements of the built and natural infrastructure,
but also the interactions of infrastructure systems with people and the
environment, to understand complex city dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
instrument will comprise 500 nodes deployed in the City of Chicago, each with
power, Internet, and a base set of sensing and embedded information systems
capabilities, with capacity to evolve annually to incorporate new technologies
and experiments from an already growing scientific partner community. The
project will directly support scientific data infrastructure services for
specific communities - engineering, physical, life, social, and climate sciences
- with a data repository and tools to support workflows that enable combination
with other urban data sources, analytics, and calibration and validation of
computational models. In addition, the instrument's open data and application
programming interface architectures will support science and education
communities incorporating the data into their existing algorithms, tools, and
methodologies, to merge the data with their community data resources, and to
develop applications that directly access the instrument data in real time. The
instrument will provide better spatial and temporal resolution of multiple
phenomena simultaneously and at larger scales than what is available from other
sensing modalities in urban infrastructure networks. The instrument will be the
first instance of a general-purpose research infrastructure that allows
researchers to rapidly deploy networks of sensors, embedded systems, computing,
and communication systems at scale in urban
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This instrument award by the Advanced
Cyberinfrastructure Division is jointly supported by the NSF Directorate for
Computer &amp; Information Science &amp; Engineering, and the NSF Engineering
Directorate (Division of Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental, and Transport
Systems, and Division of Civil, Mechanical &amp; Manufacturing Innovation).