* 1532168
* MRI: Upgrade of an EPR Spectrometer to Serve Marquette University and the Greater Milwaukee Region
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Richard Holz, Marquette University
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 08/31/2018
* USD 162,803.00

With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation Program (MRI) and
support from the Chemistry Research Instrumentation Program (CRIF), Professors
Brian Bennett and colleague Richard Holz from Marquette University will upgrade
of an electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) spectrometer. This upgrade will
provide a high-quality cryogenic EPR system for research and education, without
the expense of a new instrument. This equipment will allow research in a variety
of fields such as those that provide insight on how biologically relevant
species with unpaired electrons behave. In general, an EPR spectrometer yields
detailed information on the geometric and electronic structure of molecular and
solid state materials. It may also be used to obtain information about the
lifetimes of free radicals, short-lived, highly reactive species involved in
valuable chemical transformations as well as the initiation of pathological
tumor growth. These studies will impact a number of areas, from the synthesis of
inorganic and organic molecules to the development of new solid state materials
to compounds of magnetic and biological interest. Employing examples inspired
from ongoing research, this instrument will be an integral part of research and
teaching at the undergraduate and graduate levels at Marquette. Additionally,
the investigators have identified a significant number of interested users from
the area outside of this institution. Examples are major users from the
Universities of Wisconsin at Milwaukee, Madison and Parkside as well as St
Maurice College, Milwaukee School of Engineering and Concordia
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award is aimed at enhancing research and
education at all levels, especially in areas such as (a) carrying out
mechanistic studies on nitrile hydratase; (b) studying structural and functional
models for metalloenzyme active centers; (c) studying inorganic supramolecular
and materials chemistry; (d) studying nitrogen-cycle enzymes; (e) assembling and
regulating of Cyt c oxidase by Hig1 and oxa1p; and (f) investigating carbenes,
carbocations and non-covalent halogen interactions.