* 1532655
* ASUS: Arctic SUStainability: A Synthesis of Knowledge
* GEO,OPP
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2023
* Andrey Petrov, University of Northern Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Erica Hill
* 04/30/2023
* USD 209,367.00

This award provides support to U.S. researchers participating in a project
competitively selected by a 14-country initiative on global change research
through the Belmont Forum. The Belmont Forum is a high level group of the
world?s major and emerging funders of global environmental change research and
international science councils. It aims to accelerate delivery of the
international environmental research most urgently needed to remove critical
barriers to sustainability by aligning and mobilizing international resources.
Each partner country provides funding for their researchers within a consortium
to alleviate the need for funds to cross international borders. This approach
facilitates effective leveraging of national resources to support excellent
research on topics of global relevance best tackled through a multinational
approach, recognizing that global challenges need global
solutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Working together in this Collaborative Research
Action, the partner agencies have provided support for research projects that
utilize existing Arctic observing systems, datasets and models to evaluate key
sustainability challenges and opportunities in the Arctic region, to innovate
new sustainability science theory and approaches to these challenges and
opportunities, and support decision-making towards a sustainable Arctic
environment. This award provides support for the U.S. researchers to cooperate
in consortia that consist of partners from at least three of the participating
countries and that bring together natural scientists, social scientists and end
users (e.g., policy makers, regulators, NGOs, communities and industry).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Arctic Sustainability: A Synthesis of Knowledge (ASUS)
unites a team of diverse expertise from Canada, Denmark, Greenland, Iceland,
Norway, Russia, Sweden, and the US to develop a framework that highlights the
state of current understanding, best practices, and metrics for achieving
sustainability in the Arctic. NSF provides support to the US team members of the
ASUS consortium. The effort takes into account not only the social, demographic,
economic, and environmental aspects of resilience in creating this framework,
but looks at these across a range of scales using an inclusive process that
engages a breadth of Arctic stakeholders. The team leverages existing
investments in Arctic sustainability, observing, and development to inform the
eight work packages (1: Sustainable Arctic Regions and Communities, 2:
Sustainable Arctic Environments, 3: Sustainable Arctic Cultures, 4: Sustainable
Arctic Economies, 5: Sustainable Arctic Cities, 6: Sustainable Resources, 7:
Monitoring of Sustainability, 8: Governance for Sustainability). The team will
gather and communicate progress through the vast networks of international
Arctic scientific associations. The synthesis products from this project will be
disseminated through workshops and through educational and web-based materials.
Key Arctic stakeholder, such as the Sustainable Development Working Group of the
Arctic Council, will be considered when constructing products and materials. The
team will conduct this synthesis through a managed constellation of centers and
a committee structure to ensure continued communication and coordination of this
complex, multi-national effort.