* 1532013
* MRI Track 1: Acquisition of High Performance Computing to Model Coastal Responses to a Changing Environment
* GEO,OCE
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2018
* Bruce Segee, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 07/31/2018
* USD 266,309.00

The Gulf of Maine is undergoing unprecedented change due to a combination of
influences from climatic and anthropogenic sources. By some measures, the Gulf
of Maine is among the fastest warming regions of the world's oceans. This
warming trend has been concurrent with a 73% increase in extreme events, defined
as the top 1% of storms, over the past century. The potential impact of these
changes are significant for an economy tightly linked to marine resources and
infrastructure. Maine's aquaculture industry (comprising mostly salmon and
shellfish) has doubled in value from 2005 to 2013 and is now second only to the
lobster industry in the state. Maine's commercial fisheries were valued at a
record $585 million dollars in 2014. The effective management of natural
resources and infrastructure in the coastal zone requires modeling tools that
not only help us understand the ecological and physical consequences of natural
and human-induced changes in environmental drivers, but also help us predict
those changes and weigh the costs and benefits of adaptation or mitigation. The
accurate and timely forecasts of severe storms and coastal inundation are
critical to ensure safe maritime activities, protect life and property along the
coast. To further the development of these modeling tools for the coastal
economy of Maine, the University of Maine will significantly increase its high
performance computing to meet the rigors of problems faced by the coastal zone.
Specifically, increasing the computing capacity at the University of Maine will
allow coastal modelers to increase the spatial resolution of models to inform
decisions made on local scales (e.g., aquaculture leases) and significantly
increase access to high performance computing for undergraduate and graduate
students. Consequently, a new generation of scientists familiar with advanced
computing can be trained to develop the environmental decision support
infrastructure needed in changing coastal ecosystems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
University of Maine is an established international and national leader in
marine science research and education and as such, the community that relies on
coastal resources and infrastructure looks to the University to inform them of
impending changes. Maine is uniquely positioned physically and economically to
be affected by climate change. The state sits on one of the sharpest latitudinal
gradients in temperature in the world and has one of the longest coastlines in
the country. What the future holds for fisheries and aquaculture systems along
the coast is difficult to predict. However, the capacity to forecast multiple
scenarios of potential future change will allow managers and decision makers the
ability to adapt. There are four reasons for an investment in increased high
performance computing: (1) an increase in spatial resolution will allow models
currently under development to resolve finer scale features and inform many
decisions made on the scale of less than 100 m, (2) the current high performance
computing cluster runs at near full capacity, reducing educational opportunities
for graduate and undergraduate students, (3) linking climate change projections
to the regional scale using dynamic downscaling as opposed to simpler methods
requires more processing capacity, and (4) the ability to run multiple scenarios
of future change will more adequately characterize uncertainty. The cluster
system will have 28 nodes, each with two 12 core Intel Xeon 2.6 GHz CPU's, the
latest Haswell v3 chips. This will comprise 672 cores and will yield about 28
peak TFlops. This nearly triples the high performance computing power at the
University of Maine.