* 1532239
* MRI: Development of an exoskeleton for simultaneous assessment of brain, muscular, and nervous system output during functional arm and hand tasks
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2023
* Eric Wolbrecht, Regents of the University of Idaho
* Standard Grant
* Wendy C. Crone
* 08/31/2023
* USD 1,288,496.00

The development of a new instrument for simultaneous assessment of brain,
muscular, and nervous system output during functional arm and hand tasks will
provide unprecedented insight into the inner workings of arm and hand function,
including movement intention and movement performance. The developed BiLateral
Upper-extremity Exoskeleton for Simultaneous Assessment of Biomechanical and
Neuromuscular Output (BLUE SABINO) would be the first of its kind with the
ability to record extensive metrics from both left and right hemispheres of the
brain, muscle activation patterns, and movement of both left and right arms
simultaneously. Particularly evident in populations with neuromuscular
impairment, there is a gap in our current knowledge between the action
potentials generated by the brain and the resulting movements generated by the
muscles. This Major Research Instrumentation award will address this gap by
facilitating a better understanding of arm function along the full neuromuscular
pathway from thought to action. BLUE SABINO will also enable further study on a
variety of cutting-edge research areas from brain-computer-interfaces and
virtual environment simulation to advanced control of industrial and medical
robotics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BLUE SABINO will combine the mechanical
precision and repeatability of a 28 degree-of-freedom (DOF) dual-arm
exoskeleton, with existing high-end acquisition systems for collecting
electroencephalographic (EEG) and electromyographic (EMG) data from the brain
and neuromuscular system, as well as processing algorithms to compute general
assessment metrics. The exoskeleton components will allow natural reach and
grasp movements through two 14-DOF (12 active, 2 passive) wearable arms. EEG and
EMG acquisition will be performed with at least 32 and 64 channels,
respectively, per side. Together, the instrument will provide a groundbreaking,
holistic instrument for quantitative assessment and evaluation of arm function
not currently possible. Acquisition of biometric data from both left and right
sides of the body will allow evaluation of unilateral and bimanual activities of
daily living (ADL), as well as a means of monitoring and evaluating task
performance for both healthy and impaired users. The comprehensive assessment
capacity will enable transformative research across a wide spectrum of domains
including: functional outcome assessment, computation and planning of targeted
therapeutic approaches, advanced therapy/response correlations, novel brain-
machine-body rehabilitation paradigms, and development and optimization of
brain-computer interfaces (BCIs) and brain-controlled
neuroprosthetics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is supported by the
Engineering Directorate's Civil, Mechanical and Manufacturing Innovation (CMMI)
Division along with the Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental, and Transport
Systems (CBET) Division.