* 1532249
* MRI: Acquisition of Computer Cluster for Data-Driven Discovery in Materials Research and Education
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2016
* Nicholas Kioussis, The University Corporation, Northridge
* Standard Grant
* Leonard Spinu
* 08/31/2016
* USD 298,660.00

This Major Research Instrumentation to the University Corporation, Northridge
provides support for expanding and strengthening the computational facility of
the W.M. Keck Computational Materials Theory Center at California State
University Northridge (CSUN), a Hispanic serving institution. The cluster will
enable cutting-edge materials research and education in the following three
areas: (1) in strongly interacting many-body electronic systems; (2) in spin
transport in multifunctional devices; and (3) in interfacial charge transfer and
separation in excitonic photovoltaics. The goal is to advance fundamental
understanding of exotic quantum states of matter, to unravel intricate
interaction between electron charge and spin, and to expand the knowledge basis
for rational design of photovoltaic materials. The research has potential to
lead to faster computers, ultra-high capacity memory storage devices, and
cheaper "plastic" solar cells. The cluster will also facilitate the education
and training of next generation of materials scientists, including students from
underrepresented groups. Computational courses will be developed where students
gain hands-on experience in scientific programming and solving practical
problems by computation. The cluster will also offer opportunities for high-
school teachers and their students via NSF funded teachers summer camps to learn
about computational materials science.

The research team will develop state-of-the-art computational approaches and
apply them to fundamentally important problems in condensed matter physics and
materials science. The researchers will investigate fundamental problems
associated with correlated electron systems and demonstrate novel physical
phenomena emerging in complex materials. The improved understanding and
quantitative prediction based on computational modeling on the complex
properties of these interacting systems will provide valuable information and
guidance for the theoretical and experimental research in the field. The
scientists will study the electronic structure and spin transport of
multifunctional nano-systems consisting of ferromagnetic and ferroelectric
tunnel junctions based on multiferroics and topological insulator materials. The
coupling between different degrees of freedom and its sensitivity to interfacial
structure will give rise to a wealth of exciting phenomena, providing
unprecedented access to emerging multi-functionalities of future spintronic
devices. They will tackle a grand challenge in solar energy conversion, charge
transfer and separation at donor/acceptor interfaces, which is the bottleneck
for excitonic solar cells. A first principles based theoretical framework will
be developed to address fundamental problems at the organic/organic and
organic/inorganic interfaces. The computational developments and the proposed
research have the potential to provide fundamental understanding of important
unresolved questions in areas of condensed matter physics and materials science,
ranging from understanding new states of matter, topological characterization,
unconventional superconductivity, and quantum phase transitions in strongly
interacting electron and spin systems; to spin transport in
ferromagnetic/ferroelectric tunnel junctions and spintronic devices; and to
charge transfer and separation at donor/acceptor interfaces pertinent to solar
cells.