* 1532079
* MRI: Acquisition of a Raman Spectrometer  for Research and Training at the University of Mississippi
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Charles Hussey, University of Mississippi
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 08/31/2018
* USD 201,666.00

With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) Program and the
Chemistry Research Instrumentation and Facilities (CRIF) Program, the University
of Mississippi will acquire a Raman spectrometer. Raman spectroscopy has become
an integral analytical tool in academic chemistry departments, in industry, and
in forensic laboratories for the analysis of materials and for basic and applied
research. The instrument uses a laser to interact and scatter light from the
material to produce a spectrum. The spectrum provides basic information on the
composition and structure of the material in a sample. The instrument will be
employed in their research by graduate and undergraduate students. It will be
incorporated into undergraduate laboratory classes and a Forensic Science
program to train students with modern equipment. Students from at least four
Mississippi Primarily Undergraduate Institutions (PUIs) and Historically Black
Colleges and Universities (HBCUs) will use this advanced analytical
instrumentation. The institution will become a regional resource for researchers
in need of the technique.

The award is aimed at enhancing research in areas such as (a) elucidating
effects of weak noncovalent interactions on biological building blocks; (b)
characterizating newly developed nanomaterials including solar cell building
blocks, catalysts for carbon dioxide reduction, new organic semiconductor, and
gold nanoparticles; (c) developing admicellar polymerization synthetic
techniques; (d) studying the effects of carbon dioxide uptake into carbonaceous
materials; and (e) studying ionic liquids and their intermolecular interactions.