* 1532057
* RAPID: Modeling Communication Management and Trust Networks in Ebola Response in the Dallas-Fort Worth Metropolitan Region
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/15/2015,08/31/2016
* Simon Andrew, University of North Texas
* Standard Grant
* David Mendonca
* 08/31/2016
* USD 39,939.00

The general aim of this Grant for Rapid Response Research (RAPID) is to collect
ephemeral data of ad hoc collaborations developing and dissolving in response to
Ebola. Capturing the nature of collaboration and information exchanged can
assist in designing a crisis communication system that will help local
government organizations be better prepared for surprise events. The project
activities will also advance the state of knowledge of how city governance and
emergency response organizations receive and communicate risk information to
solve protective action dilemmas, especially during a pandemic outbreak. The
findings will be shared with the first responders in the region. This will in
turn impact a larger population of over 6.4 million citizens who reside in the
Dallas-Fort Worth (DFW) region. In addition to advancing undergraduate and
graduate teaching, training, and learning, the study provides a doctoral student
with field research, data collection, coding, analysis, and publication
experience. By leveraging the knowledge of a large network of alumni from the
Master of Public Administration and the Emergency Administration and Planning
programs, will also meet the university's goals of being a regional leader in
research and contributing to solving societal
problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Based on the Institutional Collective Action
framework, the first objective is to investigate the ad hoc communication and
trust networks that have emerged in responding to Ebola between city managers,
first responders, and key health care personnel in the DFW region. Currently,
there are no studies of Ebola response at the organizational level. Previous
scholars generally used public sources to map terrorist organizations networks;
others employed content analysis of official documents detailing preparedness
planning to map the type/patterns of interorganizational collaboration, and
described such interactions and collaborations as metaphors. However, such
techniques of data collection and analysis are fraught with limitations due to
incomplete information and biases in media framing and reporting. The meaningful
benefits of ad hoc collaborations to individual organizations are also seldom
noted by the mass media. Using Social Network Analysis, we seek to investigate
whether closely-knitted community organizations with a strong sense of
belongingness can enhance the capacity of individual organizations to gain
access to a wide range of additional information. The second objective is to
examine the "outcome" related to risk communication and protective action
decision-making of these network structures. The data collection will be
conducted through 40 face-to-face semi-structured interviews of emergency
management coordinators followed by mail surveys of 300-350 emergency response
agencies. This study will result in at least two peer-reviewed publications,
three presentations at the Natural Hazards and Application Workshop, the
American Society for Public Administration, and at Regional Emergency Managers
and Voluntary Organizations Active in Disasters (VOAD) meetings.