* 1532843
* 2015 Fifth Annual Mid-Atlantic Regional Mathematics Student Conference
* MPS,DMS
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2016
* Padmanabhan Seshaiyer, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 03/31/2016
* USD 19,602.00

This award supports participation in the Fifth Annual Mid-Atlantic Regional
Joint Mathematics Conference, held at George Mason University, March 20-21,
2015. The goals of the conference are to (a) bring together students and experts
in industry and academia; (b) provide undergraduate and graduate students as
well as post-doctoral associates and new doctoral degree holders an opportunity
to present their research in a professional conference setting; (c) foster
interdisciplinary collaboration among research groups from both academia and
industry; (d) encourage networking between students and industry professionals
and; (e) increase student awareness of, and interest in, U.S. government and
private industry careers. This conference will strengthen the connection between
mathematical advances in industry, government agencies, and academia.
Professionals from industry and government agencies, academicians, and students
will benefit from the diverse collection of talks, focusing on real world
problems as well as recent theoretical advances. The core participating
universities for this conference are George Mason University, Virginia
Polytechnic Institute, and Shippensburg University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
conference will focus on recent advances in applied mathematics, including
optimal control theory, partial differential equations and the finite element
method, computational topology, probability theory and stochastic processes,
fluid dynamics, the modeling of materials, and machine learning. Additionally,
the conference will feature talks concerning traditionally pure and applied
areas of mathematics with emphasis on computational aspects of problem solving
as well as education. The conference will help to prepare mathematical sciences
students for careers in business, industry, and government. Industry
participants will benefit from learning about cutting-edge academic advances and
from access to highly-trained problem solvers, and students will benefit from
exposure to real world problems, thus giving context to their areas of study.
The broader impact of the conference is the increased collaboration between
industry, government and academia. By bringing these diverse groups together,
the meeting will foster the exchange of ideas on how to tackle new, complex
problems. Additionally, the conference provides young academic researchers a
chance to network with industry professionals. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Conference
web page: sites.google.com/site/siammidatlantic