* 1532778
* Collaborative Research: Integrating neural interfaces and machine intelligence for advanced neural prosthetics
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2018
* Kapil Katyal, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Shubhra Gangopadhyay
* 07/31/2018
* USD 257,000.00

Brain-machine interfaces (BMI) read signals directly from the brain to control
external devices such as robotic limbs. While this technology has great
potential to benefit people who are paralyzed, BMIs often have poor performance
because they use noisy, low-level signals to simultaneously control many aspects
of the robotic limb's movements. In contrast, this project will address this
shortcoming by reading high-level intents from the brain in order to control an
intelligent robotic system. These changes reflect cutting-edge advances in
neuroscience and machine intelligence and will require close cooperation between
scientists, engineers, and physicians. The project aims to leverage expertise
across these diverse fields in order to generate significant improvements in BMI
technology to advance the national health, increase scientific understanding of
the brain, and lead to dramatic improvements in the quality of life for these
severely disabled persons.

This collaborative project will decode high-level cognitive actions from neural
signals recorded in the parietal cortex of a tetraplegic human, then carry out
those intents using a smart robotic prosthesis. Persons with tetraplegia who
have multielectrode arrays (MEA) implanted in reach and grasp areas of the
posterior parietal cortex (PPC), will participate in experiments to explore the
neural representation of cognitive intentions in human PPC including object
selection, action intention, and neural control of robotic limbs. Experimental
results will be used to construct BMI control algorithms optimized to decode
these cognitive signals. In parallel, a modular, semi-autonomous robotic
prosthesis will be developed that can identify household objects and plan reach-
and-grasp movements to manipulate or transport the objects. These scientific and
technological efforts will be supported by continued clinical care of the
tetraplegic participants. The study will explore increasingly capable iterations
of the BMI system, culminating in testing of the fully developed BMI system in
the participants' own home environment where they will practice activities of
daily living. The resulting system will leverage deep insights in cognitive
neuroscience and advanced capabilities in machine sensing and robotic control
systems to substantially improve the ease of use and capability of brain-machine
interfaces.