* 1532907
* Dual Enrollment Technician Pathways and Careers in Electronics Engineering and Computer Integrated Machining
* EDU,DUE
* 12/15/2014,11/30/2017
* Deborah Porto, Johnston Community College
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Teles
* 11/30/2017
* USD 144,287.00

This project is designed to recruit rural high school students into community
college technician degree programs that are linked to manufacturing jobs in the
region. The project activities include: 1) developing a new Electronics
Engineering Technology dual-enrollment program, 2) creating awareness among high
school and college counselors, teachers and faculty, parents and students on the
content of and career potential for Electronics Engineering and Computer-
Integrated Machining technicians, 3) providing activities including summer camps
to increase the recruitment of female and male high school students to dual
enrollment technology programs, and 4) educating high school and college
counselors on technician careers through externships and return to industry
programs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The project is improving
student learning in engineering technician programs by building on a pilot dual
enrollment technician program established in computer-integrated machining. It
is adapting materials, methods, and marketing materials from ATE Centers in
Florida, Connecticut, and South Carolina. To increase opportunities for students
to work in high paying jobs in manufacturing, the project is focusing on groups
that are currently underrepresented in the field, particularly females. There is
strong institutional support and there are strong partnerships with the public
school system, manufacturers, and the economic development community.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: In order to meet the skills gap faced by regional
manufacturers, the project is developing and strengthening a pipeline of skilled
employees for area manufacturers that is not dependent on incumbent worker
retraining. The creation of a close partnership between manufacturers, the
community college and the high schools is providing a response to changing
technology in manufacturing to ensure their long term profitability. The
expansion of dual enrollment programs is affording students new career options
not previously understood and doubling the pipeline by focusing on both females
and males. Long term, the success of the project is enabling the development of
additional technician dual enrollment programs and creating a model Career
Academy for high school students that can be adapted by other rural communities.