* 1532188
* MRI: Development of a microfluidic flow cytometer for high-throughput noninvasive single-cell physio-chemical analysis
* BIO,DBI
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2019
* Vladislav Yakovlev, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 07/31/2019
* USD 710,564.00

An award is made to Texas A&amp;M University to develop a new and unique
instrument which will be sought by users within and outside Texas A&amp;M
University and provide unsurpassed capabilities for the cutting-edge research
and education in the areas of molecular and cellular biology, agriculture,
engineering, medicine, and national defense. The new instrumentation is unique
in many aspects, and it is anticipated that it will play a major role in
developing new approaches for high-throughput cellular analysis, which are in
high demand in biology and medicine. One of the thrust areas of emerging
applications for this instrument is lipidomics. Microbes (both natural and
engineered) that can convert biomass into oil offer the promise of achieving
sustainable oil production and enhancing domestic energy independence. The newly
developed instrument will substantially enhance the University infrastructure by
uniting several Colleges, Institutes and Centers. This project will support
broader impacts that promote the education and training of undergraduate and
graduate students, as well as the general public. Specifically, this project
will provide research opportunities and training for highly motivated
undergraduates across several colleges and research disciplines; provide unique
educational opportunities for students from the Texas Rio Grande Valley and the
United States-Mexico border region, which includes the most economically
disadvantaged areas of the country according to the U.S. Census Bureau. The
results will be broadly disseminated through publications, public presentations,
tutorial, and hands-on training seminars. Finally, findings from this research
will be disseminated to the public through broadcasted segments on "Invisible
Jungle", an undergraduate-produced radio program that is carried weekly on the
local National Public Radio Affiliate, KAMU radio (College Station,
Texas).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Identification, classification and
sorting live cells are activities of considerable research and commercial
interest. Chemical composition and elasticity in cells play an important role
our classification and our understanding of function. Conventional analysis of
the chemical composition of cells involves the use of molecular labels or
analytical approaches that destroy cell viability. Similarly, the conventional
analysis of biomechanical or elastic properties of biological materials involves
labor intensive and slow approaches. No commercial instrument exists to assess
those properties at a high throughput rate (&gt;1000 cells per second) and non-
invasively. The potential demand for such instrumentation is enormous, since
almost every research/industrial/clinical lab relies on cell sorting. By
providing additional capabilities, the newly developed instrument will also fill
existing gaps in instrumentation. Innovations in scientific instrumentation
often share several key features. First, these innovations perform measurements
that were previously impossible. Second, they perform analyses at low cost with
unprecedented throughput. Finally, instrumentation innovations address an
important scientific need. Here, we will develop a transformative technology
platform that contains all of the hallmarks of innovation in scientific
instrumentation, and as such, has the potential to significantly advance life
science, biomedical and engineering research. The overall instrument will be
composed of two parts: (1) an optical sensing unit optimized for (a) chemical
analysis of cells by means of coherent anti-Stokes Raman scattering
spectroscopy, and (b) biophysical measurements of elasticity in cells through
coherent Brillouin scattering; and (2) multifunctional microfluidic devices
providing standardized platforms for cell delivery, sorting, and in situ
validation of cell?s elastic properties. The newly developed instruments will
also be validated using biological samples.