* 1532287
* MRI: Acquisition of a High Field, Wide Temperature Range Electrical, Magnetic and Thermal Properties Measurement System
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Janet Tate, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Leonard Spinu
* 08/31/2018
* USD 544,100.00

The instrument acquisition provides state-of-the-art capability for measuring
electrical, thermal and magnetic properties of a broad variety of materials, to
enable next-generation information storage devices; high-speed electronics;
lower-cost and higher-efficiency solar cells; high-energy physics infrastructure
and medical imaging technologies to name a few. In addition, it will support
industry-university partnership to develop new and advanced techniques for
investigating materials. The equipment will fill a critical void in the
materials research infrastructure in Oregon and be designated as a shared
resource available to other academic institutions and regional small businesses.
Graduate and undergraduate students participating in the research projects will
gain experience in advanced measurement techniques on a platform widely used in
research and development laboratories worldwide. The robustness and ease of use
of the instrument will also enable enriching science outreach opportunities for
high school and under-represented minority students in the community.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The acquisition of the instrument enables
turnkey as well as custom characterization of electrical, magnetic and thermal
properties of a wide variety of materials, including semiconductor,
multiferroic, magnetic and superconducting materials. Turnkey options available
include state-of-the-art magnetometry, and thermal conductivity and electrical
charge transport measurements over a wide range of temperature (1.8 K to 400 K)
and magnetic field (0 to 14 T). The open hardware and software architecture of
the system, amenable to customization, will permit development of new
measurement techniques to support materials discovery as well as fundamental
understanding of the physics underlying material behavior. Specifically, the
systematic measurements and cutting-edge experiments enabled by the instrument
will facilitate discovery and design of new materials with strong coupling
between multiple properties including high-coercivity magnetostrictive
materials; room-temperature multiferroic materials based on Aurivilius-phase or
magnetoplumbite compounds; and metastable materials that promise higher
photovoltaic and thermoelectric energy conversion efficiency. It will support
the creation of new characterization techniques including atomic-resolution
magnetic microscopy using vortex electron beams; sub-cellular imaging of live
biological samples by magnetic particle imaging and advanced systems for
measuring magnetostrictive and magnetoelectric properties of materials. It will
lead to understanding of the fundamental physics underpinning electron-electron
interactions in nanostructures; conduction processes in quantum-dot solids; and
magnetoelectric coupling in multiferroic materials. Experiments using
dielectrics to screen Coulomb interactions will provide compelling new tests of
Luttinger liquid theory and Mott insulator gap theory in carbon nanotubes. And
it will enable development of novel synthesis and manufacturing methods for 3D
printed magnetic materials, multiferroics, quantum dot solids and niobium
superconductors.