* 1532894
* Collaborative Research: Measuring Information Content of the Artifacts of Early Design
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/11/2015,08/31/2018
* Chiradeep Sen, Florida Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Rich Malak
* 08/31/2018
* USD 114,873.00

The objective of this collaborative research project is to measure the
information content of different artifacts used in early design no matter how
the design is described, and also to study the growth of information, or
reduction of uncertainty, in the early stages of engineering design. Information
of various types is produced and used in design, and each may be expressed in
different forms, such as pictures, text, symbols, or animation. A general design
representation is being developed to translate any type of design information
into a neutral form. Second, metrics are being created to measure the
information content of artifacts based on this neutral representation, along
with tools to quantify the information content of designs. Models developed on
an earlier project will be used to validate the information metrics by
experimentally measuring how information within different designs, as measured
by the metrics, can reduce design uncertainty. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If
successful, this research will transform the methods for control and evaluation
of engineering design projects. With information measurable in the context of
decisions, computer tools and formal methods could be built to measure the
progress of design projects in terms of the information used and decisions made,
rather than the more indirect metrics used today, such as time elapsed or money
spent. This research will stimulate new research into the understanding and
measurement of the "state of knowledge" of a design team. By having a way to
measure knowledge state, it could be possible to quantify the designer's
knowledge gain throughout a design project, which could lead to new tools and
methods for evaluating a design team's capability in retaining and reusing
knowledge between projects, and for objectively assessing the learning curves of
student design teams. The findings of this research will be integrated into
design-related courses at each university in order to improve students'
appreciation for "learning by doing" and give them a better feel for the
complexity of decision-making in engineering design.