* 1532628
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Early EEOC, Legal Mobilization, and the New Administrative State
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2017
* Tania Melo, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Mark Hurwitz
* 08/31/2017
* USD 25,194.00

General Summary

This project analyzes the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission's (EEOC) early
history in order to advance understanding of legal mobilization and state
capacity. The study examines the EEOC's ability to implement its objectives
without formal authority and the role of non-state actors in the implementation
of employment discrimination law, which would in turn inform how understaffed
government agencies can successfully shape legal and political reform and how
legal mobilization can be a tool of state capacity building. The PI does this
through a multi-site comparative design that creates the first district court-
level database of early EEOC litigation efforts.

Technical Summary

The PI analyzes the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission's (EEOC) early
history in order to advance understanding of legal mobilization and state
capacity. The PI contributes to three sets of scholarly literature: (1)
Administrative Law and State Capacity; (2) Legal Mobilization; and (3) Labor
Law, Politics and the History of the EEOC. The study examines the EEOC's ability
to implement its objectives without formal authority and the role of non-state
actors in the implementation of employment discrimination law, which would in
turn inform how understaffed government agencies can successfully shape legal
and political reform and how legal mobilization can be a tool of state capacity
building. The PI does this through a multi-site comparative design that creates
the first district court-level database of early EEOC litigation efforts. The
data collection process involves formal interviews, archival research, and
survey research.