* 1532107
* MRI: Acquisition of An FEI Helios NanoLab G3 CX Dual Beam FIB System for Research, Education and Outreach at Vanderbilt University
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2017
* Richard Mu, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Leonard Spinu
* 07/31/2017
* USD 928,786.00

This Major Research Instrumentation award supports Vanderbilt University with
the acquisition and commissioning of an FEI Helios NanoLab G3 CX dual beam
focused ion beam (FIB) system for multidisciplinary research, education, and
outreach in nanoscale science and engineering. The FEI Helios Nanolab G3 CX dual
electron and ion beam system provides such capability for a group of researchers
across Middle Tennessee, including those at Vanderbilt, FISK, and Austin Peay
State Universities. The research projects address problems of technological
importance such as nanowires for high-efficiency direct thermal to electrical
energy conversion, creating novel man-made materials for manipulating light, for
better solar cell design, and characterizing complex artificial vascular
systems. Importantly, when integrated with the existing scanning transmission
electron microscopy system at Vanderbilt, the acquisition of the NanoLab G3 CX
system will help to establish an atomic-resolution microscopy infrastructure
that is urgently needed in Middle Tennessee. The scientific research is tightly
integrated with educational efforts, including hands-on training of graduate
students. In addition leveraging various outreach programs at Vanderbilt, the
impact of this project will be extended to high school students through
demonstration of fabrication and manipulation of unique nanostructures.
Moreover, the close collaboration between Vanderbilt and FISK Universities, a
historically black university, will facilitate participation of underrepresented
groups. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This powerful instrument will enable fabrication
of nanoscale features with high precision, preparation of site-specific TEM
samples, and three-dimensional (3D) nanoscale imaging. These new capabilities
will lead to research activities addressing a broad range of nanoscience and
nanoengineering challenges: from high performance thermoelectric nanowires to 3D
all-dielectric metamaterials, from nanocomposite photovoltaic materials to
complex 3D micro/nanofluidic networks. As an enabling tool, the dual beam FIB
system will also open new opportunities and catalyze new collaborations among
nanoscience researchers at Vanderbilt and across the Middle Tennessee. Together
with the recently installed FEI Tecnai Osiris S/TEM, this project will establish
the much-needed research infrastructure for high resolution microscopy in Middle
Tennessee, which will produce significant impacts on many researchers at
Vanderbilt and six nearby universities