* 1532235
* MRI Collaborative Consortium:  Acquisition of a Shared Supercomputer by the Rocky Mountain Advanced Computing Consortium
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Howard Siegel, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Stefan Robila
* 08/31/2018
* USD 700,000.00

A cluster supercomputer is deployed by the University of Colorado Boulder (CU-
Boulder) and Colorado State University (CSU) for the Rocky Mountain Advanced
Computing Consortium (RMACC). This high-performance computing (HPC) system
supports multiple research groups across the Rocky Mountain region in fields
including astrophysics, bioinformatics, chemistry, computational fluid dynamics,
earth system science, life science, material science, physics, and social
sciences with advanced computing capabilities. It also provides a platform to
investigate and address the impact of many-core processors on the applications
that support research in these fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The system
integrates nodes populated with Intel's conventional multicore Xeon processors
and Many-Integrated-Core (MIC) 'Knights Landing' Phi processors interconnected
by Intel's new Omni-Path networking technology. Users of the new HPC system have
access to existing data management services including data storage, data
sharing, metadata consulting, and data publishing, leveraging the NSF-funded
high-performance networking infrastructure and long term storage system, as well
as additional cyberinfrastructure, at CU-Boulder and CSU. The many-core feature
of this HPC system enhances graduate and undergraduate students' education and
training as they develop, deploy, test, and run optimized applications for next
generation many-core architectures. Training for researchers and students is
provided through workshops appropriate for introducing diverse audiences to the
efficient and effective use of HPC systems, the challenges of vectorization for
single core performance, shared memory parallelism, and issues of data
management. Additionally, advanced workshops on large-scale distributed
computing, high-throughput computing, and data-intensive computing are offered
during the year and at the annual RMACC student-centric HPC Symposium. The
Symposium brings together hundreds of students, researchers, and professionals
from universities, national laboratories and industry to exchange ideas and best
practices in all areas of cyberinfrastructure. For-credit HPC classes will be
delivered for online participation, educating the next generation of
computational scientists in state-of-the-art computational techniques.