* 1532115
* MRI: Acquisition of an Isotope Ratio Mass Spectrometer for the University of Hawaii at Hilo Analytical Laboratory
* BIO,DBI
* 08/15/2015,01/31/2019
* Tracy Wiegner, University of Hawaii at Hilo
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 01/31/2019
* USD 568,192.00

An award is made to the University of Hawaii at Hilo (UH-Hilo) Analytical
Laboratory to acquire an Isotope Ratio Mass Spectrometer. This new instrument
will be capable of analyzing solid samples like soils, as well as plant and
animal tissues for stable isotopes of carbon, nitrogen, sulfur, hydrogen, and
oxygen. It will also be able to analyze liquid samples for stable nitrogen and
oxygen isotopes in nitrate, hydrogen and oxygen isotopes in water, and stable
carbon isotopes in dissolved organic carbon and carbon dioxide. This instrument
will be the only one on Hawaii Island capable of these analyses, and the only
one in the state and the greater tropical Pacific island region capable of
measuring stable isotopes of sulfur and hydrogen in solid samples, as well as
dissolved organic carbon. The Analytical Laboratory is integral to the UH-Hilo's
mission to inspire learning, discovery, and creativity inside and outside of the
classroom, and improve the quality of life in Hawaii, the Pacific region, and
the world. It is the only facility on Hawaii Island that trains students, many
of which are from underrepresented groups (Hawaiian, Pacific Islander, and
female), to use analytical instrumentation for environmental sample analysis.
The expanded stable isotope analyses capability of the Laboratory will engage
even more underrepresented students in Science, Technology, Engineering, and
Mathematics (STEM) disciplines, exposing them to cutting-edge technology, and
allowing them to gain meaningful, employable research experience. These
experiences will increase student retention and improve recruitment.
Collaborations among UH system faculty, federal agencies, and researchers from
other national and international institutions will be enhanced with this new
instrument. Products resulting from use of this instrument will be disseminated
via the Laboratory website, student symposia, as well as faculty conferences and
peer-reviewed publications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Applications of stable
isotopes in ecology have grown exponentially in the last 20 years allowing for a
greater understanding of biogeochemical cycles in natural and human-influenced
ecosystems, food web structure and dynamics, animal migrations, paleoclimate, as
well as the ability to identify pollution sources and track them. This
instrument will allow for a new suite of elements in different forms to be
analyzed, substantially increasing the types of studies and student training the
UH-Hilo Analytical Laboratory can support in and out of state. Additionally,
faculty and students across the UH-Hilo campus will have access to this state-
of-the-art technology for their research projects and courses. UH-Hilo is
located on Hawaii Island which is often referred to as a "Living Laboratory"
because of its numerous climatic zones, active volcano, coral reefs, and high
rate of endemism; therefore, the new types of cutting-edge stable isotope
studies with this new instrument are endless.