* 1532006
* MRI:  Acquisition of a Laser-diode-heated Floating Zone Furnace for Education and Research
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2017
* Martha Greenblatt, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Leonard Spinu
* 07/31/2017
* USD 339,990.00

This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) award will be used by Rutgers
University New Brunswick to acquire a Laser-diode-heated Floating Zone furnace
(L-FZ), which will be used to grow high quality bulk single crystals of a
variety of complex quantum materials including multiferroics, ferroelectrics and
low-symmetry magnets. The instrument will support research and education at
Rutgers Center for Emergent Materials (RCEM), Rutgers, and the State University
of New Jersey. L-FZ is a crystal growth furnace that is newly developed in
Japan, and the successful acquisition of L-FZ through this grant will result in
the first installation of L-FZ in the United States, serving the national
interest by ensuring world-leading research on crystalline quantum materials in
the US. Compared with, for example, the conventional infrared-lamp-heated
Floating Zone furnace, L-FZ has unique functionalities such as the extreme
temperature gradients, high growth temperatures and fast growth rates. These
functionalities will enable the growth of high-quality single crystals of an
entirely new set of crystalline materials and result in transformative
discoveries of new materials. The Principal Investigators and nation-wide
collaborators from, for example, New Jersey Institute of Technology (NJIT),
Brookhaven National Lab, U. of Tennessee, and Johns Hopkins, will benefit
significantly from the previously-unavailable crystals for large-range and high-
resolution imaging techniques such as scanning probe microscopy and transmission
electron microscopy as well as neutron scattering. L-FZ will support research
and education activities involving undergraduate, graduate students and postdocs
at RCEM, as well as K-12 students in the New Jersey region and beyond through
the Partners in Science Program organized by the Liberty Science Center, New
Jersey. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The functionalities of the Laser-diode-heated
Floating Zone furnace enable the growth of [1] metastable phases, [2]
incongruent melting compounds, [3] materials with high vapor pressure, [4]
compositional complex materials, and [5] materials with low viscosity melt. It
will be the first machine of its kind installed in the United States, and has
potential to be a game changer for education and research in the field of the
synthesis of functional quantum materials. Homogeneous single crystals grown
with L-FZ will be utilized for transformative investigations of local/global
topology, emergent functionalities and manipulation of mesoscopic domains,
domain walls, and textures in a wide range of crystalline materials such as
multiferroics, low-symmetry magnets, thermodynamically metastable phases and
improper ferroelectrics. Using a wide-range of high-resolution imaging
techniques such as scanning probe microscopy and transmission electron
microscopy as well as neutron scattering, investigation will lead to scientific
understanding and technological exploitation of domains, domain walls, and
mesoscopic textures such as skyrmions.