* 1532225
* MRI:  Acquisition of an Atomic Force Microscope with Optical, Thermal, and Electrical Analysis Capabilities
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2018
* Benjamin Aleman, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Leonard Spinu
* 07/31/2018
* USD 283,906.00

The Major Research Instrumentation program provides funds to support the
University of Oregon (UO), Oregon State University (OSU), and Portland State
University (PSU) with the acquisition of an atomic force microscope instrument.
The instrument will provide state-of-the-art capabilities in atomic-scale
resolution, multi-mode surface imaging (topography, temperature, magnetization,
voltage, stiffness, etc.) and simultaneous optical microscopy that are not
currently available to researchers at UO, OSU, and PSU. The instrument will be
housed in an open-access, shared semiconductor nanofabrication and
characterization facility, which is part of UO's Center for Advanced Materials
Characterization in Oregon (CAMCOR), will be managed by full-time professional
staff, and will be available for use by researchers in academia and industry
throughout the region. The equipment will also be used to develop new curriculum
for the UO Master's internship program tracks in semiconductor devices and
photovoltaics, polymers, and optics, and the UO Advanced Materials Analysis and
Characterization graduate program. These programs attract students from across
the US and are helping to provide a trained high-tech workforce to drive the US
economy. Furthermore, the instrument will be integrated into a broad range of
established public outreach activities on the UO campus through CAMCOR including
the SAIL program (low-SES high school students), the SPICE program
(underrepresented middle school students), and Sustainable Materials Research
Training (SMaRT) for undergraduates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ability to
visualize, manipulate, and probe systems, such as a living cell or a
semiconductor device, at the atomic scale plays a vital role in our exploration
of urgent questions across the physical, biological, and biomedical sciences.
Furthermore, the ability to study systems at this length scale, also known as
the nanoscale, holds an essential role in the development and engineering of new
technologies in areas as distinct as materials, biotechnology, alternative
energy, transportation, and electronics. The instrument has the capability to
acquire atomic-resolution topographical, electrical, thermal, and mechanical
information on materials ranging from metals, semiconductors, and ceramics, to
proteins, synthetic polymers, and living cells, while concurrently performing
optical studies via an inverted microscope. The instrument offers force
spectroscopy on the level of single atomic bonds and can used as a lithography
tool for nanofabrication. The AFM will enable a range of research across
chemistry, physics, biology, and geology. Uses include the study of
electrodynamic, thermal, and strain coupling in solid-state quantum bits, in
situ studies of (photo)electrochemical processes, ascertaining calcite growth
dynamics for geology, electron-hole selectivity mapping for improved
photovoltaics, the measurement of membrane protein assemblies in liquids, the
characterization of thermal properties of novel polymers for biomedical
applications, electrical simulation experiments of bio-inspired electronic
circuits for neural implants, the study of diffractive electron optics for
wavefront-engineered beams in electron microscopes, characterization of novel
two-dimensional atomic crystals, study of enhanced photo-response of composite
metallodielectrics, exploration and design of optical and photoconductive
properties of organic semiconductors, measuring photocurrents in one and two-
dimensional materials, and time-resolved dynamical studies of protein
structures.