* 1532276
* MRI: Acquisition of Thermal Ionization Mass-Spectrometer for UCSC W.M. Keck Facility
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2018
* Paul Koch, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* David Lambert
* 07/31/2018
* USD 540,000.00

This award funds the acquisition of a new Thermal Ionization Mass Spectrometer
(TIMS) to be integrated into the W.M. Keck Isotope Laboratory at the University
of California, Santa Cruz. The TIMS will be co-located within the recently
renovated climate-controlled laboratory and wet chemistry clean labs needed for
the preparation of geologic samples for isotopic analysis. The reopening of this
open-user facility will catalyze new research and provide the tools needed to
train undergraduate, graduate and postdoctoral researchers in the use of high
precision isotopic methodologies. The Earth and Planetary Science department,
which is one of the largest Earth Science department?s in the country with over
a 150 majors, has a population representative of the student body which includes
over 40% from underrepresented ethnic backgrounds and a first year class made up
of 41% of first generation college students. Outreach from this award includes a
mini-grants program, available to internal and external users, to support
exploratory and developmental research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This facility will
allow high precision U-Pb and U-series geochronologic dating with research
applied to the origin and evolution of the continental and oceanic crust, the
dynamics of volcanic systems and the timing and rate of glaciations and climatic
change. Additional capabilities include measurements of the Sr, Ca, Nd, and Pb
isotope systems, which are applied by UCSC Earth and Marine scientists to
reconstruct variations in paleo-seawater in response to changes in tectonic
uplift, climate, biogeochemical cycling and ocean circulation. UCSC
paleontologists and ecologists use these same tools to study food web dynamics
and foraging ranges of organisms in the present and past. &lt;br/&gt;