* 1533947
* Conference: Advancing Team Effectiveness in a Globalized World; Michigan State University, October 8-10, 2015
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2015,12/31/2019
* Steve Kozlowski, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 12/31/2019
* USD 47,916.00

Nontechnical Description of Significance and Importance

A variety of global forces unfolding over the last two decades have pushed
organizations world-wide to restructure work around teams to harness diverse
expertise for innovation and to enable more rapid, flexible, and adaptive
responses. The dual needs of innovation and adaptability make teams the focus
for skill development, knowledge sharing, and action. Moreover, the push toward
collaboration and teamwork is global, as critical expertise is sought wherever
it is located. Aided by technology, virtual teaming is ubiquitous. This has
increased the diversity of team members and the heterogeneity of their cultural
and ethnic backgrounds. This places primary emphasis on melding diversity and
minimizing the potential for fragmentation, subgroup formation, and faultlines
that fracture teams. Modern work teams are increasingly global, multicultural,
and virtual. Given the increasing prominence of multicultural teams, one would
expect that there would be a strong scientific foundation and conferences
devoted to this topic, but that is not the case. There are literatures on
culture and diversity, but they are not team centric. There are well-developed
literatures on composing, training and developing, leading, and managing teams,
but a focus on multicultural issues and their implications for team
effectiveness theory and research is diffuse. This represents a significant gap
in the literature. The purpose of the conference is to surface key conceptual
gaps, synthesize differing perspectives, and advance an agenda for theory
development and research to enhance multicultural team effectiveness.
Multicultural team effectiveness encompasses important substantive topics of
culture, diversity, and team effectiveness. Integrating these topics advances
broader scientific and societal concerns as well. Recent research shows that
science and engineering are increasingly collaborative and cross-disciplinary,
and that collaborative science has more impact. Collaborative science entails
multicultural teams. Advancing knowledge of how to ensure the success of
multicultural teams will also advance diversity in science and technology.

Technical Description

There is a clear need to develop a more integrated understanding of the effects
of culture and diversity across the spectrum of topics relevant to forming,
developing, and leading effective teams. The fragmented literature necessitates
theoretical integration, new research to close knowledge gaps, and the
development of innovative applications to aid teamwork in multicultural
contexts. The conference is designed to advance this integration by (a)
targeting key experts across core topic areas (i.e., culture, diversity, team
training, team leadership, and team effectiveness); (b) having them share their
knowledge and insights on new developments across core topics; and (c) engaging
them and diverse conference participants in interactive, focused discussion
sessions to integrate ideas, identify gaps, and propose promising directions for
synthesis, theory development, and new research. This approach will help to
integrate this fragmented literature and to organize a coherent framework for
conceptual progress, research advancement, and practical applications to improve
multicultural team effectiveness. In addition, products from the conference will
be publically available. Presentation materials and consented videos of
presentations will be available for downloading from the Consortium for
Multicultural Psychology Research (CMPR) website at the Department of
Psychology, Michigan State University.