* 1533623
* NCS-FO: The role of noise in mental exploration for learning
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2019
* Joseph Kable, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Kurt Thoroughman
* 07/31/2019
* USD 1,019,916.00

What makes people behave so differently from one another? Consider how we make
decisions. Some people are quick and decisive but overly rigid, unable to adapt
effectively to new opportunities or threats. In contrast, others may be more
deliberative and less confident, making their decisions less predictable but
more adaptable to changing circumstances. With funding from the National Science
Foundation, Drs. Joshua Gold and Joseph Kable of the University of Pennsylvania
are investigating a new theory that in the real world, there is a fundamental
tradeoff between these two extremes. The theory includes a novel proposal that
what has previously been dismissed by researchers as random variability in human
behavior might instead reflect uncertain, adaptable decision-making linked with
norepinephrine, a neurochemical implicated in learning and arousal. Does this
characteristic explain other aspects of human personality and behavior? Can
norepinephrine levels in the brain be manipulated to affect complex learning and
decision-making behaviors? In answering these questions, this work will
establish foundational, basic knowledge that, in the long term, will help to
guide the development of new tools to diagnose and counteract conditions
associated with abnormal learning and decision-making, including attention
deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), anxiety, depression, and schizophrenia.
This knowledge about individual differences in learning will also inform how to
best tailor educational and learning practices, as well as how to design
computer programs that learn adaptively from experience. Other benefits of this
work are resources that will assist research and education in cognitive and
neural systems, including publically available datasets, computer code and
machine learning algorithms; increased participation of underrepresented groups
in this kind of integrative research, via summer research experiences for high
school and undergraduate students; and an increased public awareness of
neuroscience via public lectures, Brain Awareness Week activities, and
contributions to a website that explains brain research in laymen's terms.

The work is based on a novel hypothesis about brain mechanisms that are
responsible for certain idiosyncratic learning and decision processes.
Specifically, in our unpredictable world, decision-makers face an inherent
trade-off: higher certainty leads to more precise and accurate choices when the
world is stable but an inability to adjust to change, whereas less certainty can
lead to greater adaptability but also more variable and imprecise decisions. The
investigators propose that this trade-off is regulated by interactions between
arousal and cortical systems. To test this hypothesis, they use an
interdisciplinary and integrative set of approaches with three primary
objectives: 1) develop a theoretical framework describing inherent trade-offs
between output stability and learning in hierarchical, probabilistic inference
processes in unpredictable environments; 2) identify behavioral, physiological,
and neural correlates of variability in how individuals navigate these trade-
offs while making choices in unpredictable environments; and 3) identify causal
influences of the brainstem nucleus locus coeruleus, a key component of the
arousal system, on the variability in adaptive inference. The work forges
meaningful connections across theory and experiment, spanning multiple spatial
and temporal scales and levels of abstraction, to identify computational and
physiological underpinnings of individual differences in learning.