* 1533515
* Implementation Project: Blue-Shirt Program: Engineering Clinic-Based Curriculum to Enhance Retention of Underrepresented Groups at Tennessee State University
* EHR,HRD
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2021
* S. Keith Hargrove, Tennessee State University
* Continuing Grant
* Carleitta Paige-Anderson
* 06/30/2021
* USD 1,904,891.00

Implementation Projects in the Historically Black Colleges and Universities -
Undergraduate Program provide support to design, implement, study and assess
comprehensive institutional efforts to increase the numbers of students and the
quality of their preparation by strengthening science, technology, engineering
and mathematics (STEM) education and research. This implementation project in
the College of Engineering at Tennessee State University seeks to address issues
related to the declining enrollment and graduation of African American men in
engineering. The goal of this project is to create a five-year pilot engineering
program where students participate in a one-year pre-engineering curriculum and
are engaged in hands-on projects every year to enhance the retention rate and
graduation rate of African American engineering students. The project studies
the leading factors that contribute to retention of minority students,
specifically African American males. The project is guided and informed by
formative and summative evaluation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project reforms
the traditional engineering curriculum to allow less prepared incoming students
to complete a one-year pre-engineering curriculum to get them prepared for the
four-year program. The Blue-Shirt program will deploy the concept of engineering
clinics that provide project-based learning experiences. Specific objectives
are: to develop a pilot one-year engineering preparation curriculum that allows
students to enter the formal traditional engineering program with adequate
credentials; to develop courseware and laboratory modules to enhance the
learning experience of engineering students through real-world designed projects
and interaction with industry professionals for mentoring and professional
development; to identify and examine the psycho-social attributes that
contribute to the disparate attrition rate of African American students in
engineering, with a particular focus on African American men, and to recommend
intervention strategies to improve the retention rates; and to institutionalize
the Blue-Shirt program with sustained efforts focused on STEM student
achievement. This project can serve as a model for engineering education to
train qualified engineers, who will ensure the continued global competitiveness
of the U.S. industries.