* 1533631
* Planning Project for Changing the Equation for Science and Mathematics Learning
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2017
* Mazen Shahin, Delaware State University
* Standard Grant
* Claudia Rankins
* 07/31/2017
* USD 350,000.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities - Undergraduate Program (HBCU-
UP) provides support to design, implement, and assess strategies that can lead
to comprehensive institutional efforts to increase the number of students
receiving undergraduate degrees in science, technology, engineering and
mathematics (STEM) and enhance the quality of their preparation by strengthening
STEM education and research at HBCUs. The project at Delaware State University
seeks to "change the equation for science and mathematics" by focusing on
introductory mathematics and science courses and the critical transition from
the freshman to the sophomore year. The project focuses particularly on the
College Algebra course, a preparation course for Calculus, since currently 89%
of first time, first year students at Delaware State University place into a no-
credit, developmental mathematics course.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Activities that
are part of this project are: a virtual summer bridge program focusing on
mathematics for all incoming freshmen declaring a STEM major; study hall for all
freshmen STEM majors; and research opportunities for freshmen and sophomore STEM
majors. The activities are built on pilot results from previous projects and on
intervention models shown to be effective at Delaware State University. The
project will be guided by an on-going evaluation and external and internal
steering committees.