* 1533917
* XPS: EXPL: DSD: Portal: A Language and Compiler for Parallel N-body Computations
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2019
* Aparna Chandramowlishwaran, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 06/30/2019
* USD 316,000.00

Title: XPS: EXPL: DSD: Portal: A Language and Compiler for Parallel N-body
Computations&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Modern machines are becoming increasingly more
complex resulting in even the most advanced compilers failing to generate the
best optimized code. As a result, there is a big gap between the algorithm one
designs on paper and the code that runs efficiently on a billion-core system.
This research project aims to bridge this gap by developing Portal, a new high-
performance domain-specific language(DSL) and compiler, for the domain of N-body
problems. Such problems have applications in various areas ranging from
scientific computing simulations in molecular dynamics, astrophysics, acoustics,
fluid dynamics all the way to big data problems. In Portal, domain scientists
can write programs at a high level while obtaining the performance of highly
tuned and optimized low level code written by experts on modern massively
parallel machines. The intellectual merit is to show how a DSL with a high-level
formulation can lead directly to both asymptotically fast algorithms and their
efficient parallel implementations on a variety of distinct architectures. The
project's broader significance and importance are freely available software to
enable domain scientists to harness the performance power of parallel computing
and enabling scientific discovery not only in scientific computing and machine
learning but also in a number of related problems in domains such as statistics,
computer graphics, computational geometry, and applied mathematics. These
problems can be expressed in Portal to obtain an out-of-the-box parallel
optimized implementation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of Portal are three-
fold: (a) to implement scalable, fast, and asymptotically optimal tree-based
N-body algorithms, (b) to design an intuitive language and API to enable rapid
implementations of a variety of algorithms, and (c) to enable parallel large-
scale problems to run on current and future exascale machines. More importantly,
the language and intermediate algorithm representation are independent of the
architecture, making this approach portable and easily extensible to different
platforms from ARM/x86 CPUs to GPUs. The project aims to solve important
software issues that will allow for interoperability and scalability of N-body
problems on massive datasets.