* 1533688
* NCS-FO: Collaborative Research: Micro-scale Real-time Decoding and Closed-loop Modulation of Human Language
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2022
* Aydin Babakhani, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 07/31/2022
* USD 718,520.00

Humans produce language, which is a defining characteristic of our species and
our civilization. We can select words precisely out of a large lexicon with
remarkably low error rates. It is perhaps not surprising that this complex
speech production system is easily affected by disease. Brain damage induced
language disorders affect millions of Americans, and there is little hope of
remediation. Research on the anatomical, physiological, and computational bases
of speech production has made important strides in recent years but this has
been limited by a glaring lack of information on the dynamics of the process.
This limitation results from the low spatio-temporal resolution of the available
tools to collect data and the effectiveness of the current tools for analysis.
Our driving vision in this project is to develop an unparalleled understanding
of cortical connectivity in the human language system at small spatio-temporal
scales. We possess much expertise in signal decoding of the processes of cued
word production with intracranial recording techniques, as well as using
cortical stimulation to modulate the system. FDA-approved arrays will be used to
perform closed-loop decoding of sensorimotor processes during speech production
and transient neuromodulation of the language system in patients with epilepsy
undergoing intracranial electrode placement for the localization of seizures.
Ultimately though, the fine-grained understanding and representation of
sensorimotor loops in the language system necessitates the development of ultra-
small energy efficient detectors that will enable the knowledge gained in this
exploratory project to be eventually applied in patients who have sustained
neurological injuries that have resulted in pervasive language impairments. This
integrative project brings innovative microelectronics technologies together
with state of the art large data analysis techniques to begin to develop a first
of its kind system to remediate language disorders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
engineering objective is to develop biocompatible microchips to vastly enhance
our insight into language and other cognitive processes and learning.
Miniaturized microchips in silicon technology will be developed that can record
neural signals, digitize them, and transmit the signals to an in vitro receiver
wirelessly. The three-fold thrust of the project will be integrated when the PIs
develop closed-loop real time decoding and transient neuromodulation system
based on a population of miniaturized detectors and neuromodulators. The system
has the potential to provide an unprecedented detailed understanding of the
human language system and provide the framework and hardware for neural
prosthetics in patients with aphasia and other language disorders. The project
embodies multiple high-risk goals that have the potential to shift
neuroengineering paradigm from recording and modulating in only a few regions of
the brain to deploying a population of ultra-small and energy efficient
detectors-modulators.