* 1533762
* XPS: EXPL: DSD: A Memristive Hardware Platform for Large Scale Combinatorial Optimization
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Engin Ipek, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Yuanyuan Yang
* 08/31/2019
* USD 298,283.00

Mathematical optimization plays a vital role in virtually every scientific
discipline. A 2013 report by the U.S. National Academy of Sciences (NAS)
identifies optimization as one of the seven giants of statistical data analysis
on massive data, while the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) Office of Science
reports that mathematical optimization will increasingly be used in the exascale
era. Solving large-scale optimization problems on massive datasets can require
weeks or months of computation time on modern supercomputers, which regrettably
deliver only a small fraction of the peak performance due to significant data
movement overheads. Hardware and software innovations that can improve energy
efficiency by orders of magnitude are needed before exascale platforms for
mathematical optimization can become
practical.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project embodies a radically
different vision of the future, one where large scale combinatorial optimization
problems are mapped onto a memory-centric, non-Von Neuman compute substrate and
solved in situ within the memory cells, with orders of magnitude greater
performance and energy efficiency than contemporary supercomputers. Recent
developments in the resistive random access memory (RRAM) technology are
leveraged to build an extremely low power, fast memory substrate for
accelerating combinatorial optimization algorithms. RRAM is a memristive, non-
volatile memory technology that provides FLASH-like density and DRAM-like read
speeds. The project exploits the electrical properties of RRAM in combination
with CMOS transistors to enable in situ optimization within the memory cells,
thereby eliminating data movement between the memory arrays and the
computational units, reducing the energy, and significantly increasing the
performance. Novel algorithms will be developed to map problems from different
scientific and engineering domains onto the proposed memristive hardware
substrate. Software modules and libraries for memory allocation and
partitioning; dynamic resource management; and hardware-software co-design will
be developed to give the user control of the optimization process at runtime. At
the hardware level, the accelerator employs a versatile organization of data
arrays constructed from novel RRAM cells, capable not only of storing the data,
but also of performing in situ computation on that data. The proposed research
holds the promise of bringing about a transformative change in the performance
and energy efficiency of exascale optimization frameworks, with tremendous
positive fallout to science, technology, and society as a whole. Architecture
and software innovations will be disseminated to the broader research community
through published papers, as well as tutorials on the proposed framework and
mapping algorithms. The educational component of the project involves training
both graduate and undergraduate students in computer architecture, as well as a
memory systems course that integrates the RRAM technology into the syllabus. The
PI is also personally involved in local programs promoting the participation of
women and underrepresented minorities in computer science and engineering, and
has an ongoing effort to increase the enrollment of local minorities in
University of Rochester's CS and ECE programs.