* 1533966
* The Fourth International Congress on Sustainability Science and Engineering, Balatonfured, Hungary, May 26-29, 2015
* ENG,CBET
* 04/15/2015,03/31/2017
* Yinlun Huang, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Triantafillos Mountziaris
* 03/31/2017
* USD 50,000.00

Huang, 1533966&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over the past two decades, industries have
made tremendous efforts to improve energy and material efficiency in engineered
systems, design greener products and sustainable supply chain, and become more
responsible to the society through improving their business sustainability. In
academia, sustainability science and engineering has become a very active area
of research in various disciplines of engineering, natural and social sciences.
Sustainability theories and sustainability assessment, analysis, design and
decision making methodologies as well as tools have been developed, many of
which are used to tackle real-world problems in collaboration with industries.
To improve communications and promote experience sharing, networking, and
collaboration between academia and industries, a variety of sustainability
related conferences, symposiums, and workshops are organized around the world
every year. To address much broader issues of sustainability science and
engineering, facilitate discussions on scientific and technological development,
and share research and practice experiences in industrial sustainability, a
group of scientists, educators, and engineers, and governmental officers have
decided to organize the fourth event of a conference series, namely The 4th
International Congress on Sustainability Science and Engineering (ICOSSE). The
conference will be held in Balatonfüred, Hungary on May 26-29,
2015.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is the first time for the ICOSSE series to
organize an event in a foreign country. This conference should provide an
excellent platform for scientist, researchers, and practitioners of various
physical sciences, engineering fields, economics, and social sciences to discuss
research and education challenges, share their research and practicing
experience, and promote networking. The conference will be organized on four key
themes in sustainability; they are: sustainable energy, sustainable
manufacturing, energy for sustainability, and the nexus of food, energy, and
water. The presentation focus will be on pursuing industrial sustainability from
the systems perspective using scientific and engineering innovations. The
conference should help bridge the gap between research and development and
strengthen the linkage between industries and academia, and explore
opportunities for broad international collaboration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
ICOSSE becomes a major international conference series in the sustainability
field. Different from the past three ICOSSEs, this 4th event is to be held in
Europe. The travel grant should help US academic attendees take this opportunity
to learn the cutting-age research in various fields of sustainability, share
their experience with the world class leaders and other colleagues, especially
those in Europe and near regions, and identify international collaboration
opportunities in strengthening sustainable engineering research and education.
Junior faculty members, young researchers, graduate and undergraduate students,
especially those minorities underrepresented in science and engineering will be
strongly encouraged to attend the conference. Student poster paper competitions
will provide a great opportunity for them to present their research activities
and receive advice from leading experts from different countries. It is planned
that selected papers will be published in five technical journals.