* 1533771
* XPS: FULL: DSD: Collaborative Research: FPGA Cloud Platform for Deep Learning, Applications in Computer Vision
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Alexander Berg, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Yuanyuan Yang
* 08/31/2020
* USD 300,955.00

We stand on the verge of dramatic advances in deep learning applications, which
will soon enable practicality and widespread adoption of computer vision based
recognition in scientific inquiry, commercial applications, and everyday life.
Grand challenge problems are within our reach; we will soon be able to build
automated systems that recognize nearly everything we see, systems that can
recognize the tens of thousands of basic-level categories that psychologists
posit humans can recognize, systems that continuously learn from photos, video,
and web content in order to create more complete and accurate visual models of
the world. However, while it is clear that the computational capabilities for
deep learning are within reach, it is equally clear that the required
computational power cannot come from general-purpose processors. To succeed, we
will need to build specialized domain-specific computing systems based on
hardware accelerators that are capable of exploiting the extreme fine-grained
parallelism inherent in deep-learning workloads. This project leverages
parallelization and reconfigurable hardware to create an automated system that
distributes computer vision algorithms onto a large number of field-programmable
gate arrays (FPGA Cloud). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project builds on recent
advances in domain-specific hardware generation tools in order to bring the
potential parallelism and performance per watt advantages of FPGAs to large-
scale computer vision problems. By developing a platform to run deep learning
algorithms on large clouds of FPGAs, this proposal explicitly addresses scaling
algorithms beyond what a single chip can process. This involves addressing a
wide range of challenging problems in algorithm analysis, building domain-
specific hardware generators, communication for scaling algorithms across
multiple FPGAs, and extensive validation of generating hardware for state-of-
the-art deep learning approaches applied to computer vision problems. This
project advances tools for designing domain-specific FPGA implementations of
algorithms, taking a step toward making more efficient computing with greater
parallelism more widely available. In particular, for computer vision, there
will be significant benefits from a product of multiple improvements: higher
parallelism, lower gate requirement by moving to fixed point when possible, and
better performance per watt leading to higher computation density in servers.
Together, these have the potential to significantly increase the extent to which
computer vision can be a part of our daily lives, making computers better able
to understand the context of our world.