* 1533674
* HBCU-UP Targeted Infusion Project HT-ASSERT - Attaining and Sustaining STEM Excellence with Research Training
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2015,05/31/2021
* Amanda Masino, Huston-Tillotson University
* Standard Grant
* Leroy Jones II
* 05/31/2021
* USD 477,917.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP)
through Targeted Infusion Projects supports the development, implementation, and
study of evidence-based innovative models and approaches for improving the
preparation and success of HBCU undergraduate students so that they may pursue
STEM graduate programs and/or careers. The project at Huston-Tillotson
University (HT) seeks to implement inquiry-based courses and undergraduate
research to improve and sustain STEM student engagement, training, and
transition to STEM careers and graduate study. The curriculum will emphasize
real-world research experiences, reconfigure course objectives to emphasize
inquiry and problem-based learning, and challenge students to use the critical-
thinking skills central to the practice of science. Project activities will
advance STEM students' knowledge and understanding, enhancing the number and
preparedness of the institution's STEM graduates. Thus, this project will have a
societal impact on STEM representation from underserved
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of Huston-Tillotson's "Attaining and
Sustaining STEM Excellence with Research Training" (HT-ASSERT) program is to
improve and sustain the retention, engagement, and scientific training of
Natural Science students at HT by emphasizing undergraduate research. The
project will enhance undergraduate research through two linked project
activities: 1) integrate the science curriculum to highlight inquiry and
research, beginning with scientific skill building in introductory courses and
culminating in a capstone independent student research project for every
student; and 2) develop the material and intellectual infrastructure (lab
spaces, faculty expertise, and research collaborations) needed to enact deep and
lasting transformation of STEM education at HT. Project activities will
integrate with existing STEM programs at HT, including HT's STEM education and
campus academic enrichment programs. This project will involve collaborating
faculty at the University of Texas at Austin.