* 1533569
* Targeted Infusion Project: Development of a Knowledge-Based System for Integrating Artificial Intelligence into the Undergraduate Engineering Curriculum
* EHR,HRD
* 08/01/2015,12/31/2019
* David Olowokere, Texas Southern University
* Standard Grant
* Claudia Rankins
* 12/31/2019
* USD 400,000.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP)
through Targeted Infusion Projects supports the development, implementation, and
study of evidence-based innovative models and approaches for improving the
preparation and success of HBCU undergraduate students so that they may pursue
STEM graduate programs and/or careers. The project at Texas Southern University
seeks to infuse innovative electrical and computer engineering specialized
artificial intelligence (AI) tools into traditional engineering problem-solving
routines with a problem-based learning approach to bridge current curricula
gaps, enhance engineering students' problem-solving and critical thinking
skills, expose them to new technology, prepare them for diverse and
multidisciplinary workforce requirements, and attract and encourage students to
pursue professional engineering licensure or post-graduate studies in
engineering field. The activities and strategies are evidence-based and a strong
plan for formative and summative evaluation is part of the project.

There are five key objectives: 1) to develop an interactive and comprehensive
intelligent database to document, compare, and analyze cutting-edge AI
applications in the civil engineering field and use it as the platform and
educational media for curricula development and implementation; 2) to develop
one new interdisciplinary course "AI Tools for Engineering Problem Solving" for
senior engineering students; 3) to enrich current curricula by integrating
innovative AI application case studies into twelve existing civil engineering
junior and senior level courses; 4) to foster an interdisciplinary academic
setting by hosting a server-based intelligent database; and 5) to support
undergraduate students' early involvement in research. The project activities
can serve as a model for other institutions that desire to strengthen
undergraduate education in their engineering and technology programs.