* 1533476
* TIP: Infusing Laboratory-Bench STEM Into Exercise Physiology Via Integration of Chemistry, Biology, and Biophysics
* EHR,HRD
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Dawn Henderson, Winston-Salem State University
* Standard Grant
* Claudia Rankins
* 08/31/2019
* USD 399,961.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP)
through Targeted Infusion Projects supports the development, implementation, and
study of evidence-based innovative models and approaches for improving the
preparation and success of HBCU undergraduate students so that they may pursue
STEM graduate programs and/or careers. The project at Winston-Salem State
University (WSSU) seeks to infuse a novel, engaging bioengineering project into
the existing Exercise Physiology curriculum. This project will enhance student
abilities to use lab-bench techniques to provide an innovative educational
opportunity to funnel the next generation of talent into the STEM pipeline.
Novel aspects of this proposal include: offering this experience to
undergraduates; offering this experience using Exercise Physiology as a
platform; infusing the lab-bench modules using a bioengineering project as a
vehicle; and offering this experience at a HBCU, so that underrepresented
students are funneled into STEM graduate schools and careers. The Department of
Exercise Physiology at WSSU will be one of the first, if not the first in the
nation, HBCU or otherwise, to offer this experience.

The goal of this project is to infuse lab-bench modules into the Exercise
Physiology curriculum at WSSU. The objectives of this project are to: 1) improve
student attitudes toward use of lab bench-based techniques; 2) improve student
perceptions of scientific inquiry in Exercise Physiology; 3) increase student
intentions to engage in undergraduate research; and 4) increase student
intentions to persist in STEM-related fields. Thus, this project has the
potential to advance knowledge related to cognitive and behavioral factors that
may determine whether or not an underrepresented STEM undergraduate pursues
graduate school.