* 1533564
* AitF: FULL: Collaborative Research: Provably Efficient GPU Algorithms
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2021
* Claudio Silva, New York University
* Standard Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 08/31/2021
* USD 400,000.00

Graphics processing units (GPUs) were originally developed as specialized
hardware exclusively for graphics rendering. In recent years they have become
massively parallel systems with hundreds of processing cores supporting
thousands of threads. Given their computational potential, they are now used to
support general-purpose computation via high-level programming languages. As a
result, they have become a standard platform for high-performance computing
(HPC) simulations in natural sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;However, there is
still very little understanding of what types of algorithms translate into
efficient GPU programs, and many implementations rely on a limited number of
design patterns and many rounds of trial-and-error. There is a need for simple
but accurate algorithmic models to get a wider algorithmic community involved in
GPU computing. The project will develop such a model, intended to have the
transformative effect of enabling algorithms researchers to focus their efforts
on creating algorithms for GPUs in a way that is currently not possible,
increasing the algorithmic knowledgebase in GPU computing. Over time, more
efficient algorithms will lead to better utilization of computing resources and
reuse of code implemented as libraries. Such a model for GPUs will also enable
teaching GPU computing to a wider group of students, similarly to how sequential
and PRAM algorithms are currently taught.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
study the algorithmic aspects of GPU computing and will develop a simple but
accurate theoretical model for GPUs, that will define clear guidelines and
complexity metrics for algorithm evaluation. The PIs will develop and implement
algorithms that will improve the state of the art code base of general purpose
computation on GPUs in the areas of combinatorial algorithms, computational
geometry, visualization, search algorithms, and data structures.