* 1533746
* Standardized World Income Inequality Database
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2019
* Frederick Solt, University of Iowa
* Continuing Grant
* Brian Humes
* 07/31/2019
* USD 228,809.00

General Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Standardized World Income Inequality
Database (SWIID) aims to provide data on income inequality for the broadest
possible sample of countries and years that are made as comparable as possible.
Income inequality is an enduring focus of inquiry in the social sciences that
has attracted renewed attention from policymakers and the public. Economists,
political scientists, sociologists, and other social scientists have long sought
to explain why incomes are relatively equal in some countries and times and much
larger disparities between rich and poor are found in others. The effects of
income inequality on other forms of social inequality, such as health
disparities, and on other phenomena ranging from political violence to economic
growth to democratic transitions are similarly vital questions. The reliability
of the results of these investigations and any policy interventions they
suggest, depend crucially on the quality of the income-inequality data they
employ; the SWIID is therefore a data infrastructure project that is central to
the promotion of scientific progress on these
topics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The SWIID surpasses other inequality datasets by
directly addressing their tradeoff between coverage of countries over time and
the comparability of the data they supply. It does so by using model-based
multiple-imputation methods on data drawn from regional collections, national
statistical offices, and academic studies to generate estimates for the missing
country-years in the high-quality but sparse Luxembourg Income Study dataset. It
currently provides comparable estimates of market- and net-income inequality for
174 countries for as many years as possible from 1960 to the present. The
proposed research comprises four principal activities to improve the SWIID
project: (1) acquiring and cleaning data to expand its coverage, (2) assessing
and improving the multiple-imputation techniques used to ensure its estimates
are comparable, (3) expanding documentation to help researchers use income-
inequality data in ways appropriate to their research questions, and (4)
improving the web-based system for disseminating the SWIID to researchers,
educators, and policymakers worldwide. The SWIID has been used by thousands of
researchers around the world working in academia, governments, non-governmental
organizations, international organizations, and news agencies. Expanded and
refined versions of the SWIID will make improved knowledge on income inequality
even more accessible to policymakers and the public as well as to researchers
and educators.