* 1533802
* XPS: FULL: FP: Collaborative Research: Synchrony-aware Primitives for Building Highly Auditable, Highly Scalable, Highly Available Distributed Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2021
* Sandeep Kulkarni, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 08/31/2021
* USD 350,000.00

Auditability is a key property for developing highly scalable and highly
available distributed systems, as it enables identifying performance
bottlenecks, dependencies among events, and latent concurrency bugs. In turn,
for the auditability of a system, time is a key concept. However, there is a gap
between the theory and the practice of distributed systems in terms of the use
of time. The theory of distributed systems shuns the notion of time and
considers asynchronous systems whose event ordering is captured by logical
clocks. The practical distributed systems employ NTP synchronized clocks to
capture time but tend to use ad hoc methods. This project bridges this gap and
provides synchrony-aware system primitives that support building highly
auditable, highly scalable, and highly available distributed systems. The
project has applications to cloud computing, distributed NewSQL databases, and
globally distributed web services. The project enables other broader impacts
through enhancing scientific/technological understanding via organizing academic
workshops, outreaching to K-12 students, recruitment of minority groups, and
distributing tools and software to the community.

To enable highly auditable systems, the project investigates lightweight and
efficient designs for an augmented time (AT) primitive. AT combines the
theoretical underpinnings of causality and the practicality of physical clocks
by identifying how logical/vector clocks can be improved and tuned based on the
availability of NTP synchronization. The principle guiding AT design will be
"uncertainty resilience". These AT clocks enable highly auditable systems since
they can efficiently provide global consistent-state snapshots without needing
to wait out clock synchronization uncertainties and without requiring prior
coordination. Leveraging on these auditability primitives, the project builds
support for scalable and available systems. To enable highly scalable systems,
the project investigates design of synchrony-aware coordination primitives, such
as barrier synchronization, mutual exclusion, leader election, and causally and
totally ordered communication support. The principle guiding the design of the
synchrony-aware coordination primitives is "silent consent". These primitives
improve performance and efficiency over their asynchronous system counterparts
by trading timing information gathered from AT clocks and avoiding explicit
communication needed for coordination. Finally, the project will leverage the
auditability support provided by AT and will investigate the design of a monitor
component that detects and corrects distributed system state corruptions. The
principle guiding the design of the monitor component is "centralized oversight
and override".