* 1533990
* Gene Drives: A Deliberative Workshop to Develop Frameworks for Research and Governance February 24-26, 2016
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2017
* Fred Gould, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 07/31/2017
* USD 50,000.00

General Audience Summary

This award provides funding for a workshop that is to occur over three full days
in the early winter of 2015-2016. The topic of the conference is the governance
of gene drives. Gene drives are a subset of second generation genetic
engineering technologies that are being developed with the aim of moving
synthetic gene constructs into wild animal populations to protect, suppress or
eliminate them, such as the suppression of mosquitoes that transmit malaria and
dengue. Experts from four areas will participate in the workshop: Genetics and
molecular biology, ecology and ecological modeling, political economy, and STS
(including ethics). The PI plans for there to be equal representation across
these areas; experts will include members of academia, practitioners and experts
from government, NGOs, and industry. The structure of the workshop will be
designed to engage participants in working together to generate analyses and
summaries useful for future decision and policy making about gene drives.
Following the workshop, papers will be finalized for publication in a special
journal edition. A summary article will be published by the program committee
that compares issues and system maps across the case studies and summarizes the
key findings of the workshop. The program committee will also draft a shorter
piece sub mitted for a high profile venue, such as a Nature or Science
commentary.

Technical Summary

The proposed workshop will produce a typology of gene drives for more nuanced
and productive conversations about governance. Specifically, participants will
develop a draft typology of technologies, purposes, and contexts of gene drives,
and a framework of issues and research needs for three key areas: ecological
risk analysis, political economy analysis (including governance regimes), and
ethical analysis. In order to cover a range of technologies, purposes, and
issues, but yet be specific enough for productive dialogue, three case studies
will be used to anticipate the social, ecological, economic, and ethical issues
associated with gene drives. Integration of the natural and social sciences will
be achieved through broad multidisciplinary participation and thinking about the
cases and the systems in which they are embedded. Collaborative systems mapping
will be used as a tool to assist in the integration of natural, social, and
ethical variables, as it has been shown to be effective in creating an
environment where complexities and uncertainties can be better seen and
understood , and where participants are more willing to open up to alternative
perspectives. The combination of the topic, approach, and outputs of the
workshop make it unique, and it will contribute to deeper intellectual
understanding of gene drives in societal contexts.