* 1533957
* DMREF: SusChEM: Heterovalent Ternary Nitride Semiconductors and Mixed Ternary-Binary Heterostructures
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2021
* Walter Lambrecht, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* John Schlueter
* 09/30/2021
* USD 1,320,170.00

DMREF: SusChEM: Heterovalent Ternary Nitride Semiconductors and Mixed Ternary-
Binary Heterostructures&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical Description: The
binary nitride semiconductors gallium nitride, indium nitride and aluminum
nitride and their alloys have found important commercial applications in
optoelectronics and high-power electronics, but indium and gallium are expensive
and scarce, and flexibility in the design and control of the properties of
devices based upon mixtures of just these three compounds is limited. There is
growing interest in the much larger, but much less well-studied, family of
ternary nitride semiconductors that include, for example, zinc germanium nitride
and zinc tin nitride, formed by replacing the group III binary element with
equal proportions of group II and group IV elements. Many of these dozens of
potentially useful materials are composed entirely of earth-abundant,
inexpensive, and benign elements. The increased complexity of the ternary
nitrides, and the greater number of materials and combinations, is expected to
lead to new materials properties and more flexibility in their design. This
project will accelerate research on this new family of materials by combining
efforts in theoretical calculations and modeling of devices and properties with
synthesis and characterization focused on an important subset of these
materials. Dissemination of new and archived results via an interactive website-
accessed database available freely to the community will foster a growing
network among research groups that will accelerate progress toward understanding
and controlling the properties of these materials and developing new
applications for them.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: The research
will focus on developing growth and doping methods for ZnGeN2 and ZnGeN2-GaN
mixed ternary-binary heterostructures by metalorganic chemical vapor deposition
(MOCVD). This focus will take strategic advantage of the mature technology for
GaN growth and doping, earlier demonstrations of successful growth of ZnGeN2 by
MOCVD, the close lattice mismatch of the two materials, and their close
optimized growth conditions. The focus additionally will take advantage of the
theoretically predicted large band offset between the two materials, which have
similar band gaps in the near-ultraviolet, in the design and synthesis of the
interesting heterostructure and alloy systems that result from this situation.
The theoretical and experimental results, combined with the development of a
network, based upon the publicly accessible database website for research groups
working in this area, will lay the foundation for expanding research efforts on
this large family of materials.