* 1533483
* Targeted Infusion Project in Interdisciplinary Transportation Studies (TIP-ITS)
* EDU,EES
* 06/15/2015,05/31/2020
* Jonathan Lambright, Savannah State University
* Standard Grant
* Claudia Rankins
* 05/31/2020
* USD 477,824.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP)
through Targeted Infusion Projects supports the development, implementation, and
study of evidence-based innovative models and approaches for improving the
preparation and success of HBCU undergraduate students so that they may pursue
STEM graduate programs and/or careers. The project at Savannah State University
seeks to develop and implement an interdisciplinary undergraduate certificate
program to educate students, including those from populations traditionally
underrepresented in STEM disciplines, in technical, logistical, policy,
research, and commerce-related issues of the transportation industry.
Certificate recipients will be prepared to obtain career positions within the
transportation industry, and thus help the U.S. economy remain competitive. The
recruitment efforts include reaching out to high school students and exposing
them to STEM subjects and their relationship to the transportation field.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has the following three goals: 1) to
strengthen existing curriculum content associated with transportation concepts
to better prepare students for transportation careers; 2) to increase awareness,
student enrollment, and retention in transportation studies and associated
fields such as logistics, civil engineering, and homeland security; and 3) to
develop and implement student and faculty enhancement programs, specifically
related to transportation studies. The activities and strategies are evidence-
based and a strong plan for formative and summative evaluation is part of the
project.