* 1533560
* XPS: EXPL: CCA: Merging Parallel Run-times and Operating Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Peter Dinda, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 08/31/2020
* USD 350,669.00

Title: XPS: EXPL: CCA: Merging Parallel Run-times and Operating
Systems&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Parallelism, the ability to do break down larger
tasks into smaller tasks that can be done simultaneously, is essential for
applications to continue to become exponentially faster over time. Considerable
effort has been placed and is being placed into research on how to achieve
parallelism within hardware, programming languages, compilers, and algorithms.
However, application software also depends on systems software, particularly the
operating system kernel. Currently, the application software and the operating
system kernel are very distinct domains with a high barrier between them, and
only the operating system kernel has full access to the hardware. While this
design exists for very good reasons, it may now limit the parallelism and thus
the performance possible in applications. This project investigates an
alternative design in which the application software and the operating system
kernel are merged into one entity. The intellectual merits are several. First,
such a design has not been previously studied in the context of parallelism---
this project will determine if it is a good idea. Second, the design resonates
with modern languages and run-time systems that are designed specifically with
parallelism in mind---such systems can leverage the opportunity to use the
operating system kernel and the hardware in new ways. Finally, the project team
is well poised to carry out the investigation given their prior work in
operating systems and virtualization for high performance computing. The
project's broader significance and importance are based on the extent to which
the alternative design can enhance performance and the amount of exploitable
parallelism. If this is considerable, then the alternative design may be widely
adopted and thus contribute to keeping computing performance, as experienced
even by end-users, on its exponential track.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is
primarily concerned with allowing modern parallel run-time systems (and their
applications) to be re-conceptualized as kernels in their own right. By being a
kernel, a run-time can access the full hardware capabilities of the machine, and
it can implement exactly the kernel abstractions that it needs to achieve its
goals. The team is designing, implementing, and evaluating a kernel framework to
support the porting and construction of parallel run-time systems for this
model. Using a set of several current run-time systems and several different
kinds of parallel hardware, the team is also investigating what kernel
abstractions are useful within this model, as well as how to leverage kernel-
only hardware features to better support the run-time systems. Both mature run-
times which are to be ported to the model and nascent run-times that can be co-
designed with the model are under consideration. The project also integrates
with another effort that is investigating a virtualization approach that may
make it possible to support the new model simultaneously with the old model.