* 1533844
* XPS: FULL: DSD: Parallel Motion Planning for Cloud-connected Robots
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2021
* Ron Alterovitz, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 08/31/2021
* USD 670,536.00

Robots are entering new domains, from self-driving vehicles on real-world
streets, to autonomous aerial vehicles for package delivery, to assistive robots
helping people with disabilities in their homes with daily activities.
Autonomous robots in these domains often need extensive computational resources
for motion planning, which involves computing a safe motion for a robot through
an environment that avoids obstacles and accomplishes the task. To enable low-
power mobile robots to achieve their full potential, new algorithms and software
frameworks are needed that fully leverage parallel computation and the
warehouse-scale computing available via the cloud. This project aims to develop
a new software framework for motion planning for cloud-connected robots that
effectively parallelizes motion planning and distributes the computation across
the robot's embedded multicore processor and multiple cloud-based compute
servers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research combines ideas from multiple areas
of computer science and engineering, including robotics, parallel algorithms,
high-performance computing, motion planning, and cloud computing. Locally on the
robot, the project parallelizes traditional motion planners to fully leverage
low-power, embedded multicore processors. Simultaneously, the project enables
the robot to request computation time from cloud-based resources to
significantly increase the computing power available for the motion planning
task, and thus increase the responsiveness and quality of motion plans. The new
algorithms and software aim to enable robots to autonomously complete tasks in
new domains where the challenge of motion planning is currently prohibitive,
broadening the applicability of robots to new societally-relevant domains.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The concepts and software developed in this project are
being integrated into undergraduate and graduate courses taught across topics
ranging from robotics to high-performance computing. Another goal of the project
is to create fun, hands-on, interactive demonstrations using cloud-connected
robots to inspire children to consider STEM fields.