* 1533611
* NCS-FO: Imaging synaptic activity deep in the brain using super-resolution cannula microscopy
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2021
* Erik Jorgensen, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Svetlana Tatic-Lucic
* 08/31/2021
* USD 933,000.00

Proposal # 1533611&lt;br/&gt;Institute: University of Utah&lt;br/&gt;Title: NCS-
FO: Imaging synaptic activity deep in the brain using super-resolution cannula
microscopy&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Objective: This project will develop a tool for
high-resolution (&lt;100-nm) imaging of synapses in freely moving animals for
neuronal studies. It will accomplish this goal by the development and
integration of compact and lightweight cannula microscopy with in vitro
fluorescence imaging with accompanying technology and methodologies for imaging
synapses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical &lt;br/&gt;The long-term vision of
this project is to image with high resolution deep inside the brain of freely
moving mice using inexpensive technologies so as to elucidate the fundamental
basis of information processing and memory. Changes in synaptic strength at
specific synapses are thought to underlie memory encoding and storage, yet there
is very little experimental evidence for this theory in the intact brain due to
technical limitations of visualizing the specific synaptic pattern involved in
experience-dependent learning. This project aims to overcome this limitation by
transforming a simple, inexpensive cannula into a super-resolution fluorescence
microscope. Commercialization of this technology will be pursued after the
fundamental science and engineering has been demonstrated for widespread
dissemination. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical:&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this
proposal is to image neuronal activity, neuron structure and protein
localization deep in the brain with sub-100nm resolution using computational
cannula microscopy (CM) and novel molecular reporters of synaptic activity. CM
will allow imaging of the brain in awake, freely moving animals at unprecedented
spatial resolution. Current techniques in freely moving animals are limited to
imaging the brain near the surface, include large and heavy head stages with
moving parts, and cannot penetrate deep into the brain without significant
damage to surrounding tissue. The ultimate goal of this proposal is to allow
imaging of individual synapses in freely moving animals. We have already
developed the framework for in vitro fluorescence imaging using CM. During this
project, we will extend CM to enable: (1) super-resolution (&lt; 100nm
resolution) fluorescence microscopy and (2) deep-brain imaging (depth &gt; 1mm)
with the vision of imaging activity and protein localization in individual
synapses in the deep brain of freely moving animals. Changes in the strength of
individual synapses are thought to underlie learning and memory in the brain,
yet this fundamental theory of brain function lacks tangible experimental
evidence to support it in vivo. Our project will enable studies that address the
causal role of molecular events at individual synapses in mediating behavior and
information processing.