* 1533151
* Information and Communication Technologies, Employee Engagement in Innovation, and Team Innovation Process
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Le Zhou, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 08/31/2020
* USD 544,230.00

Many jobs in today's economy are dependent on information communication
technology (ICT). This includes traditional e-mail and telephone communications,
as well as new and evolving technologies like videoconferencing, instant
messaging, and social media tools. ICT is often used for coordination and
cooperating across different corporate units. ICT also makes it easier for many
employees to quickly and efficiently share their knowledge and plans.
Altogether, ICT could be very advantageous for producing innovation. At the same
time, there could be drawbacks such as information overload or lack of attention
to more focused formal communication channels. As a result of these concerns,
this research aims to determine how ICT facilitates employee engagement in
innovation, how ICT interacts with formal communication methods, and how the
general social climate for innovation changes the ways that ICT affects work
processes. With this knowledge, organizational decision makers will have better
ideas of what to expect when new ICT systems are implemented, and have a better
sense of what activities might emphasize the advantages and minimize the
disadvantages.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research aims to address three key
research questions. First, how does ICT use shape employee engagement in
innovation process, and in turn influence individual-level emergent states and
outcomes? Second, how does ICT use interact with formal communication structure
to shape intra- and inter-team dynamics in communication and knowledge creation,
and to impact team-level emergent states and outcomes? Third, how does
organizational climate for innovation shape the influence of ICT use on
organizational innovation processes and outcomes? This project contributes to
the literature by providing a theoretical model that explicates the influence of
ICT use on individual and team innovation processes, extending the stream of
literature on organizational learning by clarifying the most significant dynamic
process, examining how organizational climate for innovation influences the
effects of ICT use on innovation, and providing a clearly specified and rigorous
mathematical model that facilitates future extension and integration with other
theoretical models of learning and innovation. The project takes a multi-method
approach, including computational modeling, laboratory experiments, archival
data analysis, and a field study.