* 1533699
* EAGER Proposal: Bet hedging as a mechanism for pathogenic variation in the rice blast fungus
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2017
* Mark Farman, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 07/31/2017
* USD 100,814.00

Many microbes cause serious diseases of plants, humans and other animals. Both
plants and animals possess immune systems that serve to recognize the presence
of foreign organisms, which then leads to the initiation of defense responses
that prevent further spread of the invading microbe. Recognition usually occurs
when the host senses foreign proteins that are either secreted by the microbe as
it attempts to establish the pathogenic state, or which form part of the
organism's "coat." Unfortunately, pathogens have developed mechanisms that
subvert the host's defenses, allowing them to grow and cause disease. For
example, it is well known that the fungus Magnaporthe oryzae, which causes a
devastating disease of rice known as blast, can avoid recognition by the plant
through the mutation or loss of genes that code for proteins that would normally
bind to specific resistance receptors in the rice plant. Recent studies in the
investigator's laboratory imply the existence of a novel mechanism by which rice
blast, and probably other pathogenic microbes, may escape host recognition. The
hypothesized mechanism involves a bet hedging strategy in which genetically
identical fungal colonies vary the types of proteins they secrete, thereby
evading recognition by the host immune system. This project seeks direct
evidence that this mechanism is employed during an
infection.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Any given M. oryzae strain has the potential to
secrete hundreds of proteins during the infection process, many of which could
elicit a defense reaction. However, current data suggest that the fungus bet-
hedges against recognition by expressing different secreted protein subsets in
fungal colonies that are genetically identical to one another. Such clonal
variation in gene expression is believed to be a risk-spreading strategy that
increases the chance of infection success on unpredictable plant genotypes. The
goal of this project is to test this hypothesis and thereby improve
understanding of the recognition processes between pathogens and their hosts.
The specific objectives of the planned research are to: 1) Use RNAseq of
individual infection sites to test for variable expression of fungal genes whose
products elicit resistance in rice; 2) Use differential RNAseq to establish a
causal link between mesothetic host reactions and the variable expression of one
or more fungal avirulence genes. The central hypothesis is transformative
because it establishes a new paradigm for plant-microbe recognition, with the
potential to revolutionize current thinking in the field. The knowledge
generated in the project could alter how plants are bred for disease resistance
and may lead to novel therapeutic strategies for microbial diseases of human and
other animals. The project will provide research training for an existing
graduate student, who will also attend a Next Generation Sequencing and
Bioinformatics workshop during the term of the project. These training
opportunities will greatly expand her skill set and thereby enhance future
career prospects.