* 1533672
* NCS-FO: The Structure of Neural Variability During Motor Learning
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Byron Yu, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Whang
* 08/31/2020
* USD 868,952.00

Movements are inherently variable: one never throws a dart or a basketball in
exactly the same way twice. On the face of it, this variability in behavior is
detrimental to performance, preventing one from consistently hitting the
bull's-eye or making the basket. However, computational theories posit that
motor variability may also serve a functional role, enabling exploration and
learning of more efficient movements. This creates an intriguing duality: while
variability should be minimized for short-term motor performance (to act
reliably), it should be maximized for long-term performance (to promote
learning). During practice, variability might be useful for developing motor
skill. When it's game time, however, variability should be suppressed to the
greatest extent possible. Might the central nervous system set the amount of
variability in a context-appropriate fashion? This study will investigate the
neural correlates of motor variability and establish the connections between
neural variability, behavioral performance, and
learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Neural variability lies at the heart of several
theoretical computational models, from implementations of probabilistic
computation to Hebbian learning rules. Although the importance of variability
has been well recognized, the structure and regulation of neural variability
within the central nervous system is not well understood. This project
coordinates a program of experiments and new analytical techniques to examine
the structure of neural variability in the motor system. It seeks to establish,
first, how variability depends on behavioral demands, and second, how
variability impacts learning. To achieve this, many neurons of the motor and
premotor cortices will be studied simultaneously during performance of demanding
behaviors. By studying two distinct areas in the motor pathway, the impacts of
noise on motor planning and execution can be examined separately. Furthermore,
population recordings can be leveraged to decompose variability into three
conceptually distinct components: (1) variability that is related to the task
(signal variability), (2) trial-to-trial variability shared among neurons, and
(3) private variability within each neuron. The investigators will explore how
variability of each type is modulated by task context and learning. These
decompositions will yield insight into the mechanisms of variability generation
during performance.