* 1533768
* XPS: FULL: DSD: A Parallel Tensor Infrastructure (ParTI!) for Data Analysis
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2021
* Richard Vuduc, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Wei Ding
* 08/31/2021
* USD 750,000.00

This project concerns efficient parallel algorithms and software
for&lt;br/&gt;emerging and future data analysis and mining applications, based
on an&lt;br/&gt;emerging class of techniques known as tensor networks. Tensors,
which&lt;br/&gt;are higher-dimensional generalizations of matrices, are
finding&lt;br/&gt;applications in signal and image processing, computer
vision,&lt;br/&gt;healthcare analytics, and neuroscience, to name just a few.
Yet&lt;br/&gt;despite this demand, there is no comprehensive, high-
performance&lt;br/&gt;software infrastructure targeting server systems that may
have many&lt;br/&gt;parallel processors. Thus, the overarching research goal of
this&lt;br/&gt;project is to design the first such infrastructure. The
resulting&lt;br/&gt;prototype will be an open-source package, called the
Parallel Tensor&lt;br/&gt;Infrastructure, or ParTI! The broader impact of the
ParTI! project is&lt;br/&gt;to make the use of tensors, in a variety of data
processing domains,&lt;br/&gt;much easier to do and more
widespread.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ParTI! project will focus specifically on
algorithmic and software&lt;br/&gt;support for sparse tensors on single-node
multi- and many-core&lt;br/&gt;accelerated platforms. The technical approach
relies on a specific way&lt;br/&gt;of representing tensors, referred to as
tensor networks. A tensor&lt;br/&gt;network is an efficient approach for
representing the structure of a&lt;br/&gt;high-order tensor or tensor
factorization. It can used by the data&lt;br/&gt;analyst as a simple, high-level
way to express the specific structure&lt;br/&gt;or relationships he or she seeks
in the data that the tensor&lt;br/&gt;represents. However, a tensor network is
not just a tool for the&lt;br/&gt;analyst; it is also an abstract intermediate
form, from which it is&lt;br/&gt;possible to derive algorithms, express and
manage parallelism, and&lt;br/&gt;semi-automatically generate tensor processing
software. This insight,&lt;br/&gt;combined with well-known data layout and
communication-avoiding&lt;br/&gt;parallelization techniques from high-
performance sparse linear&lt;br/&gt;algebra, is what will enable a ParTI! for
tensor-based data&lt;br/&gt;analysis. The project will show the utility of this
approach by&lt;br/&gt;evaluating the ParTI! prototype on real data sets and
systems, through&lt;br/&gt;collaborations with government research laboratory
and industry&lt;br/&gt;partners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For further information
see the project web site at: parti-project.org