* 1533478
* SBIR Phase II:  A medical device based treatment of onychomycosis
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2015,02/28/2019
* Jeffrey Roe, DeviceFarm
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 02/28/2019
* USD 954,702.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is to provide a safe and effective cure for
fungal nail infections. In addition, the technology developed in this project
could be utilized in other healthcare treatments such as skin and wound
disinfection, decontamination of teeth and gums (oral hygiene), and the
sterilization of medical instruments and implanted devices. Fungal nail
infection rates are growing at an estimated 7% annually following both the
general aging of the population and the rise in the incidence of diabetes. 50%
of elderly over the age of 70 and 30% of all diabetics are affected. For many
people, their infected nails are painful and embarrassing. Worst of all,
diabetics with fungal nail infections are at increased risk for foot
ulcerations, gangrene, and amputation. 38 million Americans suffer from nail
fungal infections and spend over $3 billion dollars each year on treatments that
are ineffective and sometimes unsafe. People suffering with nail fungal
infections express widespread dissatisfaction with the limited success, side
effects, high cost and inconvenience of current treatments.

The proposed project will complete prototype development of a novel, safe, and
effective treatment option for onychomycosis (nail fungal infection). The
medical device will allow a doctor to fumigate the infected nail with gas
because gas can penetrate the nail and kill the fungus where all other
treatments cannot reach. The human toe nail lacks a blood supply to deliver
optimal immune system protection to fight off fungal infections. This project
will develop a device that converts the air above the surface of the toe nail
into the same gases used by the immune system to fight infection. Hence, the gas
treatment would safely mimic the normal blood supply of anti-microbial
chemicals. This SBIR project will reduce technical development risks, improve
the device usability by doctors, and establish the manufacturability of the
device. Device prototypes will be validated in the laboratory and with users
(Podiatrists). The clinical-ready prototypes developed during this project will
be used in future clinical trials that will prove the efficacy and safety of the
device needed to sell the product. The device promises to fulfill the unmet
medical need for a safe and effective treatment option for the millions of
Americans suffering with fungal infected nails.