* 1533822
* XPS:EXPL:DSD: Language Abstraction, Annotation, Compiler Optimization Techniques for Efficient CFD Computation
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Zhiyuan Li, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Tevfik Kosar
* 08/31/2018
* USD 273,202.00

This project seeks to build a novel programming tool that will allow scientists
and engineers to design new scientific and engineering application programs that
can best utilize today's most powerful computers. This tool will specifically
target applications in computational fluid dynamics (CFD), an area that covers a
wide range of potential applications such as jet engine design, improving and
optimizing micro-manufacturing and "micro-fluidic devices" (such as ink-jet
printers), combustion and diesel engine technology, agricultural sewage and
irrigation, ink-jet printing, medical diagnostics and DNA analysis. The tool
allows the programmers to communicate the distinct nature of their application
that can be exploited by the compiler to match any unique hardware features of
the computer system on which the program is to be run. This matching could make
the program run faster and make more efficient use of resources. The project
will help promote interdisciplinary research, teaching, training, and learning
by offering the tool to the Computational Science and Engineering (CSE)
community. Through facilities supported by National Science Foundation at Purdue
University, the tool built for this project will be offered to the high
performance computing community as open source software. Tutorials and workshops
will be organized in collaboration with Purdue University's Rosen Center for
Advanced Computing, targeting the CSE faculty and students both at Purdue and
elsewhere.

This project investigates novel CFD-specific language abstraction and
annotation techniques to enable extensive program transformation aimed at
correcting mismatches between program constructs and hardware, leading to
significant performance enhancement. A prototyping compiler will be developed to
validate the new concepts and to demonstrate the performance advantages.This
project will be based on robust models that capture the most significant
hardware factors such as communication, cache memory, and SIMD operations. High
level specifications are designed such that the programmer can specify to the
compiler the high level program semantics without being obscured by layers of
subroutine calls. Such specification binds program constructs and data
structures at a high level, allowing the compiler to make the best decision
concerning communication scheduling and data layout, taking into account
communication efficiency, data locality and vector operation efficiency. This
project will enable effective program transformation and composition that are
applied to a range of important CFD methods and applications, such as jet
turbulence simulations that solve the compressible Navier-Stokes equations
including multiple chemical species using a high-order compact finite difference
scheme; incompressible homogeneous turbulence; compressible homogeneous
turbulence based on the FFT algorithm with time advancement in physical space,
high-order finite difference schemes, and WENO shock capturing schemes; a phase
field-based approach and algorithms for simulating wall-bounded two-phase
liquid-gas flows involving free interfaces, surface tension, moving contact
lines, and hydro-phobic/-philic walls; algorithms to handle large density ratios
and large viscosity ratios of the two fluid phases; and spectral-element
simulations of turbulence, flow-induced vibrations, turbulent wakes, and solid
structures.