* 1533536
* Implementation Project: STEM Undergraduate Program to Promote Opportunities in Research and Training (SUPPORT)
* EDU,EES
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2021
* Lawrence Flowers, Livingstone College
* Continuing Grant
* Carleitta Paige-Anderson
* 08/31/2021
* USD 1,204,500.00

Implementation Projects in the Historically Black Colleges and Universities -
Undergraduate program provide support to design, implement, study and assess
comprehensive institutional efforts to increase the numbers of students and the
quality of their preparation by strengthening science, technology, engineering
and mathematics (STEM) education and research. This implementation project at
Livingston College, a small, private undergraduate institution, provides a
strategic approach to recruit students into STEM degree programs and to provide
a support system so that they are retained and persist toward graduation in a
STEM major. Livingston College serves a majority of first-generation, low-income
students. The project is guided and informed by an on-going evaluation, as well
as by internal and external advisory committees.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project seeks prepare students in their selected STEM major using curricula-
based and extra-curricular-based methodologies that engage students, enhance
learning, and develop skills. Learning opportunities will include project based
learning and process skills laboratories, pedagogically sound instruction and
content delivery, seminars and workshops for student scientific and professional
development, and exploration of industry careers and graduate school. Additional
mathematics, science, and computer information systems courses will be developed
with emphasis on active and inquiry-based learning. A STEM summer bridge program
will foster academic and social integration to facilitate students' adjustment
to college and accelerate academic performance in gatekeeper courses. A freshman
STEM learning community will be formed by clustering core mathematics and
science courses. This project can serve as a model for small, predominantly
undergraduate institutions with an open enrollment policy committed to providing
educational opportunities to students and their families.