* 1533804
* Shape-Constrained Estimation and Inference for Surveys
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2021
* Jean Opsomer, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 08/31/2021
* USD 499,978.00

This research project will provide a new class of tools for survey practitioners
to improve the stability and precision of survey estimates. Surveys represent a
key source of data for government, business, and academics. The cost of
conducting surveys has increased dramatically during the last decade, however,
while response rates have declined. The new methods developed by this project
will take advantage of "soft" or vague information often available in practice
in many different contexts but not directly used or used in only "ad hoc" ways.
This information is referred to as "shape constraints" in statistics. The new
shape-constrained survey estimation tools will represent an important advance in
design-based estimation, which continues to be the primary approach used in
large-scale government surveys. At the same time, this work will be the first
application of shape constraints in the survey context. The new tools will be
especially useful for large-scale survey agencies and have the potential to lead
to considerably improved efficiency and to result in estimates that satisfy the
qualitative properties expected by data users. The investigators will develop
user-friendly software.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project will develop
new survey estimation methods for a variety of different types of shape
constraints that can be encountered in practice, together with statistical tools
to assess whether the shape constraint holds in the survey population and to
estimate the precision of the estimates. Shape-constrained estimation will be
introduced in several important survey methodological areas of practical
interest, including in estimation for sub-populations, post-stratification,
adjusting for nonresponse and small area estimation. The research will result in
new statistical algorithms for weighted constrained estimation, in statistical
testing methods for the validity of the shape constraints for survey data, and
in a new class of weight calibration methods that are based on shape
constraints. The project is supported by the Methodology, Measurement, and
Statistics Program and a consortium of federal statistical agencies as part of a
joint activity to support research on survey and statistical methodology.