* 1533833
* Exceptional Selectivities of Dirhodium Catalysts
* MPS,CHE
* 12/31/2014,06/30/2016
* Michael Doyle, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 06/30/2016
* USD 193,635.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Catalysis Program of the Chemistry
Division, Professor Michael P. Doyle will explore dirhodium compounds that hold
transformational potential for advancements in catalysis for organic synthesis
and for the understanding of their applications. The research will focus on
three major initiatives. (1) The development of catalytic oxidations of organic
compounds using dirhodium carboxamidate. These studies will include the
elucidation and clarification of the mechanisms of oxidations by tert-butyl
hydroperoxide and the design of a synthetic strategy for peroxidation/Michael
addition/peroxide cleavage. (2) The development of acidic chiral
dirhodium(II,III) carboxamidates for high enantioselectivity in Lewis acid
catalyzed reactions, and expanding their broad use in Lewis acid catalyzed
reactions (including carbonyl-ene, Henry, and azomethine cycloaddition
reactions). (3) The development of an understanding of and control of catalysis
that exclusively produces different products from the same reactants by the use
of different catalysts (e.g., through metal carbene versus acid intermediates).
A goal is to establish catalyst uniqueness in reactions of vinyldiazoacetates
and to design useful predictions about how to develop new reactions..

This research provides fundamental advances in catalysis and offers research
opportunities for the education of graduate and undergraduate students who are
preparing for careers in the chemical sciences. Students are integrated into the
research program with a strong mentoring program that prepares them for their
intended careers. As a platform for student education, the development of new
dirhodium catalysts and their applications for highly selective processes
provides new transformations, enhanced catalyst control, and specific reaction
pathways. New oxidation methodologies catalyzed by dirhodium compounds promote
green chemistry applications that are selective and efficient, and understanding
how they occur increases the potential for uses of molecular oxygen as the
oxidant. Oxidized dirhodium compounds that are prepared by mild methods provide
a broad selection of effective and highly selective Lewis acids for use as
catalysts in carbon-carbon bond forming transformations. The search for
divergent outcomes in catalytic reactions is a concept whose applications have
practical implications for catalyst comparisons in general; the uses of two or
more catalysts that act independent of each other will increase the efficiency
of many catalytic processes.