* 1533340
* EAGER: Understanding Online Communication for Older Adults with Late-Life Vision Loss
* CSE,IIS
* 02/15/2015,01/31/2017
* Anne Marie Piper, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 01/31/2017
* USD 127,272.00

The emergence and rapid evolution of social computing presents major research
challenges for many disciplines, particularly human-computer interaction. At the
same time, the prevalence of vision impairment and blindness, which increase
rapidly after age 75, can significantly impact the ability of older adults to
use computer technology. The PI argues that without investment in new techniques
for late-life social connectivity, as a society we will be dangerously
unprepared to support aging populations online so that these individuals are
better positioned to prolong their independent life style and less likely to
feel lonely or depressed. The PI's goal in this research is to address these
concerns by exploring a novel approach to enriching the lives of seniors with
vision loss, by providing methods based on "pre-computer" technology for staying
socially connected online. To this end, the PI has developed a prototype voice-
based e-mail system that can be accessed by means of traditional telephones and
that leverages the familiarity and pervasiveness of these devices while enabling
dynamic online interaction with one's social network, but which remains untested
with this demographic. By assessing the potential for this approach, project
findings will reveal gaps in and new directions for accessibility research, and
will bring new knowledge and new tools to the forefront of this field, while
also contributing to interdisciplinary scholarship across computer science,
communication studies, and gerontology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI's approach
represents a novel way of enabling and studying online social interaction,
making it possible to examine phenomena of online behavior with entirely new
demographics. The work will contribute new knowledge on the feasibility of
deploying a voice-based online messaging system with older adults in a
naturalistic context, while identifying communication strategies used and
challenges faced by older adults with late-life vision loss and providing an
initial understanding of the potential for phone-based voice interfaces to
support interaction for this target community. The PI's V-Mail prototype voice-
based e-mail system for traditional phones integrates with existing e-mail
accounts which users configure to forward messages from specified contacts to
the V-Mail server. For example, a family member or friend sends an e-mail to a
V-Mail user by sending the message to a traditional e-mail account (e.g.,
Gmail), which forwards it to the V-Mail server that manages the recipient's list
of contacts, read and unread e-mail messages, and attachments in a MySQL
database that uses Python to interact with Twilio when an older adult calls the
system. The PI will establish initial feasibility by testing and refining system
functionality with sighted older adults. She will then use in-depth interviews
to identify strategies and adaptive techniques that older adults with late-life
vision loss use to maintain communication, and she will evaluate the usability
and appeal of the developed voice-based communication system for this target
community.