* 1533474
* Implementation Project: University of Arkansas at Pine Bluff (UAPB) STEM Academy
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2021
* Mary Benjamin, University of Arkansas at Pine Bluff
* Continuing Grant
* Carleitta Paige-Anderson
* 08/31/2021
* USD 1,952,500.00

Implementation Projects in the Historically Black Colleges and Universities -
Undergraduate program provide support to design, implement, study and assess
comprehensive institutional efforts to increase the numbers of students and the
quality of their preparation by strengthening science, technology, engineering
and mathematics (STEM) education and research. This implementation project at
the University of Arkansas at Pine Bluff (UAPB) seeks to build on a model that
has proven successful in recruiting, retaining and graduating African-American
undergraduates in STEM, to include a focus on veteran and Hispanic STEM
students. Key activities are based on the existing UAPB STEM Academy Model with
new evidence-based interventions to be researched and disseminated. The project
is guided and informed by an on-going evaluation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specific
objectives of the project are to: increase the enrollment, retention, and
graduation rate of underrepresented minority students, including veterans in
STEM disciplines; increase the number of veteran STEM scholars; increase the
number of STEM students who pass Calculus I and II; increase the number of STEM
scholars participating in internships; increase the number of UAPB STEM faculty
participating in research and mentoring STEM scholars; and increase the number
of STEM graduates who enter graduate school and receive graduate fellowships
from NSF, other governmental agencies, and private foundations. The program will
create support for strong student engagement through collaborative learning and
research, enrichment of the mathematics curriculum and pedagogy, and campus
research mentorship supplemented by summer internships. The project will assess
the key components, while implementing interventions and modifications necessary
to prepare the STEM scholars for the workforce and graduate school. This project
can serve as a model for providing support to veteran STEM students and for
purposefully recruiting and supporting Hispanic STEM students at a Historically
Black University.