* 1533790
* Facility Support: Pinon Flat Observatory - Longbase Strainmeters Interim Operation
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Frank Wyatt, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Continuing Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 08/31/2020
* USD 227,500.00

1533790 Agnew

This grant support continuity of operations and maintenance of the Pinon Flat
Observatory (PFO) long-baseline laser strainmeters (3) and one long baseline
tiltmeter for a period of forty months (congruent with the expiration of the
GAGE Facility Cooperative Agreement EAR-1261833). PFO is the only location in
which three LSM?s allow the full strain tensor to be measured with a long-term
stability that matches GPS, with a short-term sensitivity orders of magnitude
better than GPS, and without the calibration concerns and hydrologic effects
present on borehole strainmeters. The unmatched "temporal depth" of the PFO data
(including a number of environmental sensors) makes it possible to evaluate a
range of new signals and to identify patterns which appear only over very long
times. PFO LSMs have detected repeated aseismic signals triggered by local
earthquakes, observed seven times over the last 22 years, and thought to be
caused by aseismic slip within the Anza gap of the nearby San Jacinto Fault. The
LSM data extend back to the early 1970?s, and in improved form (fully-anchored)
back to the mid-1980?s.

The PFO LSM time series observations are unique in the world and are in a
strategic area of the transform fault system that runs throughout southern and
into northern California and that remains a serious and potent seismic hazard
for a large population base in the U.S. The extreme sensitivity of in vacuo
laser interferometric crustal displacement gradient measurements such as at PFO
offers the real possibility of witnessing seismic precursors within the Anza
seismic gap. The Anza gap is seismically quiet compared to regions of the
transform fault system to the south and the north. This area is certainly
potentially ripe for a major earthquake though it may be an area of the
transform that accommodates strain accumulation largely through aseismic slip.
However, if a major earthquake in the region should occur, the loss of the
important long time series PFO LSM data sets would be less than unfortunate
given the marginal costs of keeping it running until other sources of support
might be found post-September 2018. This support is congruent with NSFs mission
of promoting the progress of science and may well advance the national health,
prosperity and welfare in terms of advancing knowledge about seismic hazards and
hazard mitigation.

***

