* 1533800
* Collaborative Research: Resilience and adaptive capacity of arctic marine systems under a changing climate (RACArctic)
* GEO,OPP
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2019
* Henry Huntington, Huntington Consulting
* Standard Grant
* Gregory Anderson
* 05/31/2019
* USD 50,746.00

This award provides support to U.S. researchers participating in a project
competitively selected by a 14-country initiative on global change research
through the Belmont Forum. The Belmont Forum is a high level group of the
world's major and emerging funders of global environmental change research and
international science councils. It aims to accelerate delivery of the
international environmental research most urgently needed to remove critical
barriers to sustainability by aligning and mobilizing international resources.
Each partner country provides funding for their researchers within a consortium
to alleviate the need for funds to cross international borders. This approach
facilitates effective leveraging of national resources to support excellent
research on topics of global relevance best tackled through a multinational
approach, recognizing that global challenges need global
solutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Working together in this Collaborative Research
Action, the partner agencies have provided support for research projects that
utilize existing Arctic observing systems, datasets and models to evaluate key
sustainability challenges and opportunities in the Arctic region, to innovate
new sustainability science theory and approaches to these challenges and
opportunities, and support decision-making towards a sustainable Arctic
environment. This award provides support for the U.S. researchers to cooperate
in consortia that consist of partners from at least three of the participating
countries and that bring together natural scientists, social scientists and end
users (e.g., policy makers, regulators, NGOs, communities and industry).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The RACArctic (Resilience and adaptive capacity of arctic
marine systems under a changing climate) project will bring together a team of
natural and social scientists from the US, Japan, and Norway to investigate
stressors and futures of fisheries-impacted marine ecosystems in the north.
Through a synthesis of available observations, including information from
fisheries managers and subsistence harvesters, the team will assess the effects
of physical drivers and human pressures on marine ecosystems and key fish
populations in the North Atlantic and North Pacific. Best practices for
fisheries management in these sectors will be developed from the available
management frameworks taking into account not only physical-biological
relationships but the adaptive capacity of fish stocks, the integrated
ecosystem, and the socio-economic needs of fisheries-dependent communities in
the Subarctic-Arctic transition zone. This comparative analysis will connect
with a breadth of stakeholders through a series of workshops and provide use-
inspired results through collaboration with fisheries management councils.