* 1533795
* XPS: EXPL: SDA: Scalable Concurrency Control Techniques for Distributed Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Ananth Grama, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 08/31/2020
* USD 299,990.00

Virtually all distributed computing applications, from transactions on databases
to updates on social media platforms, involve concurrent operations on data
objects. For these applications, concurrency control mechanisms represent
significant performance overheads. These applications typically exhibit strong
and persistent patterns in data access. Motivated by the importance of the
problem, this project investigates the use of dynamic data- and lock-access
patterns in distributed computations to significantly improve the performance of
concurrency control mechanisms for scalable systems, specifically, in
conventional cloud environments and key-value stores such as BigTable, HBase,
and Cassandra. In contrast to conventional techniques that collocate locks with
corresponding data items, this project relies on a modular lock service that
decouples lock locations from corresponding data objects, and maintains lock
state of all data items in a small set of storage nodes.

This design choice motivates a number of questions for this research: (i) where
and when should lock states be migrated into the lock service? (ii) when should
lock state be repatriated to the data store? (iii) how should the lock service
be scaled out? (iv) what are fault-tolerant, low-overhead, deadlock- and
livelock-free protocols for these operations? and (v) how can long-lived data
access patterns be leveraged in such systems? Building on preliminary results
that demonstrate the feasibility and considerable promise of the approach, the
project develops algorithms, protocols, analyses, and open-source software,
along with comprehensive validation in the context of a diverse set of
applications.

The project will result in a novel framework for concurrency control in scalable
distributed systems. The concurrency control service has a number of desirable
features: (i) modularity -- the service can be instantiated at runtime, with
minimal change to underlying data storage organization and access mechanisms;
(ii) extensibility ? the service adapts dynamically to load and service
requirements; and (iii) high performance through the use of efficient algorithms
exploiting data and lock access patterns. These features are achieved through a
novel mix of algorithms for lock migration and collocation, statistical models
for dynamic lock and data access, protocols for lock state management,
associated proofs of correctness and fairness, fault tolerance, performance, and
scalability. The concurrency control service is fully validated on private as
well as public clouds on a mix of applications drawn from Online Transaction
Processing and Machine Learning.

The project directly impacts an important class of cloud-based applications by
providing a modular and extensible lock service. The service relieves burden on
the application programmer while providing high performance and elastic
throughput. Beyond this, the project includes a number of educational
initiatives aimed at undergraduate and graduate education, along with outreach
efforts aimed at enhancing representation of minority groups. These include
development of instructional material, curricula, organization of and
presentations at workshops and summer schools, and recruitment initiatives aimed
at students from under-represented groups.