* 1533656
* XPS: FULL: FP: Design and Synthesis of New Energy-efficient Self-healing Computing Electronics with Real-time Configurability
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Hai Zhou, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Yuanyuan Yang
* 08/31/2019
* USD 548,614.00

The energy consumption and material cost for modern data-centric computing
systems have been rapidly expanding over the past decade. Unfortunately, a
significant amount of the energy and material expense is being wasted to create
enough tolerance to manufacturing defects, process variation, reliability
degradation, etc. As the technology scaling is becoming prohibitively expensive,
it is highly desirable to develop a novel computer system with real-time
reconfigurability to cope with the variability stemming from both manufacturing
and user demand. Unfortunately, conventional CMOS technology has not provided us
such a capability because once an integrated circuit is fabricated, it can no
longer be modified. However, the very recent development of non-volatile memory
devices, specially the emerging memristor device, have opened the door for a new
design paradigm with real-time
reconfigurability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Leveraging the memristor?s real-time
tunability, large on-off resistive ratio and CMOS process compatibility, this
project explores a new design and synthesis methodology of large scale
integrated circuits with real-time reconfigurability. By intelligently
integrating novel memristor device based self-healing circuits with detection
and tuning functionalities, a new computer system can perform real-time
adjustment without allocating a large amount of design margin and thus achieve
significant energy and cost saving. With this in mind, this project will perform
(1) device level modeling and design kit development for memristor integrated
VLSI and mixed-signal design, (2) circuit level design to create robust self-
healing digital and mixed-signal system, and (3) design automation development
to enable large scale integration of the proposed reconfigurable design
methodology. For broader impact, the project provides a unique training
opportunity to the students to obtain a broad knowledge base and out-of-box
thinking capability through the cross-layer research activity in this project.
The developed design kit and methodology will be available to the community to
inspire innovative VLSI and mixed-signal circuit design with memristor devices.