* 1533516
* HBCU-UP TIP: Integrating Innovative Polymer Chemistry Research into the Introductory General Chemistry Two Course Sequence- Fostering STEM Interest and Retention
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2018
* Natalie Arnett, Fisk University
* Standard Grant
* Claudia Rankins
* 07/31/2018
* USD 377,655.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP)
through Targeted Infusion Projects supports the development, implementation, and
study of evidence-based innovative models and approaches for improving the
preparation and success of HBCU undergraduate students so that they may pursue
STEM graduate programs and/or careers. The project at Fisk University seeks to
develop and implement a two-semester integrated course-laboratory experience in
polymer chemistry as an alternative to the traditional General Chemistry two-
semester course for undergraduate students. The lecture/discussion and research-
embedded laboratories will be interdependently linked to serve as a basis for
engendering excitement about the impact that scientific discovery has on society
and to build research skills that would be relevant for students' continued
engagement in research as an undergraduate STEM major and beyond. Fisk students
are disproportionately under-represented minorities; thus increasing student
interest and efficacy in STEM will have the direct effect of broadening
participation in STEM careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the proposed
project is to further enhance student learning and academic outcomes in
Chemistry, and to increase student retention in STEM. Specifically, the goals
are to: 1) deepen student learning of core concepts in General Chemistry via an
Introduction to Polymer Chemistry two semester course sequence integrated with
authentic research as an option for meeting the requirements for General
Chemistry; 2) develop enduring materials to permit replication of this course
(classroom, laboratory and Supplementary Instruction) nationally; and 3) utilize
assessment of student outcomes, broadly defined, as embedded educational
research. The benefits of achieving the goals of this project include increased
student deeper learning of fundamental concepts in General Chemistry, whetting
students' interest in STEM fields as a major and as a career.