* 1533625
* NCS-FO: Integrative Neural Approaches to Understanding Science Text Comprehension
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2020
* Bonnie Meyer, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Gregg Solomon
* 07/31/2020
* USD 1,094,878.00

The overall goal of this project from researchers at Pennsylvania State
University is to understand the neurocognitive mechanisms underlying reading
comprehension of expository scientific texts by school-aged children, adult
first language readers, and adult second language readers. The proposed research
integrates knowledge from several largely separate research traditions that are
related to reading comprehension: (1) cognitive psychological and educational
research in adult first language reading comprehension, (2) cognitive
psychological and educational research in child first language reading
comprehension, (3) neuroimaging research in text comprehension, and (4) graph-
theoretical modeling of knowledge representation. Findings from this project
will have significant implications for STEM education. It was funded by the
Integrated Strategies for Understanding Neural and Cognitive Systems program,
which included support from the EHR Core Research (ECR) program and the
Behavioral and Cognitive Sciences division of SBE. The ECR program emphasizes
fundamental STEM education research that generates foundational knowledge in the
field. Investments are made in critical areas that are essential, broad and
enduring: STEM learning and STEM learning environments, broadening participation
in STEM, and STEM workforce development. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team
will study the behavioral and neural patterns during the reading of science
text, in an attempt to unravel the brain's text reading network underlying first
and second languages, and the neurocognitive differences between good versus
poor readers. It combines methods from functional magnetic resonance imaging,
cognitive study of learner abilities, and advanced data-analytic techniques in
cognitive modeling and brain networks. The study of brain networks through the
connectivity that exists in the functional and structural pathways of the
learning brain holds the promise of providing new insights into the neural bases
of individual differences, neuroplasticity, and language learning and
representation. Data analytics will be applied to probe into the dynamic changes
in connectivity patterns. This approach will allow the study not only of
learning-induced or experience-dependent neural changes, but also what brain
networks characterize individual differences in learning and representation
(including intrinsic neural patterns captured by resting-state functional
connectivity). Observed neural changes and patterns will allow the researchers
to predict who might be more successful learners.