* 1533985
* DMREF: Biologically Inspired Optimized Materials And Technologies Transformed by Evolutionary Rules (BIOMATTER)
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Mathias Kolle, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* John Schlueter
* 08/31/2019
* USD 1,550,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;Materials that satisfy society's increasing
demand for technological innovation and that provide solutions to major global
challenges of the 21st century in the fields of energy efficiency, resource
management, technology development, human health, and world security are
frequently required to simultaneously exhibit multiple functions with superior
performance. Through the course of natural evolution, a plethora of organisms
have conceived material solutions that show exemplary performance
characteristics across multiple property classes, including mechanics, optics,
actuation and chemistry. These organisms thus provide an advantageous starting
point for studying the role of morphology, morphogenesis, and material
composition on emerging material properties. The project will explore the
causalities between hierarchical material architectures, composition and
morphogenesis, and the emerging functionalities in a set of exemplary biological
systems. This will enable the identification of a generalized set of rules for
guiding the design and fabrication of multifunctional 21st century materials.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This research is inspired by
the vision that an understanding of the material solutions and design criteria
used by Nature's finest multitasking artists in combination with novel
analytical and computational materials evolution tools can provide insight into
functional synergies and trade-offs in multifunctional materials and result in
revolutionary biomimetic material platforms. The research team proposes to study
the causalities between hierarchical material architectures, composition, and
morphogenesis and the emerging properties in a set of exemplary biological
systems by analytical and computational analysis of the multi-faceted material
parameter interactions underlying true multifunctionality. Building on knowledge
about design paradigms prevalent in biological multifunctional materials,
analytical algorithms, computational routines, and virtual material design
environments will be conceived that will allow the characterization of the phase
space of possible material solutions as a function of user-prescribed
performance criteria. This will permit the team to identify a generalized set of
rules for guiding the design and fabrication of multifunctional new materials.
The particular emphasis is on identifying synergies and trade-offs between
mechanical functionalities, optical properties, actuation behavior, fluidics,
and surface-chemistry induced effects. Based on this set of design rules, the
PIs will fabricate material prototypes using state-of-the-art additive
manufacturing, self-assembly, and microfabrication strategies. A detailed
characterization of the performance of these prototypes and comparison to the
parent biological system(s) will enable evaluation of the validity and
prediction capabilities of the design rules and allow for their refinement in an
iterative process. In summary, the PIs propose to tackle the challenges of
multifunctional material design using a feedback oriented "evolutionary research
algorithm" with focus on the realization of dynamic multifunctional materials
capable of fast autonomous or controlled functional morphing stimulated by
external influences or user input.