* 1533792
* EAGER: Cataloging Software Using a Semantic-Based Approach for Software Discovery and Characterization
* CSE,OAC
* 07/01/2015,12/31/2017
* John Doyle, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Rajiv Ramnath
* 12/31/2017
* USD 299,926.00

When scientists need to find software for a task, they often use ad hoc methods
such as asking their colleagues, searching the web, or using whatever others
appear to be using. This unsystematic approach often results in unproductive
effort and poorer scientific results because scientists cannot find the software
that is best for their needs. If a comprehensive software index were available
it would help enable more efficient use of existing software resources and tools
and contribute to more efficient and effective investment in the scientific
research itself. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Further, software is created and evolves
too rapidly for humans to monitor; thus creation of the index should be
automated. Also, while today's social-coding movement is putting more software
into open-source repositories, thus offering greater opportunities to find and
characterize software automatically, a significant obstacle remains: the lack of
automated indexing methods that can produce results acceptable to humans. This
proposed EAGER project seeks to investigate the use of innovative computing
techniques for automating the creation of an index that can be used by
scientists to find the software they need. Their test system (CASICS -
Comprehensive and Automated Software Inventory Creation System) will be tested
with an initial set of users and made available for public
use.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, the researchers will (1) extend an
existing software ontology; (2) develop methods for source code analysis using
the ontology; (3) adapt a repository crawler to apply the methods to projects in
SourceForge and GitHub; (4) implement a browsing and search interface to the
database of results; and (5) augment the search facility to use semantic
similarity via the ontology. They will use the prototype system to explore
variants of the code analysis methods, select the best, and assess the
performance of inferring characteristics of software found in the repositories.
For automated index creation to be feasible, software discovery and
characterization algorithms need to improve, so that the index is complete and
organized more meaningfully. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will explore the
hypothesis that a deeper underlying knowledge structure, coupled with
appropriate feature extraction and classification algorithms, can improve
classification performance compared to past approaches. The use of ontologies to
assist source code analysis has been explored in other work, but it has not been
applied as proposed here. The project is expected to extend the state of the art
in source code analysis and categorization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The central
question in this project is whether the ontology-based descriptions of software
produced by the classification methods can compare with human labeling. To
address this, and in addition to the intellectual merit of the classification
approach described above, the researchers have also proposed unique methods for
empirically evaluating the results of the classification, as follows: (a) assess
the overlap between the output of their methods with the classifications already
present in GitHub and SourceForge - the two software catalogs they propose to
mine, (b) develop a test system to perform double-blind evaluation with human
judges on the software that is classified and (c) compare the search in CASICS
to Google using a set of benchmark search queries that users in astronomy and
systems biology would issue for various scenarios, identified through a survey.