* 1533987
* DMREF - Collaborative Research: Developing design rules for enhancing mobility in conjugated polymers
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2019
* Alberto Salleo, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* John Schlueter
* 07/31/2019
* USD 533,469.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;Organic semiconductors have many applications in
portable, large-area or ubiquitous electronics. They also have great potential
in bioelectronics as active materials in sensors or transducers. All such
devices work by transporting charges; finding materials with large charge
mobilities is therefore a major goal in the field of organic electronics. The
search for high-mobility organic semiconductors, however, is still largely
conducted with an Edisonian philosophy. The primary goal of the proposed
activity is the development of a set of rational design principles for creating
high-mobility conjugated homopolymers and copolymers which will impact all
applications of organic semiconductors, from solar cells to light-emitting
diodes and transistors. Insight derived from theory will be used to design and
synthesize molecules that will be analyzed experimentally using X-ray
diffraction for structural characterization and optical spectroscopy for
measuring charge delocalization. These attributes will be correlated with the
ability of the materials to carry current. The ultimate goal is to link specific
features of the molecular structure and of the short-range arrangement of
molecules within the assembly to carrier mobility. The methods developed, both
theoretical and experimental, can potentially streamline the search for high
mobility polymers and pave the way for the next generation of high-performance
organic-based electronic devices. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;Rational design of functional materials will be based on a
theoretical model that accounts for charge transport, nuclear-electronic
coupling, and various manifestations of diagonal and off-diagonal disorder
within a two-dimensional lattice appropriate for mixed or segregated pi-stacks.
Design principles derived from theory will be tested on several model Donor-
Acceptor copolymers in which intrachain torsional disorder and/or HOMO energy
alternation is carefully controlled. Structure/property relationships will be
evaluated on high-performance copolymers based on the indacenodithiophene
structural motif using acceptors with varying electron-withdrawing strengths.
Microstructural characterization of thin polymer films will be accomplished
using grazing incidence X-ray diffraction (GIXD), and charge delocalization will
be probed using charge modulation spectroscopy (CMS) on oriented samples in
order to obtain polarization resolution. The proposed activity will provide the
organic electronics community with a method to experimentally and theoretically
evaluate materials quickly for the design of high-performance organic
semiconductors. It will also provide the first measurements of the coherence
length of polarons in conjugated polymers using steady-state infra-red
absorption spectroscopy. The coherence length will be linked to the design of
new conjugated polymers and their short-range morphologies, thereby providing
fundamental insights into what governs delocalization and trapping in conjugated
polymer films.