* 1533532
* CAREER:  Integrated Research and Education in Self-powered Micro-sensing for Embedded and Implantable Structural Health Monitoring
* ENG,CMMI
* 12/31/2014,09/30/2016
* Shantanu Chakrabartty, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Atul Kelkar
* 09/30/2016
* USD 120,634.00

The research objective of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award
is investigating novel battery-less, self-powered micro-sensors that can operate
at fundamental limits of energy harvesting (picowatt-nanowatt power consumption)
and hence can be used for long-term monitoring of fatigue in civil, mechanical
and biomechanical structures. A novel piezoelectricity driven ionized-impact hot
electron injection(p-IHEI) principle which exploits the computational primitives
inherent in the interface physics between piezoelectric transducers and
floating-gate transistors. The p-IHEI principle is being used for self-powered
computation of mechanical usage statistics (strain, strain-rate, acceleration,
dwell-time and spectral statistics) which are useful to prognosticate fatigue.
Also a novel piezoelectricity driven harmonic radar where the piezoelectric
element scavenges ambient mechanical noise to amplify and reflect harmonics of
any impinging radio-frequency signals. This principle bypasses many of the
signal processing steps in a conventional radio-frequency identification
technique and has the potential for interrogation distances beyond 100m.

Battery-less micro-sensors will be developed which could become an integral part
of the next generation of "smart" structures that can self-diagnose damage and
fatigue before the occurrence of any catastrophic failure. The outreach
component of this project is focused on developing an electrical-civil-
engineering forum in the area of electronic sensing systems for structural
health monitoring. This forum is being used to train graduate and undergraduate
students and students belonging to under-represented communities.