* 1533837
* XPS: EXPL: CCA: Verification and Optimization Tools for Heterogeneous Memory Consistency Models
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Margaret Martonosi, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Yuanyuan Yang
* 08/31/2019
* USD 300,000.00

Over the past decade, the deceleration of Moore's Law and Dennard Scaling has
required computing to make a dramatic shift towards on-chip parallelism in order
to achieve computer performance scaling at acceptable power budgets. In further
response, the use of diverse processing elements and specialized accelerators
has also increased; many smartphone processors or systems-on-chip (SoCs) include
4-6 different instruction set architectures (ISAs) and memory consistency models
(MCMs). In the face of this increasing heterogeneity, this project's research
aims to tame the architecture, verification, and software implications of this
fast-growing complexity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ensuring that computations occur
on the right data at the right time is fundamental to computing system
reliability, and MCMs are intended to guarantee this in multi-threaded systems,
but better verification and translation support is needed. In particular, this
work is developing a toolkit with elements including: (i) Grammars for
specifying MCMs and hardware implementations, as well as tools to derive these
specifications from existing design descriptions, appropriately annotated if
needed. (ii) Modules for enumerating and checking implementation-level (i.e.
microarchitecture-level) Happens-Before-Graphs to generate verifiers for
arbitrary MCMs and implementations. (iii) Modules for automatically translating
from one MCM to another. (iv) Tools that compose the above modules to
automatically generate litmus tests, to do binary translation including MCM
translation, and other useful examples. (v) A pedagogical tool (an MCM animator
and illustrator) for teaching students in computer architecture and parallel
programming classes. To facilitate broad use of this work, basic modules and
composed tools will be distributed as free software.