* 1533814
* Review of Progress Toward the Decadal Survey Vision in New Worlds, New Horizons in Astronomy and Astrophysics
* MPS,AST
* 05/15/2015,10/31/2016
* James Lancaster, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Vernon Pankonin
* 10/31/2016
* USD 186,790.00

Driven by discoveries, and enabled by leaps in technology and imagination, our
understanding of the Universe has changed dramatically over the course of the
last few decades. The fields of astronomy and astrophysics continue to create
new connections to physics, chemistry, biology, and computer science. Realizing
these scientific opportunities is contingent upon maintaining and strengthening
the foundations of the research enterprise. With the decadal survey New Worlds,
New Horizons in Astronomy and Astrophysics as a basis, the Mid-Decadal
Committee, formed with this award under the auspices of the Board on Physics and
Astronomy and the Space Studies Board at the National Academy of Sciences, will
identify issues of concern to the astronomy and astrophysics community and
provide guidance to federal agencies regarding their astronomy and astrophysics
research programs in order to encourage the field?s scientific
progress.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The activities of the Mid-Decadal Committee serve
to disseminate information from the supporting agencies into the broader
scientific community and the public, as well as provide the agency officials
with community-based input. The committee will gather input from the astronomy,
astrophysics, and physics communities. Additionally, members of the committee
will engage with agency officials, congressional staff, and other members of the
astronomy and astrophysics community on topics relevant to the study.