* 1533537
* Planning Project to Establish a Cohesive Community College STEM Institutional Transformation Academy - STEM-UP Academy
* EHR,HRD
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2017
* Mitchell Shears, Hinds Community College-Utica
* Standard Grant
* Claudia Rankins
* 09/30/2017
* USD 419,957.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP)
provides support for the design, implementation, and assessment of strategies
that can lead to comprehensive institutional efforts to increase the number of
students receiving undergraduate degrees in science, technology, engineering and
mathematics (STEM) and enhance the quality of their preparation by strengthening
STEM education and research. The project at Hinds Community College - Utica
seeks to establish the foundation for a "Cohesive Community College STEM
Institutional Transformation Academy". The goals of the project are: to
establish summer bridge programs, to strengthen the 2-year STEM curriculum at
the college, and to facilitate entrance of students into 4-year STEM
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Activities that are part of this project are:
meetings with the advisory boards and partnering school districts and
universities for planning purposes; faculty development and training in
redesigning of science, mathematics, and computer science courses; a two- week
summer pre-college bridge program for rising 11th graders; a five-week summer
pre-college component for entering STEM freshman; and collaborations with
partnering 4-year institutions, such as Jackson State University and Alcorn
University. The project will be guided by an on-going evaluation.