* 1533780
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Morphological Decomposition in Arabic
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2017
* Adam Ussishkin, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 07/31/2017
* USD 10,711.00

When we hear a word, many factors affect the speed and accuracy with which we
decide that what we have heard is indeed a word of our language. Word frequency
is a particularly salient predictor of a listener's behavior when presented with
a word; words which are more frequent are recognized more quickly than words
which are less frequent. Moreover, the frequency of individual word parts such
as suffixes and prefixes also have an effect on the recognition of the word as a
whole. These phenomena are important for psycholinguistic models of storage and
processing which represent how people acquire words of a language, store them in
their minds, and retrieve them when they must perceive or produce them. Such
models inform effective methods for teaching language as well as diagnosis and
treatment of language disorders. However, studies focusing on the role of
frequency in word recognition have been largely limited to Indo-European
languages, which results in an incomplete picture of the mechanisms which allow
humans to learn, recognize and produce language. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main
goal of this psycholinguistic research is to explore the role of frequency in
word recognition for a colloquial dialect of Arabic spoken in Amman, Jordan.
This research entails psycholinguistic experiments measuring reactions to a
variety of kinds of spoken words which differ based on the frequencies of the
parts that they contain. Furthermore, these studies involve the collection of
personal linguistic histories, as well as the gathering of texts and transcripts
from Web, chat, and broadcast domains. This research will contribute to a richer
understanding of how Arabic speakers determine what constitutes a word of their
dialect, and what properties of the word affect the speed and accuracy with
which they do so. Determining which word parts contribute most to their storage
and access in the mind will result in more informed ways of teaching colloquial
Arabic dialects to non-native speakers. Robust data focusing on which words
actually belong to this particular dialect will contribute to dictionary-writing
and lexicon-building, strengthening the scarce resources which exist for spoken
Arabic dialects.