* 1533858
* XPS: FULL: FP: Write-Efficient Parallel Algorithms for Emerging Memory Technologies
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Phillip Gibbons, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 08/31/2019
* USD 845,000.00

Chip manufacturers in the past ten years have been enhancing computing
performance by including multiple processor cores per chip. Given that all the
cores have to access a shared memory, however, this access has increasingly
become a bottleneck in terms of energy, latency, and bandwidth. To help deal
with these and other problems, industry has been developing a variety of new
memory technologies such as phase-change memory, Spin-Torque Transfer Magnetic
RAM, and Memristor-based Resistive RAM. These technologies offer the promise of
significantly lower energy and higher density than standard DRAM memory
technology. One of the key issues, however, is that writing to memory based on
the technologies is significantly more costly than reading from memory,
suffering from higher latency, lower per-chip bandwidth, and higher energy
costs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to develop new
sequential and parallel algorithms and algorithm design techniques that are
efficient in terms of the number of writes they perform, and hence make better
use of these new technologies by reducing energy consumption and improving
performance. This contrasts with 50 years of research on algorithms in which
writes are assumed to be no more costly than reads. If successful the research
will have a broad impact on future users of such technologies, which could be
very many, as well as on the models and approaches for future algorithm design.
The PIs also plan to develop efficient implementations of algorithms that they
will make freely and openly available. The project includes an educational
outreach component in which, as part of courses on databases and applied
algorithms, the PIs will teach students about the new memory technologies and
algorithms that can take advantage of them.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Within the
scope of work the PIs will (1) develop appropriate abstract models for capturing
the asymmetric costs in memories, (2) develop and analyze algorithms in the
models, (3) prove lower bounds, (4) develop programming abstractions that help
express such algorithms, (5) develop working applications (e.g., in graph
analytics and databases) based on the algorithms developed, and (6)
experimentally verify the utility of the models and abstractions in guiding the
development of efficient algorithms. The intellectual challenge within this
context will be in developing such models, algorithms, and programming
abstractions that are simultaneously simple, elegant, and practical, while at
the same time gaining insights into fundamental limits and trade-offs.