* 1533627
* Broadening Participation Research Project: Exploring Computing Careers through a Virtual Career Fair Using Embodied Conversational Agents
* EHR,HRD
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Chance Lewis, Morehouse College
* Standard Grant
* Earnestine Psalmonds
* 08/31/2018
* USD 349,950.00

Morehouse College will conduct a research project to uncover new insights
regarding the effect of culturally relevant career exploration resources on high
school students' career interests. The researchers propose a mixed-methods
research design using quantitative and qualitative data to examine the effects
of using embodied conversational agents (ECAs) in virtual career exploration
fairs with rural and urban high school students. Building on previous research
that shows that ECAs are as effective as humans when used to mentor
undergraduate students interested in pursuing graduate school, the researchers
will explore whether the research extends to high school students considering
computing careers.

Guided by the "possible selves" and "social cognitive career theory (SCCT)"
frameworks, researchers will examine students' perceptions of computing and
computing careers before and after each career exploration fair, noting the
effect and impact of questions and answers (Q&A), storytelling, and culturally
relevant storytelling. The ECAs will represent minority individuals in authentic
computing professions. The specific research questions are: 1) In what ways do
students' career interests and perceptions change following virtual career
exploration fairs using ECAs? 2) How do culturally relevant ECAs differ based on
student perceptions and identities? and 3) What roles do gender, race,
ethnicity, grade level, and location (rural/urban) play in students' career
identities? Survey data will be analyzed to determine the relative impact of the
virtual career exploration fair on student self-efficacy, interest in computer
science careers, and predictive factors of the SCCT?

The project presents a potentially sustainable solution for motivating urban and
rural high-need school districts to explore computing careers. Data collected on
student attitudes, interests, and self-efficacy will help guide improvements to
the ECAs and ensure they are broadly applicable for future uses.