* 1533500
* NCS-FO: Collaborative Research: Understanding Individual Differences in Cognitive Performance: Joint Hierarchical Bayesian Modeling of Behavioral and Neuroimaging Data
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Zhong-Lin Lu, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 07/31/2019
* USD 452,165.00

Understanding the complex determinants of individual health and wellbeing is
critical for the promotion and maintenance of a healthy world population.
Wellbeing may be understood not only as the absence of physical and mental
illness but also as the quality of life and optimal functioning of individuals.
It is well known that individuals vary tremendously in terms of cognitive
abilities and dispositions, as seen from performance on high-order cognitive
tasks, decision-making preferences, and emotional competencies. However, the
neural underpinnings of much of this variability are poorly understood: It is
unclear how individual differences in brain structure and function across tasks
and processes are linked to abilities and competencies. This project explores a
mathematical and computational framework for investigating a large-sample
neuroimaging and behavioral dataset in order to improve our understanding of
individual differences in cognitive performance. An ultimate goal of the project
is to predict individual cognitive performance in novel, real-world situations
based on observed (past) behavioral and neuroimaging data and contribute to the
understanding of cognitive health and wellbeing of individuals. The project will
also offer many training opportunities for the next generation of scientists.

The technical approach will build on and integrate recent advances in cognitive
science, neuroscience, statistics, and machine learning. Statistical models will
integrate data from both brain imaging and behavioral tests to generate
predictions that otherwise may not be possible with a single source of data. The
research will go beyond establishing and explaining individual differences to
predicting individual cognitive performance in a variety of tasks.