* 1533681
* Targeted Infusion Proposal: Using a Project-Based Learning Approach for Education and Training in Technological Innovation for STEM Students
* EDU,EES
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2020
* Elham Fini, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Standard Grant
* Claudia Rankins
* 06/30/2020
* USD 559,979.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP)
through Targeted Infusion Projects supports the development, implementation, and
study of evidence-based innovative models and approaches for improving the
preparation and success of HBCU undergraduate students so that they may pursue
STEM graduate programs and/or careers. The project in the School of Technology
at North Carolina A&amp;T State University (NCA&amp;T) seeks to enhance
students' knowledge and instruction in technological innovation using a project-
based approach. This training program will be integrated as part of the
undergraduate and graduate courses in innovation and technology management while
preparing students for the Ph.D. program in Technology Management which is
offered at NCA&amp;T through a consortium of five other universities.
Undergraduate students are involved in the implementation of this
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific objectives of the project are to:
create instructional materials for technological innovation in the context of
manufacturing and services; incorporate the new content into one new course, one
course in the undergraduate applied engineering technology program and one
graduate course in the Master of Science in technology management program using
project-based learning and case studies; and study the impact of this education
and training on students' learning outcomes. Improvements in areas such as
higher order cognitive skills, self-efficacy, ease of learning of subject
matter, teamwork, and communication skills will be evaluated. The findings of
this project will be disseminated and materials will be developed into an
instructional package which will be publically available and can be adapted by
other institutions to educate and train students in technological innovation.