* 1533767
* XPS: FULL: CCA: Cymric: A Flexible Processor-Near-Memory System Architecture
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Hyesoon Kim, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Yuanyuan Yang
* 08/31/2019
* USD 750,000.00

Emerging software applications in data analytics, graph analysis, and machine
learning must process increasing volumes of data. Such data-intensive
applications stress the communication and storage parts of a computer system
more than the computation parts. Yet most of today?s systems are ?compute-
centric? in the sense that their designs focus on improving the efficiency of
computation. Computing near data or processing-near-memory can significantly
reduce data communication between memory and processor providing potential for
significant improvement in energy-efficiency of next generation computing
systems.

This project investigates and addresses the challenges facing the design of the
next generation of memory-centric processors ? specifically processing-near-
memory (PNM) architectures. The project will characterize the energy and time
behavior of future applications and use this understanding to assess how to best
architect new systems that combine memory and compute in close proximity.
Specifically, the activities will address i) programming models, ii) processing-
near-memory architectures, and iii) power & thermal managements with the
development of cross-cutting data movement, compiler and microarchitectural
optimizations. The results of this work can influence the design of future
enterprise and high performance computing systems. The major principles,
insights, and outcomes of this project will be integrated as modules into
mainstream courses in Computer Architecture. The investigators will also
continue their participation in Institute outreach programs that have the goal
of promoting participation of undergraduate, minority, and female students in
engineering research and higher education.