* 1533539
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award: Traditional Household Production And Consumption
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* David Walton, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 05/31/2016
* USD 13,671.00

The primary objective of this research is to understand how members of ancient
households made obsidian stone tools according to different production
strategies and used different tool forms for specific functions. This research
is focused on households because recent archaeological findings indicate that
households and independent consumer demand were integral to the formation of
broader economic structures in ancient societies. In many parts of the world,
craft production was primarily a household activity without oversight or control
by political states or religious institutions. Household tools are also
important to study because they can reveal examples of technological
experimentation and invention, patterns of exchange in nearby marketplaces or
long distance trade, and ritual behaviors. Archaeology is well suited for
studying the broader impacts of technological change and economic structures on
individual households and their residents because it can reconstruct and compare
production and consumption patterns over space and time. In a similar way, the
US Bureau of Labor Statistics measures the expenditures and incomes of consumer
units (i.e. families or households) to produce the annual Consumer Expenditure
Survey, which provides economic policymakers with crucial data for determining
the impacts of policy changes on different economic groups. By amassing economic
data from different types of households archaeologists can investigate how
broader socioeconomic processes operated within ancient societies and affected
ancient peoples over the course of time. In addition, in many developing regions
of the world today production takes place within a household and archaeological
research can set this process in a broader context.

Under the guidance of Dr. David Carballo, David Walton will investigate the
nuances of obsidian tool production and consumption in household spaces. This
project is unique, compared to previous scholarship, because it applies methods
of technological classification and microwear analysis to artifact collections
obtained from previous and recent excavations at six different sites in the
central Mexican highlands spanning the Middle Formative to Late Postclassic
Periods (900 B.C.-A.D. 1550). Using archaeological data through a comparative
approach avoids culture-bound theorizing and helps to evaluate models of
economic behavior gleaned from studies around the world. This volcanically
active region of Mesoamerica contains chemically traceable sources of obsidian
that were mined consistently for over 2,300 years. The study sample, which
includes a survey collection from the ancient metropolis of Teotihuacan, is
selected to offer secure excavation contexts from communities of variable sizes
located in the same region that had access to these obsidian sources. This
project maximizes the amount of data creation for these collections, some of
which have been studied to only a small degree, by conducting multiple analyses
to generate complementary information. In particular, this project amasses one
of the largest and most diverse samples of Mesoamerican stone tools subjected to
microwear analysis, which is a heavily underutilized method in the field
compared to other areas such as North American and Paleolithic archaeology. This
project acts to strengthen international relationships with officials from the
Mexican Instituto Nacional de Antropolog√≠a (INAH) and three US academic
institutions through laboratory collaborations and resulting publications. It
will also permit Mr. Walton to conduct research for his doctoral dissertation.