* 1533498
* Targeted Infusion Project: Infusion of Toxicology into the Biology and Chemistry Programs at Fort Valley State University
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Robin Bright, Fort Valley State University
* Standard Grant
* Carleitta Paige-Anderson
* 08/31/2020
* USD 399,049.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP)
through Targeted Infusion Projects supports the development, implementation, and
study of evidence-based innovative models and approaches for improving the
preparation and success of HBCU undergraduate students so that they may pursue
STEM graduate programs and/or careers. The project at Fort Valley State
University (FVSU) seeks to diversify the Biology and Chemistry curriculum by
establishing two new toxicology undergraduate courses and increasing summer
undergraduate research training opportunities at FVSU. This project will: 1)
promote student interest in toxicology to address the global need for qualified
toxicologists; 2) foster critical thinking and enhance problem solving skills to
better prepare students for future careers in toxicology; 3) increase the number
of intellectually and technically equipped students applying to graduate
programs in toxicology or related STEM fields; and 4) enhance diversity in
toxicology and related STEM disciplines. FVSU grants over 40% of its
baccalaureate degrees to underrepresented minorities in STEM disciplines; thus
this project will have a direct effect on broadening the participation of
underrepresented minorities in Toxicology careers and broaden the pool of
qualified students applying to graduate and professional
schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aim of the proposed project is to improve and
update the Biology and Chemistry curriculum through the infusion of toxicology
instruction and undergraduate research. Activities proposed to achieve this goal
include: 1) establishing curriculum for Principles of Toxicology (3 credit
hours, Lecture Course) and Investigations of toxicology (2 credit hours,
Laboratory Course); 2) establishing a core toxicology teaching laboratory
suitable for implementing inquiry-based course instruction; 3) establishing
undergraduate research opportunities in toxicology through institutional
collaboration; and 4) enhancing FVSU faculty knowledge and research expertise in
toxicology.