* 1533644
* XPS: FULL: FP: A profile-centric IDE for science-based performance engineering in the cloud
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2021
* Charles Leiserson, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2021
* USD 2,195,770.00

Scientists developing compute-intensive multicore applications find it difficult
to parallelize their code, a problem that is exacerbated if they wish to take
maximum advantage of the potential provided by cloud computing. Part of the
problem is that bad codes cause the generation of incorrect hypotheses while
reading, writing, and debugging code, wasting time, energy, and resources.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research plans to meld advanced profiling methods for
multithreaded programming with modern user-interface technology to produce a
highly usable open-source integrated development environment (IDE) for the
performance-engineering of multicore software applications in the cloud. The
goal is to provide programmers with continuous profile data for scalability and
other performance profiling relevant to parallel programming. They plan to embed
an IDE into a profiling framework to produce a profile-centric IDE, continuously
providing performance feedback so that developers can see and compare the
results of recent runs of their program as they edit their
code.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has the potential to enable science-based
performance engineering of multicore applications in the cloud. The vast
majority of computer users, not just expert computer scientists, will be able to
develop highly efficient parallel software applications, broadly impacting every
computing application in every walk of life. The software produced by this
project will be made freely available to anyone on the World Wide Web using a
liberal open-source license.