* 1533885
* XPS: FULL: CCA: NUMB: Exploiting Non-Uniform Memory Bandwidth  for Computational Science
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2015,02/28/2019
* Mark Hill, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Yuanyuan Yang
* 02/28/2019
* USD 859,934.00

This research seeks to maximize the benefit that modern and upcoming trends in
computer hardware systems can confer on science and engineering disciplines that
use computation to catalyze discovery and innovation. Computer architecture and
hardware systems have been experiencing disruptive transformations, and are
certain to continue on this evolutionary path as platforms highlighted by
massive parallelism and heterogeneous composition of processing units are
becoming the norm. Such advances have triggered a realignment of market segments
and computing capabilities from what was previously known: Complex fluid
simulations that were previously in the purview of enterprise-grade computing
may now be accommodated in modestly sized clusters. Virtual prototyping tasks
previously handled by clusters can now be performed using a single workstation.
This newfound availability of advanced computer capabilities, however, poses
challenges for traditional practices in scalable software engineering, and even
reaches the limitations of theory and algorithms that were designed with a less-
parallel, homogeneous computing platform in mind. This research activity
combines one of the most prominent ongoing trends in computer architecture,
namely the fact that memory access and bandwidth are both non-uniform in
heterogeneous CPU/GPU systems, with driving applications from the domain of
computational science and engineering. This project will lead to the coordinated
development of hardware innovations, scalable development practices,
heterogeneity-friendly distributed computing algorithms and parallelism oriented
numerical methods to extract optimal performance from emerging platforms on
scientific computing workloads. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The expected systems and
computer architecture advances resulting from this activity include: (i)
Defining appropriate consistency models for systems with Non-Uniform Memory
Bandwidth (NUMB), developing and refining Heterogeneous Race Free (HRF)
consistency models for overlapping scopes and NUMB platforms. (ii) Improving the
coordination of memory bandwidth utilization, by developing interfaces and
mechanisms to manage interstage temporal locality, and assessing such mechanisms
and policies in the context of our driving applications. (iii) Exploring
enhanced mechanisms for synchronization, both among GPUs as well as between the
CPU and GPU, by exploiting hardware-assisted reduction models in heterogeneous
system and provide fine-grain data handling and synchronization semantics
without fine-scale locks and barriers. (iv) Designing and implementing Operating
System extensions to better manage heterogeneous memory (e.g., various levels of
caches, accelerator memory or non-volatile memory (NVM) data stores).
Applications research will emphasize (a) workloads in Adaptive Computational
Fluid Dynamics (CFD), an area that has traditionally fostered co-development of
theoretical and systems aspects and is well represented in the joint expertise
of the collaborating investigators, and (b) instances of interactive Virtual
Anatomical Modeling and Simulation, as an emerging exemplar of a host of
computer-aided training tools for medical and surgical education that has only
been made possible due to the enhanced capacity of modern computing platforms.
This synergistic research endeavor will facilitate important emerging
applications in medicine, computer-aided design and engineering research that
are on the verge of attaining practical utility. It will also reveal new options
for enabling more energy-efficient systems, provide a blueprint for optimized
performance in throughput-sensitive applications beyond numerical computing, and
generate opportunities for development of academic courses that highlight the
merits of a conscious co-evolution of systems and theory principles.