* 1533260
* INSPIRE Proposal: Spatiotemporal structure of the rs-fMRI signal reflects contributions from different types of brain activity
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2021
* Eric Schumacher, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 07/31/2021
* USD 1,000,000.00

This INSPIRE award is partially funded by the Perception, Action, and Cognition
Program in the Division of Behavioral and Cognitive Sciences in the Directorate
for Social, Behavioral, and Economic Sciences, the Physics of Living Systems
Program in the Division of Physics in the Directorate for Mathematical and
Physical Sciences, and the Neural Systems Cluster in the Division of Integrative
Organismal Systems in the Directorate for Biology, and the Office of Integrative
Activities.

A key roadblock to understanding how the human brain works is that it is
currently impossible to examine activity throughout the whole brain non-
invasively with both a spatial resolution that is adequate to resolve functional
areas and a temporal resolution on the time scale of cognitive processes. One
possible improvement is to use resting state functional magnetic resonance
imaging (rs-fMRI), which can image the whole brain non-invasively with
potentially acceptable resolution. The drawback is that rs-fMRI measures the
relative oxygenation level of the blood and contains contributions from non-
localized fluctuations in blood flow and volume in addition to localized
contributions linked to neural activity. The possibility exists that particular
spatial and temporal patterns in the rs-fMRI signal may represent separable
contributions from different types of brain activity. For example, the rs-fMRI
signal may carry not only information about the magnitude and duration of neural
activity but also information about the underlying patterns or "carrier waves"
for neural information processing. If successful, this project would allow the
mapping of different types of brain activity throughout the whole brain, a feat
that cannot be achieved by any current imaging modality.

To this end, the investigators conduct simultaneous functional magnetic
resonance imaging and direct neural recording to determine the relation between
fluctuations in the rs-fMRI signal and electrophysiological brain activity and
to examine the effect of spontaneous fluctuations in the rs-fMRI signal on
perception and cognition. Goals are to 1) identify rs-fMRI analogues of high
frequency and very low frequency electrical activity using multimodal
experiments and spatiotemporal analysis; 2) determine how spontaneous
fluctuations in activity affect the processing of sensory stimuli in rats and
humans; and 3) explore whether the rs-fMRI analogues of high and very low
frequency activity specifically predict human performance on cognitively
demanding tasks. Collectively, the studies will lead to a better understanding
of how spatiotemporal patterns of brain activity measured non-invasively combine
during neurocognitive processing, knowledge that is likely to provide new
insights about mental processing differences across individuals, within
individuals across time, and across groups with different brain organization
(e.g., damage or disease).

A strong broader impact of this award is that it will allow the researcher to
ramp up her efforts to provide a clearinghouse for information and resources for
mothers in STEM fields, helping them stay in the academic pipeline. The PI
recently initiated a web resource and forum, "Moms in STEM," and has organized a
community of female scientists committed to contributing articles and
information to the website.