* 1533933
* XPS: FULL: DSD: Collaborative Research: Parallelizing and Accelerating Metagenomic Applications
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Yuan Xie, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Yuanyuan Yang
* 08/31/2020
* USD 572,000.00

The importance of metagenomics arises from the fact that over 99% of the species
yet to be discovered are resistant to cultivation. Unlike single genome
sequencing, assembly of a metagenome is intractable and is in large part, an
unsolved mystery. Moreover, the advent of high throughput sequencing is fueling
rapid generation of enormous metagenomic datasets. There is no available
sequenced genome for a majority of the species. There is a need to determine the
number of species in a metagenomic dataset as well as the abundance of each of
these species. The key steps (Assembly and Clustering) in the metagenomics
analysis algorithms are compute-intensive, while the sheer amount of data the
algorithms operate on is staggering. The most promising way to tackle the
computational challenges is to build special purpose hardware, dedicated solely
to suitable algorithms.



The main objective of this project is to develop a range of flexible,
affordable, parallel, fast hardware-accelerated bioinformatics solutions, using
GPGPU, FPGA, and ASIC, for metagenomic analytics to provide an alternative to
expensive computer clusters. Specifically, hardware solutions for metagenomic
clustering and assembly will be developed. Several acceleration methodologies,
including parallel software mapping and special hardware design, are proposed to
explore the parallelism inside the applications and to improve the data access
bandwidth in the hardware running bioinformatics applications. The ideas
proposed in this work will be evaluated in a multi-pronged manner using a
combination of simulation, emulation and prototyping efforts. Further, the PIs
will use a combination of commercial tools, collaborator resources and existing
internal tools. The research will be conducted in collaboration with industrial
partners. Through close collaboration with several industry partners, direct
transfer of many ideas to industry is enabled. The outcome of this research
will, therefore, have a direct impact on future bioinformatics application
solutions. This project will involve graduate and undergraduate students in all
aspects of the research. The PIs will actively integrate the research results
from this project into the graduate and undergraduate curricula, and develop new
interdisciplinary courses on bioinformatics and computer architecture to train
the next generation work-force. Finally, the tools and techniques developed in
this research will be made available through web-sites for use by other
educators, researchers, and industry practitioners.