* 1533988
* DMREF: Computer-aided Design of Hierarchical Molecular Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2019
* Peter Ortoleva, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* John Schlueter
* 09/30/2019
* USD 1,350,000.00

DMREF: Computer-aided Design of Hierarchical Molecular
Materials&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical Description: Organic materials that
spontaneously order into specific architectures could significantly advance our
ability to harvest solar energy. However, developing these materials in
traditional ways is a tedious process. This project will integrate computer-
aided design (CAD), synthesis, and characterization to make a transformative
approach in ordered organic materials discovery. An Indiana University team will
study packing interactions and develop CAD algorithms for organic architectures.
The architectures will form by spontaneous interactions of molecular building
blocks programmed with specific features that connect them with neighbors.
Resulting architectures will be characterized with state-of-the-art microscopy
at single molecule resolution. Those data will be used to improve the design
algorithm to reliably predict two-dimensional packing and film growth on
surfaces. This algorithm will be implemented as computer software to supersede
experiment and thus allow vast speed-ups in the discovery of new organic
materials for harvesting solar energy. This work will have a broad impact on
many applications of organic materials through free distribution of the design
software and through national scientific symposia. The project will also sponsor
recruitment of under-represented groups to scientific research careers and
outreach to engage high school students in nanoscience education, thus impacting
the next generation of scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description:
It is understood that blending two types of organic polymers with 10-20 nm
feature sizes is advantageous in photovoltaic devices, but, at present, we do
not know how to program organic molecules to form organized bulk heterojunctions
with these feature sizes. This project will apply an integrated theory-
experiment approach to the programming of molecular self-assembly. Multiscale
simulations will be implemented as the core of a materials CAD platform.
Innovations in multiscale molecular dynamics will be used to accelerate
computation. Batch execution of simulations will be automated by database-backed
software. CAD results will be used to design molecules that will be synthesized
and allowed to self-assemble at the solution-solid interface. 2D and 3D
architectures will be characterized using molecular-resolution scanning
tunneling microscopy. Continuous feedback between CAD and the resulting
architectures will accelerate the discovery of highly ordered multilayer films.
The self-organization of two-component mixtures into alternating domains will be
investigated. CAD software will be made available for others to use in the
creation of novel organic materials.