* 1533522
* Targeted Infusion: Cyber Infused Mathematics Initiative
* EHR,HRD
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2020
* Sharon Smith, Delaware State University
* Standard Grant
* Claudia Rankins
* 07/31/2020
* USD 399,972.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP)
through Targeted Infusion Projects supports the development, implementation, and
study of evidence-based innovative models and approaches for improving the
preparation and success of HBCU undergraduate students so that they may pursue
STEM graduate programs and/or careers. The project at Delaware State University
(DSU) seeks to create the Cyber Infused Mathematics Initiative (CIMI) to
establish inverted classes for introductory mathematics courses using a student-
centered approach that blends online mastery learning and in-class inquiry-based
instruction within a scientific problem solving context. Currently, 89% of
freshmen students at DSU place into a non-credit, developmental mathematics
course. Not being able to take the introductory mathematics and other gatekeeper
courses reduces student persistence and retention. The main goal of the CIMI is
to improve retention of STEM students, particularly between the freshman and
sophomore year by creating a supportive culture of active learning.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project seeks to transform mathematics instruction at
DSU to improve students' learning outcomes and engagement with STEM topics; to
increase the passing rate of STEM freshman enrolled in College Algebra; to
increase the number of students retained in STEM majors from the freshman to
sophomore year; to increase the number of students who graduate in STEM majors;
and to develop a cadre of interdisciplinary faculty committed to implementing
best practices in the teaching of introductory mathematics. Mathematics and
science faculty will collaborate first to revise the College Algebra course
which serves the majority of entering STEM freshman. They will then adapt the
approach to Trigonometry and Calculus I, the mathematics courses STEM students
take after completing College Algebra. This project will produce an empirically
based model that bridges the gap in student preparation between developmental
and college-level mathematics coursework, as well as link professional
development with changes in instructional practices and students' mathematical
practices at the college level. The project will examine undergraduate students'
mathematics learning and achievement in the context of a historically black
university, where 81% of the undergraduate students are from racial and ethnic
groups traditionally underrepresented in STEM. The project is guided by an on-
going evaluation.