* 1533613
* Personalized Genetics and Genealogy exercises to enhance introductory biology courses
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Aditi Pai, Spelman College
* Standard Grant
* Claudia Rankins
* 07/31/2019
* USD 361,949.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP)
through Targeted Infusion Projects supports the development, implementation, and
study of evidence-based innovative models and approaches for improving the
preparation and success of HBCU undergraduate students so that they may pursue
STEM graduate programs and/or careers. The project at Spelman College seeks to
test a novel approach to increase student engagement in STEM fields at
Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCUs), through development of an
introductory biology course intervention centered on a genetics and genealogy
(G&amp;G) approach. This personally relevant curriculum is considered key in
attracting and retaining minority students. The approach is expected to be more
successful than current approaches at: 1) promoting content knowledge learning;
2) generating enthusiasm for science; and 3) increasing scientific literacy with
respect to evolutionary theory. This project will have the long-term impact of
reducing attrition of underrepresented students from life
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The G&amp;G approach is aimed at stimulating
interest in the study of science and the pursuit of a STEM career by priming
students with the discovery of unique facts about themselves, their history, and
their relatedness to other humans in the world. This project will contribute to
the field of STEM education by providing: 1) a new pedagogical model for
combining personalization with a discovery-based approach in an
interdisciplinary context; 2) a strategy for addressing the truly challenging
issue of the low acceptance of evolution among students in a unique way; 3) a
"STEAM" model to meaningfully incorporate visual art and narrative into Biology
education; and 4) a model for faculty development and networking through the
adoption of a popular social networking site for the same.