* 1533282
* EAGER: Job-Centered Power Management Policies for Data Centers
* ENG,ECCS
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2017
* Zygmunt Haas, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 12/31/2017
* USD 102,750.00

Energy consumption is one of the most important practical and timely problem
associated with data centers for cloud computing. The urgency of this problem
has been exposed by both, the governmental agencies and the industry. While
policies that consider the physical design of the data centers have been studied
in the technical literature rather thoroughly, the operational characteristics
of the data centers (e.g., the required performance of the executed
applications, such as the type of services and the applications being supported,
their QoS requirements, associated background server maintenance processes,
etc.) have rarely been accounted for. In particular, there is a need to
investigate the implications of exploiting the operational characteristics of
the data centers in the context of power management policies, as those could
lead to potentially significant energy savings and operational cost reduction of
a computer cloud.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: In the proposed project, we will
study the effect of the characteristics of the applications and their
requirements on the design of the data centers? power management policies. A
particular interest of our study will be the design of such policies in the
context of distributed data centers, as provided by the cloud-computing
paradigm. In particular, we will investigate the problem of Power Management
Policies in heterogeneous data centers for the case of independent/individual
data centers from the perspective of job profiling, such as failure and latency
tolerance. We will study the possibility of decomposition of the peak loads to a
data center into high latency tolerant requests that needs to be migrated to
different, less busy data centers, or high failure tolerant requests that
require less server resources being activated at peak times. Similarly, we will
study the approach of grouping jobs, as to reduce the demand variability on
servers. Such decomposition and grouping will be dynamically
performed.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The results are expected to significantly
improve over the other approaches of power management of data centers, as well
as represent estimations which closer match practical systems. The educational
impact includes training of graduate and undergraduate students and outreach
activities.