* 1533763
* Targeted Infusion Project: Bridging Alliances to Infuse Neuroscience at The Lincoln University (BrainLU)
* EHR,HRD
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Karen Baskerville, Lincoln University
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Claville
* 08/31/2020
* USD 497,870.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP)
through Targeted Infusion Projects supports the development, implementation, and
study of evidence-based innovative models and approaches for improving the
preparation and success of HBCU undergraduate students so that they may pursue
STEM graduate programs and/or careers. The proposed Bridging Alliances to Infuse
Neuroscience at The Lincoln University (BrainLU) Targeted Infusion project aims
to establish a neuroscience program in the Department of Biology at Lincoln
University. This project seeks to diversify the pipeline of neuroscientists for
the 21st century. BrainLU will train undergraduate students to think like
scientists and immerse them in innovative research so that they can contribute
to the advancement of neuroscience. The project is transformative as it brings
an interdisciplinary approach to teaching undergraduate neuroscience and
transitions undergraduate students to graduate education with high-impact
learning experiences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To attain the goal of establishing a
neuroscience program, the following objectives will be carried out over the
3-year funding period: 1) train and engage underrepresented undergraduate
students in innovative neuroscience research in the research laboratory and
classroom; 2) establish an interdisciplinary major in neuroscience at The
Lincoln University that fosters creativity and original thought and builds
critical thinking, analytical, quantitative, and research skills; and 3) develop
a dynamic cooperative 4+1 BS/MS program in neuroscience between Lincoln
University and Drexel University College of Medicine that can lead to a PhD in
neuroscience. The proposed activities are geared to excite students about
cutting-edge neuroscience research, bridge collaborating partners, and leverage
the existing NSF HBCU-UP LEAPS Forward March program.