* 1533797
* XPS: FULL: DSD: Collaborative Research: Parallelizing and Accelerating Metagenomic Applications
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2015,03/31/2017
* Raj Acharya, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* tao li
* 03/31/2017
* USD 202,000.00

The importance of metagenomics arises from the fact that over 99%
of&lt;br/&gt;the species yet to be discovered are resistant to cultivation.
Unlike&lt;br/&gt;single genome sequencing, assembly of a metagenome is
intractable and&lt;br/&gt;is in large part, an unsolved mystery. Moreover, the
advent of high&lt;br/&gt;throughput sequencing is fueling rapid generation of
enormous&lt;br/&gt;metagenomic datasets. There is no available sequenced genome
for a&lt;br/&gt;majority of the species. There is a need to determine the number
of species in&lt;br/&gt;a metagenomic dataset as well as the abundance of each
of these&lt;br/&gt;species. The key steps (Assembly and Clustering) in the
metagenomics&lt;br/&gt;analysis algorithms are compute-intensive, while the
sheer amount of&lt;br/&gt;data the algorithms operate on is staggering. The most
promising way&lt;br/&gt;to tackle the computational challenges is to build
special purpose&lt;br/&gt;hardware, dedicated solely to suitable
algorithms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main objective of
this project is to develop a range of flexible,&lt;br/&gt;affordable, parallel,
fast hardware-accelerated bioinformatics&lt;br/&gt;solutions, using GPGPU, FPGA,
and ASIC, for metagenomic analytics to provide an alternative
to&lt;br/&gt;expensive computer clusters. Specifically, hardware solutions
for&lt;br/&gt;metagenomic clustering and assembly will be developed.
Several&lt;br/&gt;acceleration methodologies, including parallel software
mapping and&lt;br/&gt;special hardware design, are proposed to explore the
parallelism&lt;br/&gt;inside the applications and to improve the data access
bandwidth in&lt;br/&gt;the hardware running bioinformatics applications. The
ideas proposed&lt;br/&gt;in this work will be evaluated in a multi-pronged
manner using a&lt;br/&gt;combination of simulation, emulation and prototyping
efforts. Further,&lt;br/&gt;the PIs will use a combination of commercial tools,
collaborator&lt;br/&gt;resources and existing internal tools. The research will
be &lt;br/&gt;conducted in collaboration with industrial partners. Through
close&lt;br/&gt;collaboration with several industry partners, direct transfer of
many&lt;br/&gt;ideas to industry is enabled. The outcome of this research
will,&lt;br/&gt;therefore, have a direct impact on future bioinformatics
application&lt;br/&gt;solutions. This project will involve graduate and
undergraduate&lt;br/&gt;students in all aspects of the research. The PIs will
actively&lt;br/&gt;integrate the research results from this project into the
graduate and&lt;br/&gt;undergraduate curricula, and develop new
interdisciplinary courses on&lt;br/&gt;bioinformatics and computer architecture
to train the next generation&lt;br/&gt;work-force. Finally, the tools and
techniques developed in this&lt;br/&gt;research will be made available through
web-sites for use by other&lt;br/&gt;educators, researchers, and industry
practitioners.