* 1533512
* NCS-FO: Collaborative Research: Sleep's role in determining the fate of individual memories
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2015,02/28/2019
* Ken Paller, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 02/28/2019
* USD 398,095.00

Identifying the cognitive, computational and neural mechanisms responsible for
determining why some memories survive when others fade is one of the many grand
challenges facing researchers of the human mind and brain. It is widely
understood that sleep plays a critical role in long-term remembering, yet what
exactly happens during sleep to affect the persistence of memories remains
largely unknown. This project brings together a team of researchers who will
integrate multiple independent lines of work in cognitive neuroscience,
cognitive psychology, and computer science in order to investigate the precise
mechanisms undergone by recently-formed memory representations as a person
sleeps and how these mechanisms determine which memories survive and which fade.
The proposed integration of cutting-edge neural data analysis methods for EEG
and neuroimaging data, basic human memory theory, and neural network modeling
make possible the ability to non-invasively track individual memories in the
human brain as they compete with each other and are modified during sleep. The
potential advances from this work could impact education, training situations,
and public health by facilitating the development of new strategies for ensuring
that important memories survive after initial
learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research suggests that memories compete for
neural space such that reactivating one particular memory can exert "collateral
damage" on other related memories. In other words, accessing one memory can come
at the expense of later being able to access other nearby memories in the
network space. The proposed studies test the hypothesis that importance shapes
neural dynamics during sleep by selectively boosting memory reactivation; this
boost ensures that important memories out-compete related memories during sleep,
resulting in strengthening of important memories and weakening of less-important
memories. To test this hypothesis, competition between memories will be elicited
during sleep by playing sound cues, each of which was linked (during wake) to
two different picture-location memories. Multiple interlocking approaches will
track how memory competition during sleep shapes a memory's persistence versus
fading. Neural network models will be used to generate predictions about how
reward responses during encoding shape competitive dynamics during sleep, and
how these competitive dynamics determine the eventual fates of competing
memories. Predictions will be tested by using fMRI to measure neural activity
associated with reward processing during encoding, EEG to measure brain activity
during sleep, and pattern classifiers to decode memory activation from the sleep
EEG data. Observations of competitive dynamics during sleep will then be related
to later memory performance and to multivariate fMRI measures of memory change.
The project has the potential to provide, for the first time, a comprehensive
look "under the hood" at the life of a memory as it is acquired, processed
during sleep, and eventually recalled. Pivotal knowledge will be gained about
how variance in reward processing at encoding influences sleep replay dynamics,
and about how sleep replay dynamics affect subsequent memory performance and the
structure of neural representations.