* 1533693
* NSC-FO: Collaborative Research: Individual variability in human brain connectivity, modeled using multi-scale dynamics under energy constraints
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2015,01/31/2018
* Edward Rietman, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Shubhra Gangopadhyay
* 01/31/2018
* USD 149,864.00

Recent years have witnessed an explosion of interest in human brain connectivity
and its relationship to brain-based disease. Functional connectivity analyses in
neuroimaging have taken three general forms: cross-correlations, weighting of
directed connections, and graph-theoretic approaches. Graph-theoretic measures,
in particular, provide valuable insights into network features at the time of
imaging. Yet, they cannot identify how the brain came to have those features,
nor can they inform estimation of future network evolution. Neurological and
psychiatric illnesses tend to have degenerative or oscillatory time-courses that
range over decades; thus, network evolution will be critical to understanding
why two individuals with the same diagnosis show markedly distinct developmental
onsets and prognoses.

At the most fundamental level, clinical neuroscience currently lacks the tools
for probing how biological constraints imposed upon synapses impact functional
connectivity patterns. These constraints include, among others: limited energy
resources as per the aggregate energy conversion rate of a finite number of
mitochondria, the need to balance excitatory and inhibitory neurotransmitters in
order to maintain homeostasis, and neural repair mechanisms (e.g., inflammation,
MMP-9). Our long-range goal is to develop these tools, focusing first upon
energy constraints across synaptic-hemodynamic scales, for three strategic
reasons. 1) Glycemic load is implicated in many neurological diseases, including
epilepsy, brain cancer, and dementia. 2) Energy utilization is easy to
manipulate experimentally through diet, and to quantify via CO-2 monitoring,
with protocols that permit translation to/from animal models for multi-scale
modeling. 3) Recent findings link neural connectivity to metabolic expenditure.
In the short-term, we focus upon establishing feasibility for three critical
principles in preparation for the proposed work. First, we will conduct a pilot
neuroimaging study (36 scans; N=12, under three conditions) to establish that
our proposed experimental manipulation of energy supply and demand provokes
reorganization of brain networks. Second, we aim to bridge scales: to
demonstrate how agent-based simulations of point-neurons can incorporate network
structure imposed at the level of human neuroimaging, and evolve as a function
of changing inputs (energy supply, demand). Third, we propose to develop/adapt
methods required to mathematically characterize dynamic networks for both fMRI
data and simulations. This fundamental work will position us to conduct future
research on modeling of metabolic processes as a function of synapses, glia, and
mitochondria, and to use these simulations to predict individual variability of
fMRI results as a function of neural energy consumption.