* 1533791
* SHF: Small: Analytical Support for Investigating Software Modifications in Collaborative Development Environment
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2015
* Miryung Kim, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 08/31/2015
* USD 225,334.00

Collaboration is essential to software development. As software engineers
develop and evolve software, they need to analyze past and present software
modifications implemented by other developers in various tasks such as peer code
reviews, bug investigations, and change impact analysis. Developers are often
overwhelmed with a large amount of awareness information about software
modifications. Auto-generated emails about check-ins, builds, and regression
tests often flood developers' mail boxes, yet it is very difficult for
developers to identify significant and relevant change-events. Existing software
engineering tools do not easily allow developers to search software
modifications relevant to their tasks, focus, and interests.

This research project will produce analytical support for investigating software
modifications in collaborative development environment called CHIME. First,
CHIME will provide an extensible, logical change analysis framework that
identifies software modifications relevant to one's own code modification
according to various kinds of delta relationships. The users of the framework
can import, select, and extend various notions of interference, dependence,
similarity, and co-occurrence relationships among individual software
modifications. Second, CHIME will provide a search interface to empower users to
ask and answer questions about the content, structure, and context of code
changes across multiple revisions. In order to reduce programmers' burden on
formulating search queries, we will conduct empirical studies with professional
developers to identify frequently asked questions about past and present
software modifications. The resulting list of the questions will be provided as
template queries that the developers can use or refine. Third, CHIME will
provide targeted notifications about others' software modifications by
monitoring other developers' change-events that are relevant to the developer's
own modification. The impact of this research will be substantially improved
developer productivity in a rapidly-evolving, collaborative and parallel
software development. CHIME will reduce awareness information overload and will
help users manage the impact of others' code changes on their code, detect and
resolve merge conflicts early, and coordinate shared tasks, contributing toward
early detection and removal of integration and interference failures.