* 1533592
* Targeted Infusion Project: Building an interdisciplinary geosciences and geospatial intelligence  curricula through applied training in mapping and spatial reasoning
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Camelia Knapp, Claflin University
* Standard Grant
* Claudia Rankins
* 08/31/2018
* USD 331,375.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP)
through Targeted Infusion Projects supports the development, implementation, and
study of evidence-based innovative models and approaches for improving the
preparation and success of HBCU undergraduate students so that they may pursue
STEM graduate programs and/or careers. The project at Claflin University seeks
to increase the diversity in the geosciences and geospatial intelligence
workforce while congruently offering interdisciplinary and synergistic human-
physical geography curricula. A combination of traditional, online, and field
based training will be used to provide the foundation in the geosciences for
future professionals destined for diverse careers during the first two years,
whereas the third year will be allocated to the development of the new course,
its approval process, and the planning for its first year implementation as well
as to student mentorship.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project's overall
goal is to foster, advance, and strengthen interdisciplinary development and
applied training in geosciences and geospatial intelligence of a diverse
workforce. The goal will be reached by achieving the following cognitive,
affective, and behavioral objectives: Cognitive: Students will (a) learn
principles and methods for describing both physical and human earth features;
(b) decode, comprehend, analyze (quantitatively and qualitatively) and place
maps in their proper spatial and chronological contexts; (c) utilize modern
technologies to collect web-based and field data and; (d) create and interpret
discipline specific maps. Affective: Students will: (a) be sensitive and aware
of a map's spatial, chronological, and cultural context to identify possible
bias(es) and the ethics behind manipulation intents; (b) value the role of
geospatial literacy in today's job market; (c) understand and appreciate the
relevance of minority involvement in geospatial decision-making and; (d) have
positive feelings toward geoscience and geospatial intelligence careers.
Behavioral: Students will: (a) interact with geospatial phenomena in their
natural state; (b) apply/incorporate geospatial concepts and skills into their
teaching and other chosen career; and (c) utilize acquired know-how for
decision-making at the community, national, and maybe international level.