* 1533581
* SI2-SSE: Fast Dynamic Load Balancing Tools for Extreme Scale Systems
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2020
* Cameron Smith, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Seung-Jong Park
* 09/30/2020
* USD 500,000.00

Massively parallel computing combined with scalable simulation workflows that
can reliably model systems of interest are central to the continued quest of
scientists, engineers, and other practitioners to address advances in scientific
discovery, engineering design, and medical treatment. However, to meet their
potential, these methods must be able to operate efficiently and scale on
massively parallel computers executing millions of processes. Reaching the goal
of millions of parallel processes requires new methods in which the
computational workload is extremely well balanced and interprocessor
communications overheads are minimized. Attaining such parallel performance is
greatly complicated in realistic simulation workflows where the models and their
discrete computer representation must evolve to ensure simulation reliability,
or to account for changing input streams. To address the need to obtain workload
balance with controlled communications, various algorithms and associated
software, referred to as load balancing procedures, have been, and continue to
be, developed. To be effective in the execution of simulation workflows in which
the workload evolves, the load balancing procedures must be applied dynamically
at multiple points in the simulation. Current load balancing techniques
demonstrate two deficiencies when applied as dynamic load balancing procedures
at very large numbers of compute cores (e.g., greater than 100,000 cores): They
become a major fraction of the total parallel computation (in some cases never
finishing within an allocation) and they do not maintain good load balance for
simulation steps that must balance based on multiple criteria. Building on
initial efforts to improve dynamic load balancing methods for adaptive
unstructured mesh applications, the goal of the proposed research is to develop
fast multicriteria dynamic load balancing methods that are capable of quickly
producing well balanced computations, with well controlled communications, for a
wide variety of applications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An important characteristic
of the dynamic load balancing procedures to be developed is generalizing the
graph to account for multiple types of computational entities and interactions.
The initial ideas for supporting multiple entity types came from consideration
balancing finite element calculations that must consider multiple orders of mesh
entities. These concepts will be refined and generalized to support multiple
applications areas. An additional development will be fast hybrid dynamic load
balancing methods that are combinations of "geometric", standard graph, and
multicriteria graph methods in which the individual methods can be executed
globally of at a more local level (such as at the node level). The dynamic load
balancing method to be developed will be demonstrated on three applications in
which the workload, and its distribution, is changing as the simulation
proceeds. The applications will be adaptive mesh simulations, adaptive
multiscale modeling, and massive scale free graphs. These applications will be
carried out on available massively parallel computers where examples on &gt;1
million cores will be demonstrated. A goal of the dynamic load balancing methods
to be developed will be to attain scalability, and do so with controlled data
movement such that the wall clock time and energy used is substantially less
than that required for an equivalent accuracy non-adaptive
calculation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The software produced by this project will be
made available as open source components. These developments coupled with
efforts to support users in applying them in the development of new simulation
tools will impact many research communities. Based on past and present efforts,
the PIs fully expect that technologies developed in this project will also be
integrated into future industrial software systems.