* 1533789
* WORKSHOP: Human-Computer Interaction Doctoral Research Consortium at ACM CHI 2015
* CSE,IIS
* 03/01/2015,02/29/2016
* Susan Fussell, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 02/29/2016
* USD 19,275.00

This is funding to support a Doctoral Consortium (workshop) of approximately 6
promising graduate students from the United States, along with a panel of about
5 distinguished research faculty mentors. The event will take place in
conjunction with the ACM 2015 Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems
(CHI 2015), which is sponsored by the Association for Computing Machinery's
Special Interest Group on Human-Computer Interaction (SIGCHI) and will be held
April 18-23 in Seoul, Republic of Korea. The annual CHI conference is the
leading international forum for the presentation and discussion of human-
computer interaction (HCI) research and practice, and is attended by
approximately 2,500 HCI professionals from around the world. Research reports
published in the CHI Conference Proceedings and the CHI Extended Abstracts are
heavily-refereed and widely cited; they are among the most scientifically
respected and impactful research publications in the field of HCI. More
information about the conference is available at http://chi2015.acm.org. The
annual CHI doctoral consortia traditionally bring together the best of the next
generation of HCI researchers, allowing them to create a social network both
among themselves and with senior researchers at a critical stage in their
professional development. Applications are encouraged from all doctoral students
whose research is HCI-related, regardless of the fields in which they are
earning their degrees. In accordance with CISE policy regarding conferences held
abroad, NSF funds will be used solely to support participation by students
enrolled in graduate programs in the United States. As an expression of their
commitment to diversity among the student participants, the event organizers
have undertaken that only one student per school will be accepted, except in the
case where including a second student from the same school would allow a woman
to be a participant.

The Doctoral Consortium is a research-focused meeting that has taken place
annually at the CHI conference since 1986, and has helped to launch the careers
of many outstanding HCI researchers. Goals of the workshop include building a
cohort group of new researchers who will then have a network of colleagues
spread out across the world, guiding the work of new researchers by having
experts in the research field give them advice, and making it possible for
promising new entrants to the field to attend their research conference. Student
participants will make formal presentations of their research during the
workshop, and will receive feedback from the faculty panel. The feedback is
geared to helping students understand and articulate how their work is
positioned relative to other human-computer interaction research, whether their
topics are adequately focused for thesis research projects, whether their
methods are correctly chosen and applied, and whether their results are
appropriately analyzed and presented. Student participants will present their
work to the doctoral consortium on April 18-19, with follow up activities
planned during the technical program of the conference. Extended abstracts of
the students' work will be published in the CHI 2015 Extended Abstracts.
SIGCHI's conference management committee will evaluate the doctoral consortium,
and the results will be made available to the organizers of future consortia.
The CHI doctoral consortia have been highly successful in providing a forum for
the initial socialization into the field of young doctoral scholars; many of
today's leading HCI researchers participated as students in earlier consortia.