* 1533563
* Targeted Infusion Project: Improving Minority STEM Majors' Mathematics Performance through Algebra Project Pedagogy and Cognitive Training
* EDU,EES
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2018
* Milton Faison, Virginia State University
* Standard Grant
* Claudia Rankins
* 06/30/2018
* USD 478,321.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP)
through Targeted Infusion Projects supports the development, implementation, and
study of evidence-based innovative models and approaches for improving the
preparation and success of HBCU undergraduate students so that they may pursue
STEM graduate programs and/or careers. The project at Virginia State University
(VSU) seeks to develop, implement and test the impact of a series of Algebra
Project pedagogical techniques and content material in College Algebra and pre-
Calculus courses, as well as cognitive training techniques that have been
piloted in previous studies at VSU. The project aims to address the problem of
the failure rate in College Algebra courses at the institution, which is at
about 40%. Failing these courses prevents students from taking Calculus, which
is the prerequisite mathematics sequence for students majoring in the science,
technology, engineering and mathematics disciplines. The project is guided by an
on-going evaluation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will assess the efficacy
of implementing a conceptual architecture for college mathematics developed by
the Algebra Project which is accessible to students at the level of College
Algebra and pre-Calculus, and which has the potential to deepen and
strengthen&lt;br/&gt;students' understanding of the course content and provide a
solid conceptual and procedural foundation for the future study of Calculus. At
the same time, the project will study the impact on cognitive training of
working memory associated with STEM success. The research design for the project
will be quasi-experimental, with three College Algebra and one pre-Calculus
classes randomly assigned to the treatment condition, and four classes randomly
assigned to the control condition. Dependent measures include course grades,
standardized assessment of mathematics ability, attitudinal change, level of
motivation and engagement, and semester grade point average. Initial data will
be analyzed with a factorial multivariate analysis of covariance. The impact of
the cognitive and psychosocial variables on mathematics performance will be
analyzed using structural equation modeling. This is the first study of the
impact of the Algebra Project pedagogy at the college level. Results from the
study will be broadly disseminated to other institutions of higher education,
particularly those that have students entering college, but not prepared to take
Calculus.