* 1533741
* I-Corps:  Gulliver Innovative Learning: a Platform for Managing Kinesthetic Activities
* TIP,TI
* 05/15/2015,10/31/2016
* Ellene Tratras Contis, Eastern Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 10/31/2016
* USD 50,000.00

Recent reports have stressed that students need to develop an integrated
understanding of science throughout their education; particularly with a focus
on core concepts in science. In recent years there has been growing concern
regarding science education in the United States. The current United States
education system falls short when compared to international programs; this is
particularly prevalent at higher-grade levels and in scientific subjects. While
some success has been achieved in increasing student achievement in reading and
writing over the past few years, achievement in science has remained shockingly
low. It is clear from these results that new tools and technologies are needed
to engage students in science learning in meaningful ways.

The proposed project, Gulliver Innovative Learning (GIL) is a scalable
educational technology that engages students in modeling scientific phenomena in
a fun and exciting way, while at the same time helping students to better
understand such phenomena. This project has the potential of substantially
enhancing student success in introductory level STEM courses and of influencing
scientific literacy among individuals to broaden student participation in such
courses. GIL provides a powerful and memorable learning experience that will
give students confidence in their ability to tackle STEM subjects. The GIL
platform can be extended to teach many scientific concepts including medical
phenomena. Through these engaging participation-based activities, students will
develop a better understanding of the underlying concepts. Furthermore, through
instant analysis of the usage data, instructors will receive feedback regarding
the progress of their students, leading to knowledge of gaps in understanding
and resulting in ways to further instruct difficult concepts. As a result,
instructors will be able to use this information to help students make a better
connection between interrelated ideas. The team expects to use the customer
discovery process to identify a product-market fit and to explore different
pricing and revenue models.