* 1533939
* SBIR Phase II:  Regenerative Freeze Suppression for Thermally Bound Energy Storage Systems
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2015,03/31/2019
* Russell Muren, Rebound Technologies, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 03/31/2019
* USD 1,382,199.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project includes peak demand
relief for utilities, reduced&lt;br/&gt;freezer operating costs for retail
stores, and natural refrigerants for regulators. Unfortunately, no state-
ofthe-&lt;br/&gt;art system simultaneously addresses all these issues.
Industrial/commercial batteries remain&lt;br/&gt;unaffordable, refrigeration
costs account for 60% of a retail store?s electricity bills and
equipment&lt;br/&gt;manufacturers are only realizing incremental efficiency
improvements with new vapor compression&lt;br/&gt;architectures. This project
introduces an energy storage technology, embedded in a natural
refrigerant&lt;br/&gt;cooling cycle, that provides load-shifting services and a
40% reduction in commercial freezer electrical&lt;br/&gt;purchases. More
importantly, it achieves this at a 3-year payback without government incentives
using&lt;br/&gt;natural, near ambient, materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will investigate an
energy storage&lt;br/&gt;technique utilizing water as the storage material in a
time delayed, freeze-point-suppression refrigeration&lt;br/&gt;cycle. The
project will focus on the internal testing, third party validation and
commercial demonstration&lt;br/&gt;of a 10kWth system. Successful integration
within low temperature refrigeration architectures requires&lt;br/&gt;industrial
design focused on skid/waste heat integration, validation testing to inform
required part count&lt;br/&gt;reductions/system revisions and demonstration to
monitor, learn and revise the technology in preparation&lt;br/&gt;for scale up.