* 1533510
* 2015 Midwest Thermodynamics and Statistical Mechanics Conference, Iowa State University Campus, May 28-29, 2015
* ENG,CBET
* 04/15/2015,09/30/2015
* Ganesh Balasubramanian, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 09/30/2015
* USD 10,000.00

The PI proposes to convene a workshop of the Midwest Thermodynamics and
Statistical Mechanics (MTSM). This Conference series will bring together
researchers in the areas of experimental, theoretical and computational
thermodynamics and statistical mechanics for the exchange of ideas and most
recent research results. The conference is particularly designed as a platform
for young researchers (graduate students, postdocs, and junior faculty members)
to present and discuss their ideas and research accomplishments, and to identify
potential future collaborative opportunities. The conference will provide
students with an opportunity to present research, network with professionals in
their discipline, and discuss current and upcoming scientific progress in the
field. The development and application of molecular theory and simulation
methods for predicting microscopic structure and thermodynamic properties of
nanomaterials, soft matter and biological systems is fundamental to and useful
for a variety of engineering applications such as energy conversion and storage,
environmental protection, materials design and synthesis of polymers and
nanostructures, investigation of biomolecules for drug delivery and other
important areas. This conference support will be used to especially support
student participation at this event.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The MTSM Conference
has a longstanding tradition of promoting research and collaboration in
thermodynamics and statistical mechanics. Since 1988, MTSM has been organized
every year with only two exceptions. With MTSM 2015, the conference will
continue to be a venue where the latest research in computational, theoretical
and experimental thermodynamics and statistical mechanics is presented,
discussed and debated. Thermodynamics is a major pillar of scientific and
engineering disciplines. Statistical mechanics provides an additional, necessary
molecular understanding of thermodynamic properties. Opportunities to discuss
and learn thermodynamics in the context of statistical mechanics are scarce and
MTSM provides a platform for high-level learning in a small setting. TSM is
organized in the Midwest, yet attendees have been drawn from all over the United
States. MTSM conference offers opportunities for strong inter-institutional
community building as well as team building within research groups participating
together. The meetings draw a spectrum of participants from established senior
faculty members, junior faculty, and postdocs, graduate students to
undergraduates. The technical program is deliberately slanted toward
presentations by young scientists and engineers. The 2015 MTSM meeting is
tailored to facilitate personal and mentoring interactions. It is expected that
approximately 90 people will attend: 4 young faculty members will give invited
talks to their peers, 55 graduate students and postocs will participate, and
about 10 undergraduate researchers will present in a poster session. Finally, up
to 25 additional faculty members will attend, most serving as audience
participants and mentors for the students in their group and others. These
faculty members will represent a diverse set of colleges and universities,
including some primarily undergraduate institutions, and a range of experience
levels. Including researchers at various career stages. This will provide an
important forum to expand the research conversation in thermodynamics and
statistical mechanic.&lt;br/&gt;