* 1533829
* I-Corps:  Kirigami solar cell development for commercial applications
* TIP,TI
* 04/15/2015,09/30/2016
* Max Shtein, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* lydia mcclure
* 09/30/2016
* USD 50,000.00

Solar tracking is a mature technology that substantially increases the power
output of a given photovoltaic (PV) module. Conventional tracking systems such
as single and dual axis trackers have the potential to improve the overall
efficiency of PV modules and thereby lower costs, but have not been widely
implemented due to system complexity, high installation costs and the need for
cumbersome structural components to support system weight and wind loading.
Moreover, such tracking systems cannot be deployed in space-limited locations.
This team has developed a new paradigm for lightweight and compact solar
tracking based on the ancient art of Kirigami. This team's proposed technology
has the potential to reduce the cost of photovoltaic modules and can be deployed
in locations that are not accessible via the use of existing tracking technology
such as mobile and residential (pitched) rooftops on account of its low-profile,
compact nature. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Kirigami tracking modules consist of a
simple kirigami-cut pattern integrated with thin-film solar cells, whereby
pulling on the device results in a change in angle of the solar cells embedded
on the substrate. By leveraging the unique geometric properties of the kirigami
substrate itself, and the excellent electrical and mechanical properties of the
thin-film solar cells, these devices can be used to efficiently track the sun.
Due to the low-profile nature of kirigami tracking systems, there is no wind
loading and, thus, no need for additional structural components to support such
forces. Furthermore, kirigami tracking is lightweight in design, allowing one to
eliminate much of the foundation and supporting structures that, in fact, make
up much of the cost of conventional tracking systems. Due to the continuous
nature of the kirigami substrate and the ability of all cells to be actuated
simultaneously (unlike conventional tracking systems, where additional
components are needed to connect each panel), system scaling is also relatively
straightforward. Finally, by eliminating many of the components needed for
conventional tracking and drastically reducing module size, this team believes
that kirigami tracking will help open new market segments.