* 1533653
* Targeted Infusion Project: Development of a Computational and Engineering Mathematics Program Concentration at NCCU
* EHR,HRD
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2018
* Donghyun Kim, North Carolina Central University
* Standard Grant
* Claudia Rankins
* 07/31/2018
* USD 398,207.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP)
through Targeted Infusion Projects supports the development, implementation, and
study of evidence-based innovative models and approaches for improving the
preparation and success of HBCU undergraduate students so that they may pursue
science, technology, engineering or mathematics (STEM) graduate programs and/or
careers. The project at North Carolina Central University (NCCU) seeks to
develop a concentration in Computational and Engineering Mathematics. The
project intends to provide a sound introduction to computational and engineering
mathematics to undergraduate students to prepare them for positions in industry
or for graduate school. The activities and strategies are evidence-based and a
strong plan for formative and summative evaluation is part of the
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has the objectives to: infuse
computational engineering and mathematics techniques into relevant already
existing mathematics and physics courses; develop new theme-based computational
and engineering mathematics courses and laboratories; establish a 3-plus-2
program with North Carolina State University; develop a computational
engineering and mathematics capstone design project; and recruit students for
the new concentration. The areas of concentration are: robotics engineering,
computational science, data science, computer engineering, electrical
engineering, and industrial engineering. Demonstrating and evaluating how to
integrate computational and engineering applications concentrations into a
mathematics major could serve as a model to other liberal arts institutions.