* 1533978
* SBIR Phase II:  Developing a new platform technology for 3D ultrasound imaging
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2015,09/30/2018
* Ryan Gessner, SonoVol, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 09/30/2018
* USD 897,890.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is the development and commercialization of a
new technology for non-invasive preclinical imaging. This platform technology
will be used in studies of disease or in in drug development. The project will
further develop and validate an imaging platform based on three-dimensional (3D)
ultrasound, which is a low cost, high-throughput alternative to existing whole-
body imaging modalities, and will provide more sensitivity and field of view
than current two-dimensional (2D) ultrasound approaches. The technology
developed will reduce costs of whole-body preclinical imaging, and enable access
to this technology to smaller research organizations. Increased availability of
a low-cost imaging tool for preclinical disease and drug development studies
could accelerate progress in improving human health while reducing cost burdens
on life science labs.

The proposed project addresses the problem that 2D ultrasound is a preferred
imaging modality in preclinical studies due to the adequate resolution, high
throughput, and low cost; however, it suffers from user variability and
inadequate field of view. The research objectives will be to continue the
development and validation of a 3D ultrasound system which overcomes challenges
of user variability and inadequate field of view. Specific technical goals will
be to improve both the hardware and software of the system for increased
throughput, integrating the system components into a cohesive customer-facing
product, and calibrating and validating the system for its intended preclinical
imaging application. Expected results will be a novel technology ? an automated
3D preclinical ultrasound system, which will substantially improve the
performance and capabilities of preclinical ultrasound imaging, yet will retain
the low-cost and high throughput characteristics of ultrasound imaging. This new
technology will fill a need present in nearly every academic research
institution as well as pharmaceutical and contract research organizations
worldwide.