* 1533502
* Collaborative Research: Event Ecology and Extreme Events as Transformative Factors in Pastoral Socio-Ecological Systems
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Paul Leslie, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 08/31/2020
* USD 149,805.00

Extreme events, such as severe droughts, flooding, and disease epidemics, are
known to result in major social, economic, political, and environmental
transformations. The effects may include new constraints on land use and
livelihood patterns, altered access to crucial resources, impacts on
biodiversity, and long term public health problems. Cumulatively, there are
often far-reaching consequences for local and national economies. However,
outcomes vary from case to case and surprisingly little is known about why some
extreme events result in societal transformation while others of similar
magnitude do not. In this project, a team of anthropologists asks the question:
Under what conditions do transformations occur as a result of an extreme event?
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research focuses on the response of Maasai
communities in northern Tanzania to the devastating drought of 2008-2009. The
local people claim this drought to be the worst in living memory, stimulating
massive migration of livestock and people from southern Kenya and northern
Tanzania into neighboring areas in northern Tanzania, with dramatic loss of
livestock. The drought was followed by significant changes in land use and
traditional institutions and practices, including previously unseen restrictions
on who is allowed access to the crucial resources of water and pasture. The
researchers will probe why these transformative responses occurred during and
following this particular drought but not following previous droughts in recent
decades that were equally or more severe. The research will entail ethnographic
fieldwork and surveys involving households and village leaders in Maasai
villages that were on both the sending and receiving ends of the migration
during the drought. The research is designed to reveal how and why responses to
the recent drought differed from the past; how the impact of the drought
proceeded through a series of phases; and how experiences, decisions, and
innovations in one area influenced other areas and, ultimately, the social-
ecological system as a whole. The investigators have done research in this area
since the mid-1990s and thus have a deep understanding of and detailed baseline
data on traditional livelihood patterns and past responses to crises, as well as
relationships with local communities that will help ensure accurate assessment
of how and why people responded to the drought as they did and what the
implications of changing local practices are likely to be. Understanding the
responses to extreme events in this case where the situation is well understood
and the local-level processes can be identified and followed over time and space
will have a direct bearing on planning efforts to cope with the effects of
future climatic events and other problems wherever they may occur.