* 1533479
* Targeted Infusion Project: Integration, Cultivation, and Exposure to Biomedical Engineering at the University of the District of Columbia
* EDU,EES
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2020
* Sasan Haghani, University of the District of Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Claudia Rankins
* 06/30/2020
* USD 399,991.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP)
through Targeted Infusion Projects supports the development, implementation, and
study of evidence-based innovative models and approaches for improving the
preparation and success of HBCU undergraduate students so that they may pursue
STEM graduate programs and/or careers. The project at the University of the
District of Columbia (UDC) seeks to provide new learning experiences in
biomedical engineering to undergraduate students. The recruitment efforts
include reaching out to high school students and students from community
colleges to get them interested in the field of biomedical engineering. This
project will ultimately diversify and contribute to the biomedical engineering
workforce aimed at solving medical related problems through engineering
techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project seeks to enhance the existing
academic infrastructure at UDC by developing four new courses in biomedical
engineering and integrating them into existing engineering curricula; by
preparing prospective students at area community colleges towards the pursuit of
a BS degree in biomedical engineering; and by educating high school students,
undergraduate students, and faculty in current trends and research in biomedical
engineering. The activities and strategies are evidence-based and the project is
guided by a strong plan for formative and summative evaluation.