* 1533649
* NCS-FO: Sensory-Motor Integration via Recording and Stimulating Arm Nerves
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Gregory Clark, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 07/31/2019
* USD 785,615.00

Most ongoing research to develop advanced hand and arm prostheses that allow an
individual with amputation to perform highly dexterous movements and to sense
features of objects in the world has separated the performance of movements from
the sensing of objects. However, in individuals with normal ability, sensory and
motor information are integrated. This project's goal is to create movement and
sensation abilities in individuals with amputation that are more similar to that
in normally enabled individuals. In particular, the goal is to understand how to
best utilize all of the available motor and sensory information in the design of
accurate neural controllers for future generations of forearm prostheses. This
integrated approach to creating sensory percepts and interpreting motor intent
will recreate the natural, minimally monitored use of an artificial hand in
volunteers as they interact with their world. Successful completion of the
proposed work will begin the process of creating a prosthetic hand that passes
the 'Turing Test,' where the user perceives little difference between the
artificial hand and their amputated biological hand.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
program of research involves implanting neural interfaces (for both stimulating
and recording) in the major arm nerves of human volunteers and investigating use
of these interfaces while the volunteers interact with a virtual world. In
particular, the project has the goals of (a) identifying components in
peripheral nerve signals that correlate with errors between the intended
movement and the actual movement of the prosthetic arm; (b) developing accurate
encoders and stimulation systems that provide punctate, naturalistic,
multimodal, and graded sensory percepts; and (c) developing, characterizing, and
evaluating advanced decoders that estimate movement intent from a combination of
peripheral nerve signals and sensory information from the prosthesis. This third
goal, an advanced decoder, will be evaluated with scenarios that provide a clear
measure of performance and that represent activities of daily living. The
integration of sensory percepts and motor intent is expected to create a
natural, minimally monitored use of a prosthetic hand in order to interact more
effectively with the world.