* 1533956
* Exploring Joint Modeling Approaches for Longitudinal Data: Parsimonious Correlation Modeling and Discrete Observations
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2017
* Cheng Yong Tang, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 08/31/2017
* USD 38,101.00

This research project will develop statistical methods and models for regression
analysis for longitudinal data with discrete variables. Longitudinal studies
increasingly are conducted in the social and economic sciences, and these
studies often include data with discrete (for example, yes or no) variables.
However, methods for incorporating the correlations between repeated
measurements for discrete data are more challenging and remain less explored.
This project will develop more effective and convenient ways for incorporating
data information about correlations between the repeated measurements in
longitudinal studies. The project will advance the current state of knowledge
regarding statistical methods for longitudinal data modeling and their
applications in multiple social and economic sciences areas. Software will be
developed and made publicly available.

This project will develop a statistical framework that effectively incorporates
correlations between repeated measurements for analyzing a broad class of
discrete longitudinal data. The first major focus of the project will be on a
new unconstrained parametrization for the correlation matrices of general
correlated and/or clustered data. This unconstrained parametrization for
regression analysis will be parsimonious, flexible, and scientifically and
practically interpretable. The second focus of the project will target the joint
distributions of the discrete longitudinal variable. A regression analysis
framework will be constructed by using an innovative copula model whose
correlation parameters are represented by the unconstrained parametrization.
This new framework for analyzing discrete categorical longitudinal data
generally will be applicable for a broad class of discrete variables.
Theoretical and empirical studies will be carried out for justifying the
validity and merits of the new framework.