* 1533484
* NCS-FO: Nanomagnetic Stimulation Capability for Neural Investigation and Control
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Nian Sun, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Shubhra Gangopadhyay
* 08/31/2019
* USD 363,640.00

ECCS- Prop. No. 1533598 &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI: Gong, Yiyang
&lt;br/&gt;Institute: Duke University &lt;br/&gt;Title: NCS-FO: Real-time
optical readout and control of population neural activity with cellular
resolution &lt;br/&gt;Objective: &lt;br/&gt;This project will develop a
mechanism for simultaneously controlling and reading out neural activity when
being activated by optogenetic techniques; this capability will surpass a
previous limitation in neural studies. The proposal is separated into three
aims: 1) develop calcium sensors and optogenetic channels active on different
wavelength ranges to allow simultaneous readout and control, 2) develop a dual-
beam two photon microscope, and 3) develop imaging software that can process
neural activity in real-time. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nontechnical abstract
&lt;br/&gt;Understanding neural function requires examining specific subsets of
the vast numbers of neurons in the brain. Recently developed optogenetics tools,
such as optogenetic stimulation and calcium imaging, have partially fulfilled
the need to target these specific sets of neurons and study their function.
These techniques deliver engineered genes to targeted neural populations, and
use light to manipulate or measure neural activity. Current optogenetic tools
lack the spatiotemporal resolution to causally study many individual neurons in
parallel on fast time scales; they only make broad conclusions either on near-
millimeter sized brain regions, or over the timescale of many action potentials.
We propose to integrate the design and implementation of optical and genetic
tools to greatly refine the scale of investigating neural activity.
Specifically, we will create two optically independent channels: one channel for
fast, spatially precise optical patterning to control individual neurons; and
one channel for independent recording of neural activity from individual
neurons. We will then integrate these two channels by creating software that
instantaneously patterns optical excitation based on the optical recording.
Integrative design and engineering of this expansive set of tools will enable
neuroscientists to quickly manipulate and control large populations of single
neurons, a capability that does not exist presently. Our technology will allow
the community to directly explore how neural activity patterns of many
individual neurons in one brain region drive downstream neural activity. This
novel probing of functional connectivity is exactly the type of study needed to
better understand the coordination of neural activity in healthy and diseased
brains. Beyond the specific application of neuroscience, training students
within our multidisciplinary setting will create the next generation of
scientists capable of tackling the broad set of technical challenges facing
society today. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract
&lt;br/&gt;Optical imaging of brain activity has steadily developed into a
staple technique within neuroscience labs over the past decade. In combination
with genetically encoded sensors of neural activity, optical methods enable
genetic targeting and chronic, simultaneous imaging of many individual neurons.
One significant weakness of existing optical techniques when compared to
electrophysiology is the inability to simultaneously measure and control the
activity of a neuron in real time. We propose to address this shortcoming by
developing an optical imaging system and data processing software suite that
will enable real-time optical readout of neural activity and real-time neural
feedback via optical excitation, all with cellular level specificity and in
parallel over a large population of neurons. This new ability to optically
record and manipulate many genetically or functionally specified neurons
individually will augment current studies using bulk neural activation or
inhibition; the fine scale perturbations of neurons will tease apart the details
of neural circuits. Specifically, we will engineer a set of optogenetic
actuators, fluorescent sensors, and microscopy tools that will enable optical
readout and control of neurons in different wavelength channels. We will also
develop fast image processing algorithms that quickly convert images to neural
activity of individual neurons, thereby enabling real-time control of neural
activity based on the optical readout. Recently, improvements to these tools
occurred independently. Our proposal will address the integrated development of
the tool set, and effectively employ trade-offs between the individual
components. For example, simultaneous engineering of the protein sensor, imaging
processing software, and optical imaging hardware will optimize the readout
fidelity. Similarly, joint design of the genetic tools? spectral separation and
the optical spatiotemporal resolution will extend optical control precision.
Integration of these developments to examine neural function at the cellular
level is unprecedented: successful advancement of this research will enable
novel examination of the brain and help guide targeted biomedical therapies.