* 1533967
* 2015 Shipboard Scientific Support Equipment
* GEO,OCE
* 06/15/2015,08/31/2016
* David Goldberg, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* James Holik
* 08/31/2016
* USD 82,738.00

A request is made to fund additional and back-up equipment on the R/V Marcus
Langseth, a 235? Global seismic vessel with general oceanographic capabilities.
The vessel is owned by NSF and operated by Lamont-Doherty Earth Observatory of
Columbia University under a cooperative agreement. The Langseth is different
than other vessels in the Academic Fleet in that it is a designated National
Facility. It provides a unique combination of capabilities for imaging the
oceans, the seafloor and the solid earth beneath the sea. It is the only vessel
in the word dedicated to academic research that is capable of conducting 3D
seismic surveys as well as extended offset 2D surveys. The tuned, linear source
array, consisting of up to 36 air-guns, with a total capacity of 6,600 cu in is
also unique asset of this vessel. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In 2014, R/V Langseth
completed 139 days, 114 (82%) of which were NSF funded. In 2015, the schedule
shows 228 days, 73% (167 days) of which are NSF funded. Shipboard Scientific
Support Equipment requested in this proposal includes:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1)
Automatic voltage regulators $49,071&lt;br/&gt;2) Inmarsat C Felcom 18
$11,913&lt;br/&gt;3) Simrad GC-80 $33,667&lt;br/&gt;4) Power Synchronizing
Module $44,175&lt;br/&gt;5) Phased Bridge Modifications $91,440&lt;br/&gt;6)
Overhaul and upgrade of Dynacon Traction Winch $372,500&lt;br/&gt;
$602,766&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts &lt;br/&gt;The principal impact of the
present proposal is under Merit Review Criterion 2 of the Proposal Guidelines
(NSF 13-589). It provides infrastructure support for scientists to use the
vessel and its shared-use instrumentation in support of their NSF-funded
oceanographic research projects (which individually undergo separate review by
the relevant research program of NSF). The acquisition, maintenance and
operation of shared-use instrumentation allows NSF-funded researchers from any
US university or lab access to working, calibrated instruments for their
research, reducing the cost of that research, and expanding the base of
potential researchers.