* 1533708
* NCS-FO: Identifying Design Principles of Neural Cells
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2018
* Daniel Wagner, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Shubhra Gangopadhyay
* 07/31/2018
* USD 920,000.00

PI: Qutub, Amina &lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1533708&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
proposal seeks to develop a robust theory of how single neural cells form
electrically active networks. The project integrates emerging methods in
computer science, systems biology, neuroengineering and developmental biology to
offer insight into the brain's organization. Results of experiments performed in
this project have the potential to impact the design of new computing devices, a
$300B industry. Methods introduced by the investigators can be used broadly by
scientists to rapidly characterize brain cells, and can aid in the discovery of
new therapies for neurological diseases, which affect 1 in 6 people
worldwide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Neural differentiation, the process of neural
progenitor cells transforming into neurons, holds the key to understanding the
brain's ability to self-repair. Understanding this complex process can inform us
how the structure of neural networks relates to their function, which is an
important unsolved problem in neuroengineering. This project's ultimate goal is
a mechanistically-detailed theory of how neural networks form as a result of
decisions made by single neural progenitor cells. Integrating methods from three
disciplines (systems biology, nanotechnology and developmental biology), the
investigators will identify single cell features critical to network formation,
and predict how heterogeneity and noise in the cell population defines the
network's function. The investigators will employ three emerging methods
(proteomic barcoding, ImageOmics, and E-phFACS) to define neural cell phenotypes
as a function of chemical signaling, morphology and electrical activity (Aim 1).
Observed changes in these single cell phenotypes will be mapped to neural
network formation by coupling a state machine model with a graph-based analysis
(Aim 2). The effects of cell heterogeneity will be explored computationally
using a new framework developed by the investigators and iteratively compared to
in vitro live-imaging assays, and in vivo assays. The tight coupling of
chemical, morphological and electrical measurements enabled by the technologies
introduced here, can be broadly applicable paradigm for integrative scientific
research. Understanding how cells interact to form neural networks has relevance
to organism development and tissue engineering. State-machines can be adapted
across tissues and species to develop theories of cell decision-making. The
phenotyping tools that correlate electrophysiology and protein expression with
multi-cellular network topology will provide a powerful resource for
neurobiologists. Furthermore, the E-phFACS device provides a high-throughput way
to record electrical activity and sort cells. To further engage the scientific
community, the investigators will (1) provide an open source ImageOmics platform
and (2) host an international crowd-sourced neuronal network Design Challenge.