* 1533691
* NCS-FO: Assaying neural individuality and variation in freely behaving people based on qEEG
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2017
* Badrinath Roysam, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 08/31/2017
* USD 312,250.00

This project will deploy noninvasive Mobile Brain-body Imaging devices (MoBI) in
a public museum with the goal of assaying individuality and variation in neural
activity as it occurs (e.g., "in action and context") in a large and diverse
group of people, including children, experiencing fixed and interactive art
exhibits. A natural setting such as an art museum attracts thousands of people
with rich demographic factors such as age, sex, education level, occupation, and
other factors such as health, medication and neurological status, thereby
providing a unique opportunity to study the population distribution, accuracy
and stability of neural activity and advance understanding of the dynamics of
complex neural and cognitive systems in natural environments. The broader
impacts of this research include integrating the arts, science and engineering
to advance brain science; advancing the regulatory science of biomedical devices
by uncovering biometric neural data as objective endpoints to investigate
cognition, perception and action; supporting and promoting STEM education, and
advancing the field through dissemination and data sharing of products generated
in this research. Importantly, the efficacy and related safety of MoBI-based
diagnostics and therapeutics depend on scientific understanding of neural
variability and individuality. In the same way that individual variation in gene
sequences makes certain drugs more or less effective for certain people, giving
rise to the need for pharmacogenomics, individual variation in brain activity
will not only affect the assessment of drugs which use these endpoints, but will
also strongly affect the safety and efficacy of therapeutic medical devices.
Despite this critical importance, there is no concerted effort elsewhere to
address these basic questions that are holding back the research and development
of novel noninvasive biomedical devices with all of its diagnostic benefits that
could also contribute to reverse engineer brain mechanisms.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A big-data analytics approach for investigating neural
variability and individuality in brain data from a large number of diverse
participants could help advance development of biomedical devices while filling
knowledge gaps in brain science. Three research objectives will be pursued to
produce this science while developing novel tools for discovery. First, this
project entails the acquisition of multi-modal data from a thousand participants
from the diverse Greater Houston area. Second, the research will develop novel
algorithms for analyzing, inspecting, visualizing, representing, parsing, and
searching high-dimensional patterns from the multi-modal datasets acquired in a
public setting at the Blaffer museum. The goals are to uncover neural signals
associated with the passive and interactive perception/production of art and to
assess the long-term stability of neural activity acquired via quantitative
electroencephalography (or qEEG). The proposed project will lead to innovative
time-resolved methods and tools to study the population distribution, accuracy
and stability of neural activity. Third, the project will generate a unique big
dataset, and algorithms that will be shared with the scientific community. This
research opens new scientific and educational horizons for addressing empirical
problems (e.g., the acquisition of multimodal data from freely behaving subjects
in public settings), and normative problems (e.g., decoding human intent and
emotion from patterns of brain activity) in science. Moreover, the project will
enable K-12 to postdoctoral training of a diverse population of
students/trainees.