* 1533499
* A Computational Modeling Approach to Organizational Effectiveness: Mapping the Effects of Leadership, Group Structure, and Environmental Shocks.
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2017
* Steve Kozlowski, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Toby Parcel
* 07/31/2017
* USD 106,605.00

Non-Technical Description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is a three-year
program of basic research designed to address gaps in theory on team leadership,
team composition, and adaptability to environmental shocks, with a specific
emphasis on multi-team systems (MTS). This project extends our prior work on
emergent phenomena in teams by applying computational modeling to an extended
network of MTSs. The goal is to design a highly flexible computational agent
architecture that can be applied to a broad range of team types (e.g., action,
project, decision-making teams), task structures (e.g., pooled, sequential,
reciprocal, intensive), and MTS contexts (e.g., military, medical, business).
The computational model will be used to conduct virtual experiments to evaluate
the effects of different team composition and leadership configurations on team
(Phase 1) and MTS (Phase 2) effectiveness, and the resilience and adaptability
potential of different configurations given internal and external shocks (Phase
3). This modeling research has many practical applications. In particular, it is
designed to identify the basic mechanisms that underpin team effectiveness. The
model can then be used to predict the effectiveness of particular team and MTS
configurations and, based on those findings, provide prescriptive principles for
composing teams, and appointing team leaders, to ensure that teams and systems
of teams are optimized for effectiveness. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The emergence and dynamics of phenomena
relevant to the effectiveness of team and MTSs has proven difficult using the
dominant research methods (experimental and correlational research) employed in
organizational psychology and behavior (OPB). A "third discipline" based on
computational modeling is needed if OPB is to advance understanding of process
dynamics. The development of a comprehensive computational model, based on a
Markov Decision Process (MDP) architecture, which incorporates team composition,
leadership structure, and process mechanisms within- and between-teams, will
mark a significant advance in OPB. A key advantage of computational simulation
is the ability to systematically and thoroughly map a theoretical space. Virtual
experimentation will enable specification of the fundamental mechanisms that
drive dynamic interconnections among leadership, team structures, and member
composition ad their sensitivity, resilience, and adaptability to internal and
external shocks. Moreover, our use of the MDP "engine" will enable specification
of optimality and deviations from it. Research findings will enable subsequent
empirical research to be more precisely targeted, with specific points for
intervention identified. The formal computational model will enable the
generation of generalizable predictive forecasts of the effectiveness of various
team and MTS leadership structures under different within- and between-team
conditions. Thus, recommendations from this research are intended to enhance the
gains of subsequent empirical research in terms of both efficiency (i.e.,
focusing on promising targets, avoiding research that is less likely to be
productive) and effectiveness (i.e., focusing on interventions that are more
likely to be successful). This is vitally important because research on teams
and MTSs is highly resource intensive. By more precisely targeting at human
research based on the findings of virtual experiments, the resources invested in
human research are likely to have a much higher return. Thus, this research has
the potential to aid funding agencies to more precisely target research funding
priorities. Moreover, the research has a wide range of potential applications.
This same flexibility permits examination and quantification of how adaptive and
responsive different system configurations would be to unexpected shocks. As a
result, decision-makers would have the predictive and prescriptive tools from
which to make informed decisions about critical personnel, team structure, and
organizational design decisions.