* 1533846
* XPS: Full: FP: Collaborative Research: Sphinx: Combining Data and Instruction Level Parallelism through Demand Driven Execution of Imperative Programs
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2020
* David Whalley, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 07/31/2020
* USD 347,000.00

Title: XPS: Full: FP: Collaborative Research: Sphinx: Combining Data and
Instruction Level Parallelism through Demand Driven Execution of Imperative
Programs&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It has become increasingly difficult to improve
the performance of processors so that they can meet the demands of existing and
emerging workloads. Recent emphasis has been towards enhancing the performance
through the use of multi-core processors and Graphics Processing Units. However,
these processors remain difficult to program and inflexible to adapt to dynamic
changes in the available parallelism in a given program. Although the computer
architecture and programming language community continues to innovate and make
important gains towards better programmability and better designs, it remains
that parallel programming is inherently costly and error prone, and automatic
parallelization of programs is not always feasible or effective. The
intellectual merits of this project are the development of a new program
execution paradigm and the establishment of critical compiler and micro-
architecture mechanisms so that we can design processors that can be easily
programmed using existing programming languages and at the same time surpass the
performance of existing parallel computers. The project's broader significance
and importance are wide-spread: the deployment of such processors will push the
limits of computation in every field of science and
commerce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The execution paradigm under consideration is a
previously unexplored execution model, the demand-driven execution of imperative
programs (DDE). The DDE paradigm rests on a solid theoretical framework and
promises to efficiently deliver very high-levels of fine-grain parallelism. This
parallelism is extracted from a program written in an imperative language such
as C, and it is realized by means of an effective compiler-architecture
collaboration mechanism using a common, single-assignment form for the program
representation. DDE processors can extract instruction-level parallelism much
more efficiently than existing superscalar processors as the paradigm does not
require dynamic dependency checking. Such processors can fetch, buffer, and
execute many more instructions in parallel than current superscalar processors.
Owing to its dependence-driven instruction fetching and execution, the paradigm
leads to extremely scalable designs, as the communication is naturally localized
and synchronization is inherent in the model. Conventional thread-level
parallelism (TLP) is orthogonal to DDE, and thus DDE designs can exploit both
ILP and TLP. DDE architectures thus represent promising building blocks for
extreme-scale machines.