* 1534786
* SBIR Phase II:  Measuring Aqueous Metal Concentrations with the Chemometer
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2015,02/29/2020
* Daniel Miller-Lionberg, Access Sensor Technologies
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 02/29/2020
* USD 1,127,526.00

The broader impact/commercial impact of this Small Business Innovation Research
(SBIR) Phase II project is in promoting the protection of human health, the
environment, and our nation's natural resources by providing new sensors that
enable fast, accurate, cost-effective sampling and analysis tools to monitor
pollution and exposure. The innovations developed here will allow for the rapid
identification and detection of hazardous compounds in water at substantially
reduced cost. These technological innovations will translate into triple bottom-
line savings of companies by enhancing our ability to protect people and the
planet, while simultaneously providing cost and time savings to the business.
The technology embodies the concepts of sustainability and ease of use, and will
achieve broad commercial appeal by saving businesses money, time, and effort
while also giving them more data on potential sources of pollution.
Scientifically, this technology will enable more precise assessment of
environmental pollution by providing more rapid measurement capability at a
larger scale than is currently possible.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will develop an innovative, market-disruptive technology for measuring
toxic metals in water. This technology is inexpensive, portable, and does not
require any power or external reading equipment. Furthermore, it can be adapted
to a wide range of toxic compounds after initial commercialization around metals
analysis. The system costs an order of magnitude less than the current "point of
need" technologies capable of quantitative determination of toxic metals in
water, and two orders of magnitude less than the traditional laboratory tests.
Access Sensor Technologies is a new startup, but the core team has a strong
track record in the field of microfluidic paper-based analytical devices for
environmental analysis where the proposed system represents a major innovation
in the field. The proposal has four technical objectives: (1) Expand the palette
of applicable chemistry to include additional metals: cadmium, lead, manganese,
and both chromium 3+ and 6+; (2) Test the prototype system in a relevant
laboratory environment or in a simulated operational environment; (3) Achieve a
successful customer-driven demonstration of the system in the field; and (4)
Identify key elements of manufacturability that define the roadmap to production
of the system at market scale.