* 1534743
* STTR Phase II: Development of a computational protein engineering platform and its application to methane activating enzymes
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2018
* Barry Olafson, Protabit LLC
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 08/31/2018
* USD 750,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research Phase II project will combine computational protein engineering (CPE)
software, tools and methods into a "platform technology" that enables new
products and technologies in a wide range of scientific areas, including
industrial enzymes, pharmaceuticals, therapeutics, medical diagnostics and
bioenergy. This project will validate the CPE platform in an application that
has both commercial and environmental value: engineered enzymes for utilizing
methane as a feedstock. The engineered methane activating enzymes developed will
open up numerous new biological routes to chemicals and fuels from natural gas,
capitalizing on abundant domestic shale gas reserves and improving U.S. energy
independence. This CPE enzyme technology has the potential to significantly
decrease the capital cost of small-scale Gas-to-liquid (GTL) plant, enabling the
capture and monetization of otherwise economically-stranded natural gas. In
North Dakota, more than a quarter of the total gas produced is flared or vented,
wasting a valuable natural resource and needlessly emitting greenhouse gases. By
facilitating the conversion of stranded or flared methane to fuels and high-
value chemicals, this research can help reduce carbon footprint and spur
domestic manufacturing, investment, and job creation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
objectives of this Phase II project are to develop and license a CPE Platform
technology that will enable experimental biological scientists to harness the
power of computational protein design and engineering; to validate the CPE
Platform technology by engineering novel methane activating enzymes that have
increased soluble expression and methane-oxidizing activity; and in
collaboration with potential licensees of this technology, work to incorporate
the engineered enzyme into their industrial host organisms. These organisms will
be enabled to use methane as a feedstock for the bio-production of a wide range
of end products, including liquid transportation fuels, commodity chemicals and
high value fine chemicals. In Phase I, the Northwestern-Caltech-Protabit team
succeeded in engineering the particulate MMO (pMMO) catalytic subunit (spmoB) to
allow it to be solubly expressed in E. coli. This was the first demonstration of
an active methane-oxidizing enzyme that can be solubly expressed and purified in
significant quantities in a genetically-tractable recombinant host. Phase II
will continue this work, with the objective of making the spmoB enzyme more
effective by increasing its activity and solving certain other challenges for
inserting it into an industrial host.