* 1534759
* SBIR Phase II:  Increasing Production of Palladium Supported on Hierarchically Porous Monolithic Carbon Catalysts
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2015,02/29/2020
* Franchessa Sayler, ThruPore Technologies
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 02/29/2020
* USD 1,139,749.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research Phase II project is that the palladium on hierarchically porous
monolithic carbon catalyst being developed promises longer lifetimes and higher
performance to industrial chemical companies. This more active, more selective
catalyst can lower the operating temperature in chemical reactions thereby
decreasing energy usage and giving products with fewer impurities, requiring a
smaller number of purification steps and producing less waste. Success will
therefore impact both ecological and commercial sustainability in the chemical
industry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of this Phase II research project
are 1) demonstrate that the carbon support is scalable while maintaining the
mechanical properties needed for industrial use, 2) scale loading the palladium
catalyst onto the support, 3) exhibit the same high catalytic performance as the
laboratory prepared catalyst, and 4) enter full scale production while setting
up a quality system. The catalyst to be produced at large quantities represents
the first of a new class of hierarchically porous catalyst supports and so
further validation of this new product will provide the foundation for
introduction of a broad class of catalysts with these superior properties. If
successful, full scale manufacturing of this new class of catalysts will be
pursued.