* 1534772
* SBIR Phase II:  Developing Alternate Aquafeeds by Using Sustainable Methods of Bio-remediation of Seafood Residuals
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2018
* Taylor Pryor, Acadia Harvest, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 08/31/2018
* USD 754,421.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is to enhance global food security. Aquaculture
is the fastest growing agroindustry while the world fisheries catch has leveled
out. Consequently, half of all seafood consumed today is farmed. Unfortunately,
at least 30% of fish feed is derived from forage fish, the anchovy and sardine-
types at the base of the food chain. With demand for forage fish growing while
wild populations remain level at best, the price of fish meal and oil (FM&0)
climbs by 15% yearly. Clearly, dependence on FM&O is unsustainable. For fish
farmers to thrive without abusing the oceanic ecosystem, substitutes are
essential. One solution is to use vegetable-based ingredients such as wheat and
soy, but these lack vital omega-3 fatty acids. Another is to turn to the insect
world, especially by culturing ecofriendly black soldier fly larvae (BSFL). The
larvae are fed seafood residuals mixed with marine kelp and/or microalgae so
that the natural omega-3 passes through. The larvae are dried and separated into
FM&O-like meal and oil. The overarching question is: can this be accomplished
competitively? Apparently it is possible, but a 2-year pilot plant is required
to prove the practicality.

The proposed project will not only demonstrate that very large volumes of BSFL
can be cultured using omega-3 loaded wastes and algae, but that substitute fish
feeds that are palatable, stimulate growth and confer health are feasible. This
is best achieved by simultaneously conducting feeding trials with a variety of
species, including isolated bottom dwellers such as black sea bass and,
alternatively, schooling pelagic creatures such as California yellowtail.
Observing degrees of palatability is straight forward. But as with any cuisine
there are numerous ways to enhance the offering: live, dried or pelletized and,
if the latter, unit size, moisture content and even some surface additive that
confers a natural taste ? perhaps crab-like for black sea bass and squid-like
for California yellowtail. Such refinements grant significant economic margins
by virtue of better survival rates, shorter time in the tanks and less costly
ingredients. At this local level, both the farmer and the consumer benefit while
globally these gains can favorably impact food security, especially with marine
species that only require saltwater, with recirculating system that discharge
little or no waste and, of course, with substitute foodstuff derived from waste
bio-remediated by flies.