* 1534630
* DMREF: Collaborative Research: Toolkit to Characterize and Design Bi-functional Nanoparticle Catalysts
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2019
* Judith Yang, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Lin He
* 08/31/2019
* USD 270,000.00

In this project, funded by the Designing Materials to Revolutionize and Engineer
our Future (DMREF) Program of the Chemistry Division, Professors Graeme
Henkelman and Richard Crooks at the University of Texas, Professor Anatoly
Frenkel at Yeshiva University, and Professor Judith Yang of the University of
Pittsburgh are combining experimental and computational methods aimed at
discovering optimal bi-functional catalyst formulations and structures for the
electrochemical oxidation of the poisonous gas, carbon monoxide. A key element
of the research is the use of extremely small catalyst particles (containing
only several hundred atoms) that are partially coated with a protective layer of
molecules called dendrimers that keep the metal particles from coalescing. A
variety of catalysts are being made, and their structures and catalytic
activities are being analyzed. Computational studies are being performed to
predict new catalyst structures that are then prepared and analyzed; the results
from the experimental studies are used to refine the computational methods. The
combined approach represents a new toolkit for the discovery and development of
new catalytic materials having improved performance.The project participants are
involved in educational and outreach activities to engage undergraduate students
directly in various aspects of the project including an opportunity for some of
the University of Texas - Austin students to spend up to a week at Brookhaven
National Laboratory and the University of Pittsburgh. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research team is conducting density functional theory (DFT) calculations of the
entire nanoparticle structure for various combinations of metals - one which
adsorbs carbon monoxide and one which adsorbs oxygen dissociatively. The DFT
calculations of available reaction mechanisms, together with kinetic modeling
and correlations to expected variations in catalyst structures and compositions,
identify mechanisms and reactivity descriptors that will be used in subsequent
screening-synthesis-characterization-evaluation cycles. Characterizations are
being conducted by both in situ and scanning transmission electron microscopy
(TEM/STEM) and extended X-ray absorption fine structure (EXAFS). Methods are
being developed for combining the DFT calculations with the TEM and EXAFS data
to improve the determination of nanoparticle structures at the atomic scale.
From a scientific/technical standpoint, the study is advancing the dendrimer-
aided approach to catalyst synthesis, with a clearer understanding of the nature
of the particles that are produced and their catalytic activity. The study is
extending previous work on bi-metallic particles to metal-metal oxide systems,
with corresponding extension of computational and characterization efforts. The
synthesis, characterization, and modeling tools developed during the course of
this study have broad applicability to a wide range of reactions and catalyst
formulations, and the software tools will be freely distributed to the catalysis
science community.