* 1534795
* SBIR Phase II:  An Interactive 3D Game of Evolutionary Robotics for STEM-based Education
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2017
* Jeffrey Sprenger, Xemory LLC
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 08/31/2017
* USD 757,977.00

This SBIR Phase II project studies the problem of how to engage students in STEM
(Science Technology Engineering and Mathematics) education through game-based
learning in a Virtual Robotics computer game. In the game, students design,
assemble and train virtual walking robots to compete against their peer robots
to secure a seat on a virtual mission to Mars. The project analyses the effects
of competition and collaboration on the learning and retention of key robotic
control concepts. The project will produce a low-cost educational computer game,
where far more U.S. middle schools and high schools students can learn about
biomechanics, math, physics and computer algorithms through a robotic simulation
game than is possible with current robot hardware approaches. The product
provides the American educational system a solution to quickly engage students
in STEM who might otherwise turn away. STEM field professions can lead to high
paying jobs, which in turn can improve productivity and the economic landscape
for America.

The project's education technology innovation is a cloud-based robot evolution
game engine where students acting as a crowd can evolve the behavior of walking
bi-pedal robots. The evolution of robot behavior happens on three levels: 1) the
micro scale where an individual or small group of students evolves singular
robot behaviors, 2) the mid-scale where groups exchange individual behaviors to
form a behavior sequence to meet game level challenges. (For example, link a
sequence of behaviors to stand, walk, jump, and turn to clear a section of
obstacles and reach the prize goal), 3) the macro scale where the community
evolves a cumulative set of behaviors through re-use and adoption of most
efficient behaviors, discarding failed behaviors and creating new game level
challenges. In particular, this project studies how individual and group
learning is affected by adjusting the reward incentive, competitive motivation,
novelty and surprise, and challenge level difficulty. During competition, the
game gathers data regarding level of student learning and robot performance to
answer two specific questions: a) do students learn more through small group or
large group collaboration/competition, and b) are the students more engaged in
small or large scale crowd-sourced environments.