* 1534709
* SBIR Phase II:  Automation Enabled, Low-Cost, High-Volume Production of Advanced Composites
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2016,07/31/2020
* Casey Hoffman, Vistex Composites LLC
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 07/31/2020
* USD 1,043,748.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is in the automated manufacture of lightweight
high-strength carbon fiber composite materials. Experts agree that composite
manufacturers must lead innovations in sustainability, price reduction, and
cycle-time reduction to meet end-market needs. The innovations proposed in this
project, coupled with Vistex Composites' cutting edge Specialized Elastomeric
Tooling process, directly address these needs by significantly advancing the
state-of-the-art in composites manufacturing equipment. The prevailing
motivation for short automated cycles is posed by the automotive industry, where
lightweighting delivers major benefits for fuel consumption but where current
processes cannot affordably and quickly produce carbon fiber automotive parts in
large numbers. The equipment innovations proposed will not only enhance the
automotive market but will have substantial commercial value across all
composite markets as they allow the manufacture of equivalent quality products,
faster, with less waste, significant energy savings, and at lower cost.
Furthermore, the proposed automated process will enable Vistex in its aggressive
path towards not only broader adoption of its Specialized Elastomeric Tooling
process technology but also broader adoption of composite materials. This will
directly drive manufacturing job creation, for Vistex and its customers, as
composites displace foreign produced goods.

This project addresses the design, fabrication, and analysis of an automated
composite manufacturing cell using Vistex's patented Specialized Elastomeric
Tooling process as the central technology. The standard composite manufacturing
process, the autoclave, has long cycle times (hours), requires significant
manual labor, and is expensive. Vistex's proposed manufacturing cell addresses
these concerns. In the proposal manufacturing cell will be designed and
fabricated to make a composite product using Specialized Elastomeric Tooling but
where parts (1) can be moved rapidly and accurately using automation, (2)
rapidly cured using Specialized Elastomeric Tooling, and (3) rapidly
ejected/removed from the tooling, all while creating an equivalent or superior
product to with significant cycle time savings over the industry's standard
autoclave process. Through the use of material testing, cost analysis, and other
metrics, each stage of the proposed manufacturing cell will be benchmarked
against industry standard processes. The anticipated result will be a prototype
turnkey rapid automated manufacturing cell and commercially usable products for
project partners.