* 1534760
* SBIR Phase II:  Low-density parity-check error correction for enhanced reliability of flash memories
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2015,06/30/2022
* Shiva Planjery, Codelucida, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 06/30/2022
* USD 1,408,239.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project are both technical and economic. The developed
error-correction solutions will enable flash-memory-based devices to have higher
capacities, higher reliability, and faster speeds at lower power while driving
down the cost. This will have a major impact on mobile computing capabilities
and enterprise storage by improving the efficiency and reliability of data
centers, servers, and mission-critical storage that incorporate flash memories.
Improved enterprise storage boosts the efficiency and growth of IT businesses,
e-commerce, and financial trade. The solutions will also enable reduced power
consumption and heat dissipation leading to greener systems. The benefits of the
error-correction solutions are also applicable to the hard disk drive and
communications industries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project will develop and validate novel low-density
parity-check (LDPC)-based error-correction for flash memory-based solid state
drives (SSDs). SSDs are rapidly being deployed for both enterprise and consumer
storage due to their fast speeds, low power, and low heat dissipation. But they
bring numerous technical challenges stemming from the fact that reducing flash
memory cell sizes leads to an unavoidable degradation in the reliability. With a
trend of increasing die density to enable higher storage capacities, the
industry is swiftly moving towards adopting LDPC codes to provide more powerful
error-correction. However existing LDPC solutions use complex post-processing
and multiple reads to bring down the error rates to the desired levels which
lowers the read speeds, making them unattractive for future SSDs. Novel binary
LDPC-based solutions will be developed for a range of parameters, and validated
in hardware. The design method will be extended to develop new non-binary LDPC
solutions which provide even greater reliability enhancements, leading to
greater endurance in SSDs.