* 1534670
* Using Improved Aerosol Optical Thickness (AOT) and Cloud Condensation Nuclei (CCN) Relationship and Aerosol Composition to Study the Impact of Aerosol on Cloud Microphysics
* GEO,AGS
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2019
* Zhanqing Li, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 08/31/2019
* USD 499,998.00

The aerosol-cloud-interaction (ACI) is one of the largest uncertainties of all
known climate forcing mechanisms. In the nutshell, the ACI is ultimately
determined by the responses of cloud properties to variations in cloud
condensation nuclei (CCN) whose knowledge is thus the key to understanding the
ACI. Due to the impracticability of making large-scale continuous observations
of CCN, the more readily measured aerosol optical quantities, such as aerosol
optical depth (AOD), have been widely used as a proxy for CCN in ACI studies
even though both properties represent different aspects of aerosols. On the
other hand, the two properties are affected by aerosol size distribution and
chemical composition, so are linked to a certain degree. In the first phase of
this study funded by the NSF, the relationship between AOD and CCN with a focus
on the influences of aerosol physical properties and ambient meteorology has
been exploited.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aerosol-cloud-interaction (ACI) is one
of the largest uncertainties of all known climate forcing mechanisms. In the
nutshell, the ACI is ultimately determined by the responses of cloud properties
to variations in cloud condensation nuclei (CCN) whose knowledge is thus the key
to understanding the ACI. Due to the impracticability of making large-scale
continuous observations of CCN, the more readily measured aerosol optical
quantities, such as aerosol optical depth (AOD), have been widely used as a
proxy for CCN in ACI studies even though both properties represent different
aspects of aerosols. On the other hand, the two properties are affected by
aerosol size distribution and chemical composition, so are linked to a certain
degree. In the first phase of this study funded by the NSF, the relationship
between AOD and CCN with a focus on the influences of aerosol physical
properties and ambient meteorology has been exploited. This study will continue
the pursuit but focus on investigating the effects of aerosol composition and
hygroscopicity on the estimation of the ACI, estimating and reducing
uncertainties due to the use of such relationships by means of both observations
and modeling. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;1. A
comprehensive analysis on the responses of cloud microphysical properties to
aerosol optical, chemical, and hygroscopic properties will help gain deeper
insights into the mechanisms behind the aerosol indirect effect.&lt;br/&gt;2.
Accounting for the effects will help identify and quantify a bias in the
estimate of the aerosol indirect effects by the conventional approach using
ground or satellite measurements of AOD as a proxy for CCN to obtain better
estimate of the ACI for different types of aerosols under diverse meteorological
conditions.&lt;br/&gt;3. Modeling helps explain the mechanisms behind how cloud
microphysical properties respond to aerosol composition/hygroscopicity by
accounting for the influence of dynamic and thermodynamic
conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;1. With an improved
knowledge and understanding of the influence of aerosol chemical composition
and/or hygroscopicity on cloud microphysical properties, the mechanism of
aerosol indirect effect will be better understood. This will help narrow the
large range of uncertainties as identified by the Intergovernmental Panel on
Climate Change (IPCC) reports.&lt;br/&gt;2. The research will provide
interdisciplinary training opportunities for undergraduate and graduate
students, and postdoctoral fellows in measuring aerosols, retrieving cloud
properties, data analysis, and modeling.&lt;br/&gt;3. The study will have an
immediate impact on the teaching of cloud physics, atmospheric chemistry,
climate, and environmental courses.