* 1534910
* DMREF: Deblurring our View of Atomic Arrangements in Complex Materials for Advanced Technologies
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2015,03/31/2021
* Daniel Hsu, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* John Schlueter
* 03/31/2021
* USD 1,082,786.00

DMREF: Deblurring our View of Atomic Arrangements in Complex Materials for
Advanced Technologies&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical Description: As we try
and find new technologies to solve some of mankind's toughest challenges such as
abundant sustainable energy, environmental remediation, and health, we are
increasingly seeking more and more complex materials. We already have devices
that turn sunlight into electricity and use sunlight to split water into
precious hydrogen fuel, but issues such as device efficiency and cost mean that
the current technologies cannot be taken to the vast scale needed for our modern
needs. This puzzle may be solved by the use of advanced materials that perform
their tasks - energy conversion, cancer cell killer, or whatever it may be -
with greater efficiency. This is inevitably leading us towards more complicated
materials that consist of many different chemical elements and have engineered
structures on multiple different length-scales from the atomic to the nano- and
meso-scales all the way to macroscopic scales. The problem is that, because of
their complexity, it becomes very difficult to even characterize these materials
when we have made them, let alone design and engineer them at the nanoscale. Our
usual tools based on the scattering of x-rays by crystals stop working for such
nanoscale structures. The problem is not that we lack powerful enough x-ray
beams. The problem is that the x-ray scattering signal from these complicated
materials doesn't contain enough information to allow us to find a unique
structure solution. It is as if we are looking at complex patterns of atomic
arrangements through blurry, steamed up glasses. This project will bring greater
clarity to this situation by marrying together advances in applied mathematics
from diverse areas such as image recognition, information theory and machine
learning, which are having transformative impacts in commerce, law enforcement
and so on, and applying them to the problem of recognizing atomic arrangements
in materials of the highest complexity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Description: The approach will to solve multi-scale structures of materials by
marrying together the latest advances in the processing of x-ray scattering data
from nanomaterials, such as atomic pair distribution function (PDF) analysis,
with other sources of input information such as small angle scattering, EXAFS
and other spectroscopies, as well as inputs from first principle theory such as
DFT, but place them in a rigorous mathematical framework and a robust
computational framework such that the information content in the data may be
utilized to the greatest extent possible whilst taking into account
uncertainties from statistical and systematic uncertainties. The mathematical
framework will utilize the latest developments in stochastic optimization,
uncertainty quantification including function-space Bayesian methods, machine
learning and image recognition.