* 1534668
* SBIR Phase II:  Compact Torus-Shaped Organic Ranking Cycle for Distributed Solar Thermal Power Generation
* TIP,TI
* 11/15/2015,10/31/2017
* Bryce Shaffer, Air Squared Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Linda Molnar
* 10/31/2017
* USD 298,118.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is in Organic Rankine Cycles for distributed
solar power generation at micro scale and will offer a cheaper alternative to
solar photovoltaic (PV), with a payback period of just 4.5 year without
government incentives. The use of solar thermal to generate power at residential
level would offer a renewed encouragement to the solar thermal industry. With
the ability to provide heat and hot water plus electricity, the solar thermal
powered product would fulfill the energy requirements of a home single handedly.
Most are familiar with the traditional perspective on the societal impact of a
system like the Compact ORC - lower energy demand and reduced greenhouse gas. In
addition the CORC positively impacts health and wellbeing by improving indoor
air quality and providing affordable access. A number of clinical studies
connect improved indoor air quality from efficient systems with a reduction in
respiratory and cardiovascular conditions. Combining the health benefits of
clean indoor air and improved living conditions, the downstream impact on
healthcare cost would be enormous.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project attempts to
solve the problem of high cost for renewable energy from solar energy, both PV
and solar thermal, at the residential and light commercial level without
government incentives. Solar thermal can provide heat and hot water but not
electricity. PV can provide electricity but not heat and hot water. The Compact
ORC concept can do both with Combined Heat and Power (CHP). Current ORC systems
are bulky and inefficient and most importantly high cost. The objective of this
research is to combine all of the components of the ORC in one compact,
integrated, low cost package. The expander, pump, and generator will all be
mounting on a common shaft. The evaporator and condenser heat exchangers will be
mounted integral with the ORC reducing inefficiencies and packaging cost. There
will be no external piping of components together. The result will be a compact
unit that is cost and performance competitive with grid energy.