* 1534602
* SBIR Phase II:  Prospect: A Hardware Security Verification Tool
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2015,02/28/2019
* Jason Oberg, Tortuga Logic, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 02/28/2019
* USD 1,159,815.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is a dramatic increase in the security of
modern computer hardware. This project presents a security verification software
suite that detects security vulnerabilities in electronic hardware designs.
Current state-of-the-art methods for detecting security vulnerabilities in
hardware designs are very informal, consisting of security teams searching for
these vulnerabilities through manual code review and committee discussion. This
has already been shown to be ineffective in obtaining adequate security
coverage, with security vulnerabilities remaining undetected and exploitable by
malicious entities. With the unprecedented growth in the number of connected
devices being developed for the Internet-of-Things (IoT), the number of security
vulnerabilities will increase dramatically. The broader societal impact of this
SBIR Phase II project is the increased security of computing systems, leading to
more effective management of personal information and increased data privacy.
The commercial impact is a unique software offering to semiconductor companies
to help detect and prevent security vulnerabilities that could be used to
compromise an IoT device. This greatly reduces the resources necessary to
achieve high security coverage and eliminates long-term liabilities that can
debilitate an entire company.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business
Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project focuses on the technical development
of a software suite for verifying security properties of hardware designs. The
technology improves on the current methods in semiconductor companies that use
manual audits in attempts to find security vulnerabilities in chip designs. It
provides a systematic platform for verifying the security properties specified
by the security teams on the actual hardware within these companies. This
greatly improves the security coverage while reducing the time spent performing
security audits. This SBIR Phase II project will develop the features requested
directly by customers and perform the essential R&amp;D efforts of the company's
underlying information flow analysis technology in order to adequately solve
customers' problems. The end result of this Phase II project will be a
commercial grade product fit to detect and resolve security issues in modern
electronic hardware designs.