* 1534554
* Burning Effects On Savannah Environments
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2021
* Kristen Hawkes, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2021
* USD 179,888.00

Dr. Kristen Hawkes of the University of Utah will undertake research to
investigate the ways Hadza foragers living in northern Tanzania take advantage
of burned landscapes in their exploitation of wild plants and animals. Fire use
is increasingly recognized as an important component of hunting and gathering
that affects foraging return rates and has shaped local environments world-wide,
but the role of fire in subsistence activities by the Hadza and other African
foragers has been understudied. Postdoctoral associate Dr. Christopher Parker
will bring his experience measuring the immediate benefits and ecological
consequences of hunter-gatherer fire use in the Western Desert of Australia to
specify distinctive features of fire's effects in this African context. The
project will expand his comparative expertise; and participating graduate
students will learn and practice techniques of systematic behavioral
observations and quantitative fire ecology that will serve their future careers.
Recording information on fire use will contribute to the preservation of
traditional Hadza knowledge, which is threatened by the increasing effects of
globalization and will characterize human-environment interactions that can aid
policy makers charged with managing fire's impact in similar ecological
settings. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Documentation of Hadza expertise on
fire use in their East African homeland will build the foundation for estimating
and calibrating the nature and magnitude of fire's effect on foraging returns in
African savannas in the deeper past. Enumerating these effects will allow
estimates of the selective advantages that led earlier members of our lineage to
controlled fire use and will help identify the pathways by which the
distinctively human dependence on fire and cooking evolved. This research will
fill a gap in knowledge by quantifying the benefits of burns with the guidance
of people who are intimately knowledgeable about local ecology. The research
will identify which aspects of foraging are most and least affected by burns in
this equatorial savanna and which resource types see the most significant
changes in profitability when altered by fire. Results will be the basis for
characterizing the likely role of fire-induced ecological alteration on foraging
opportunities in ancient sub-Saharan Africa and improve hypotheses about the
effects of those alterations on the emergence of our genus.