* 1534787
* SBIR Phase II:  Efficacy of scaled up optimized urease producing microorganisms for manufacturing biocement binders towards a viable masonry construction material
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2015,10/31/2020
* Ginger Dosier, bioMASON Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 10/31/2020
* USD 1,373,774.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project is focused on the
continued development of biologically grown masonry units as a commercially-
viable and sustainable alternative to traditional fired masonry materials. This
product is grown in ambient temperatures utilizing a natural calcium carbonate
cement formation induced by a urease-producing microorganism. The Phase II
project will focus on material testing and further optimization and cost
reduction of biocement products, with the intention of demonstrating pilot
manufacturing and rapid commercialization via licensee manufacturers. Using
biologic products and fermentation procedures developed in the Phase I effort,
improvements will be made to scale up manufacturing and reduce cost in the
manufacturing process. The commercial potential of this technology is critically
dependent on achieving cost and performance parity, if not superiority, with
traditional materials. Each year, 1.23 trillion fired bricks are produced
globally for use in construction, resulting in over 800 million tons of carbon
emissions. The societal impacts of this research would include a dramatic
reduction in these emissions, as well as a corresponding reduction in industrial
by-product waste. This project will enhance the technological understanding for
commercial viability and test data including durability and physical
performance. Technical objectives for this effort include evaluation of the
resulting biocement masonry products through rigorous American Society of
Testing Materials (ASTM) testing methods, reduction of raw material costs
through continued optimization, creation of in-house production capability for
the requisite biologic product, and the creation and testing of a manufacturing
process suitable for transition to licensees. Main focus areas of the Phase II
project include rigorous material testing for physical performance, weathering
and durability, in-house production of robust raw material constituents, and
commercial testing coupled with pilot manufacturing. Rigorous ASTM testing
methods will be done at two accredited labs, and labor requirements will be
reduced via the adoption of lean automation in the production process.
Additionally, the utilization of existing material handing manufacturing
equipment at licensee facilities, where possible, will be evaluated. Expected
project results will include a comprehensive statistical analysis of multiple
physical samples, as well as a corresponding failure analysis. Additional
expected deliverables include the successful commission of in-house pilot scale
manufacturing for biocement constituents as a simplified additive to be used by
commercial partners and licensees.