* 1534324
* Assessing the Impact of Organizational Justice on Academic Entrepreneurship: Qualitative and Quantitative Evidence From University Scientists
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* David Waldman, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Cassidy Sugimoto
* 08/31/2018
* USD 263,439.00

Universities have established technology transfer offices (TTOs) to manage the
commercialization of intellectual property arising from federally-funded
research. Faculty members who patent, license, or form a new company based on
this intellectual property are directed to work through the university TTO, a
process of formal technology transfer. However, some academic scientists choose
to circumvent or bypass the university TTO and engage in informal technology
transfer. The objective of this project is to obtain new evidence on the
determinants of informal technology transfer. It provides useful insights for
university administrators and policymakers who govern universities. An
understanding of what induces informal technology transfer can help institutions
adopt effective policies to support academic entrepreneurship and also develop
an organizational climate that is more conducive to formal technology transfer.
The project has further important implications for initiatives designed to
stimulate startup formation by faculty and student entrepreneurs, such as the
NSF I-Corps program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research addresses key
limitations of prior studies of academic. The focus is the individual faculty
member, who is the source of innovation and potential entrepreneurship. This
research examines key psychological variables that are relevant to individuals
and the decision to work with the university TTO. Specifically, we examine
efforts on the part of TTOs to educate faculty regarding academic
entrepreneurship, championing behavior by university administrators (e.g.,
university presidents who are especially enthusiastic about academic
entrepreneurship), and faculty perceptions of fairness and equity (i.e.,
organizational justice). This is the first study to apply principles of
organizational justice to university technology transfer. We use both
quantitative and qualitative methods. We conduct several detailed case studies,
and more broadly, survey faculty members at 35 universities. The combined use of
data on individuals, academic departments, universities, and the surrounding
regions of sampled universities, enables a comprehensive perspective on informal
technology transfer. &lt;br/&gt;