* 1534527
* SBIR Phase II:  Developing a Structured Student-guided Personalized Learning System for Mathematics
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2015,02/28/2019
* Smita Bakshi, Zyante Inc
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 02/28/2019
* USD 1,000,000.00

This SBIR Phase II project develops novel adaptive techniques for web-based
learning materials, and creates Algebra and Statistics content using those
techniques. College textbooks and homework are being replaced with web-based
learning materials that are highly-interactive, involving animations, learning
questions, and auto-generated auto-graded homework/quiz exercises. The project
develops those exercises to adjust (adapt) to the learner's performance as well
as to the learner's preferences, providing a novel structured form of adaptivity
that maximizes learning efficiency while reducing student anxiety, in contrast
to many other proposed adaptive techniques. The project creates new content for
the topics of Algebra and for Statistics, two critical subjects with which many
college students struggle. The result will be greater success (and less failure)
in Algebra and Statistics courses by young college students, leading to more
graduates in STEM (science, technology, engineering, and math) fields, which
contribute greatly to the nation's productivity and competitiveness. The
techniques can be applied to many other STEM and non-STEM subjects, and for
learning beyond college courses too. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase II
project develops novel adaptive techniques for web-based learning materials,
called structured student-guided adaptive (SSGA) techniques. In contrast to some
recent adaptive commercial products, SSGA preserves the ability of an instructor
to maintain a structured path through the material, which is critical for
keeping students in synch with lecture/discussion sessions, for enabling
students to study with classmates, and more. Adaptivity comes in several forms,
including auto-generating successively-harder problems based on correct
completion of earlier problems, with explanations and source material carefully
integrated to ensure students learn underlying concepts. Also, the adaptivity is
in part guided by the student, who can choose to start with simpler or harder
problems, or can auto-generate self-quizzes based on performance, selected
material, and more. In contrast with other products, student-guided adaptivity
gives students appropriate control over their learning, yielding a sense of
empowerment and reducing anxiety that can inhibit learning. The project builds
the authoring platform necessary to support SSGA material creation, building
upon a previously-developed authoring framework for interactive web material.
The project also creates new material for college algebra and statistics
courses, whose high attrition rates can be reduced by replacing traditional
textbooks/homework with SSGA material.