* 1534080
* PFI:BIC - Utility-driven Smart Energy Services
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Prashant Shenoy, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 08/31/2019
* USD 1,004,243.00

This Partnerships for Innovation: Building Innovation Capacity (PFI:BIC) project
focuses on the development of a utility-driven energy service platform. Since
buildings consume a large fraction of society's total energy usage, even modest
improvements in building energy efficiency have the potential to yield
significant benefits. In recent years, utilities have deployed tens of millions
of smart electric meters that record building energy usage over short intervals
(e.g., every few minutes). While the original purpose of smart meters was to
support basic utility operations (e.g., automated meter reading), this project
uses them as the foundation for developing a new class of smart energy service
systems. Specifically, the project focuses on analyzing the vast amount of data
available from utility smart meters and other networked sensors to improve the
energy efficiency of buildings and the electric grid. The research is utility-
driven, since utilities have i) access to massive amounts of customer energy
data, ii) a way to deliver the results of analytics to customers, and iii)
strong incentives to improve customer energy efficiency (e.g., by reducing peak
demand to reduce their own operational costs). The approach is scalable, since
it leverages already available building smart meter data, rather than requiring
the installation of new smart devices and control systems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will develop utility-driven smart energy
services to improve grid energy efficiency, encourage energy conservation, and
promote the local renewable energy sources, such as rooftop solar. The research
methodology includes developing new energy analytic techniques for smart meter
data, combining these in novel ways to create specific applications that improve
energy efficiency, packaging those applications as cloud-based web services that
are accessible to end users, and evaluating their impact on user behavior and
energy efficiency. In particular, the project will develop three specific smart
energy service systems: i) iProgram to determine optimal thermostat schedules by
analyzing smart meter data, ii) Green Demand Response (Green-DR) to
opportunistically schedule elastic loads to align with renewable energy
generation, and iii) PowerTrip to provide real-time energy event notifications
and suggested conservation actions to users. The project will implement a
prototype of each system and evaluate them on real-world data (rendered
anonymous) from 18,000 smart meters. The research follows a human-in-the-loop
model that integrates technical and user behavioral research in the design and
implementation of smart energy services. Thus, the project includes user studies
to assess each service's behavioral impact on
users.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts stem from the project's industrial
partnerships with a local utility, a premier research lab (Microsoft Research),
a small startup company (Budderfly), and an environmentally-conscious non-profit
(WattTime.org). These partnerships will expose students to industry perspectives
on addressing real-world energy-efficiency problems, and interdisciplinary
research that spans technical and behavioral disciplines. The project will
enable sustainability-aware curriculum, undergraduate REU projects, and
sustainability-focused outreach efforts to local K-12 students through the newly
established Massachusetts Green High Performance Computing
Center.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The lead institution is the University of
Massachusetts Amherst. The primary industry partner is Holyoke Gas and Electric
(HG&amp;E)) (Holyoke, MA), a municipal utility. Primary academic partners are
the University of Maryland-Baltimore County (Baltimore, MD) and Williams College
(Williamstown, MA). Broader context partners are Microsoft (Redmond, WA), a
large business, WattTime.org (Berkeley, CA), a non-profit, and Budderfly
(Shelton, CT), a small business.