* 1534688
* SI2-SSE: Collaborative Research: An Intelligent and Adaptive Parallel CPU/GPU Co-Processing Software Library for Accelerating Reactive-Flow Simulations
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Chih-Jen Sung, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 08/31/2019
* USD 214,357.00

In order to develop the next generation of clean and efficient vehicle engines
and power-generating combustors, engineers need the next generation of
computational modeling tools. Accurately describing the chemistry of
conventional and alternative liquid transportation fuels is vital to predict
harmful emission levels and other important quantities, but the high
computational cost of detailed models for chemistry poses a significant barrier
to use by designers. In order to use such accurate models, software is needed
that can efficiently handle chemistry in practical simulations. This
collaborative project aims to develop such tools, employing the computational
power of modern parallelized central processing units (CPUs) and graphics
processing units (GPUs). In addition to helping designers create clean and
efficient engine technology, the advances made in this project are widely
applicable to other computational modeling problems including astrophysics,
nuclear reactions, atmospheric chemistry, biochemical networks, and even cardiac
electrophysiology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of the proposed effort is
to develop software elements specifically targeted at co-processing on GPUs,
CPUs, and other many-core accelerator devices to reduce the computational cost
of using detailed chemistry and enable high-fidelity yet affordable reactive-
flow simulations. This will be achieved by (1) developing and comparing chemical
kinetics integration algorithms for parallel operation on CPUs and
GPUs/accelerators, (2) developing a method for detecting local stiffness due to
chemical kinetics and adaptively selecting the most efficient solver based on
available hardware, (3) implementing a computational cell clustering strategy to
group similar spatial locations, (4) demonstrating the improved performance
offered by these software elements using commercial and open-source
computational fluid dynamics codes for modeling reactive flows, and (5)
designing a portable and sustainable software library based on the above
software elements, including building a community of users. The result of this
program will be an open source software library that significantly decreases the
cost of using detailed, accurate chemistry in realistic combustion simulations;
the success of the program will be determined based on achieving order-of-
magnitude performance improvement or better.