* 1534793
* SBIR Phase II:  Innovative Germanium-based Short Wavelength Infrared Image Sensors
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2019
* Jae Hyung Lee, Stratio, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 07/31/2019
* USD 1,409,999.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is to allow a greater number of organizations,
businesses, and individuals to access shortwave infrared (SWIR) imaging
technology. Modern SWIR technology has existed for more than 40 years, but its
expense has limited its use to the military and large corporations; this project
is grounded in the belief that when everyone has access to SWIR technology, the
benefits to society are exponential. SWIR image sensors have potential
applications in food safety analysis (e.g., identifying harmful adulterated
foods and revealing sub-surface flaws in produce), manufacturing (e.g.,
sorting), security (e.g., night vision), medical sensing (e.g., vein mapping and
blood oxygenation monitoring), and the automotive field (e.g., night/inclement
weather vision systems and for self-driving vehicles). A low-cost sensor will
open the SWIR imaging market to players in these fields who have so far been
shut out due to price. In addition, a low-cost, high-quality sensor will also
make SWIR imaging directly available to the general public for the first time
ever in the form of a SWIR camera smartphone add-on, establishing a new market
for SWIR imaging. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research
(SBIR) Phase II project will produce low-cost germanium (Ge)-based shortwave
infrared (SWIR) image sensors with features superior to those of currently
available SWIR sensors. The research objective is to resolve issues of
resolution, power usage, size, and sensitivity that limit advancement in the
SWIR imaging field. This project will address these problems by utilizing a
unique Ge-based SWIR sensor structure. In addition, a monolithic method of
integrating the image sensor material onto the Si readout integrated circuit
will be pursued. This will enable precise alignment of the readout integrated
circuit and the imaging device, which will lead to smaller pixel size and better
resolution. Finally, issues of power use and sensitivity will be addressed
through an innovative structure called Gate-controlled Charge Modulate Device.
Research will focus on refining and improving the fabrication processes
necessary to reliably produce low-cost, high-quality Ge-based SWIR image
sensors.