* 1534957
* CCF: Small: Online Learning and Exploitation of the Radio Frequency Spectrum with Sub-Nyquist Sampling
* CSE,CCF
* 12/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Anna Scaglione, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 07/31/2018
* USD 404,966.00

This project will close technical gaps to enable cognitive radio receivers to
explore the radio frequency spectrum online, using the most advanced form of
Analog to Digital conversion, referred to as Finite Rate of Innovation (FRI)
sampling coupled with the most advanced learning techniques. We plan to use the
well-established framework of the multi-armed bandit (MAB) problem, which models
the situation of a cognitive radio agent that simultaneously attempts to acquire
new knowledge and to optimize its decisions based on what it has previously
learned. Our main contribution lies in combining this framework with this novel
Analog to Digital receiver front-end, sampling rate below the so called Nyquist
limit, adaptively tuning parameters in the sampling structure to sense spectrum
opportunities over a much wider range of frequencies than was previously
considered possible, and specifically further below what is attainable
myopically, without adaptation.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The outcome of our study
is a cohesive system model for a cognitive sensors, endowed with a decision
engine that can optimize not only what to sample but also how to sample analog
signals, leveraging on its expected success in finding spectrum holes. The
project will explore the complexity of the overall architecture and, ultimately,
evaluate the potential benefits of a cognitive MAB-FRI receiver. By moving
learning algorithms a step closer to manage directly the data-acquisition
interface to the physical world, the research as broad implications in a variety
of related sensing problems. The project will also include activities to engage
students in classrooms presenting the basic mathematical tools used in this
research and minorities in research projects that contribute to advance the
broad field of adaptive systems.