* 1534471
* Statistical Extensions and New Applications of Cultural Consensus Theory
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Ramesh Srinivasan, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 08/31/2019
* USD 259,999.00

This research project will expand the computational, statistical, and
methodological aspects of Cultural Consensus Theory (CCT) to handle a variety of
new situations. Knowledge, preferences, and beliefs shared by a group of
individuals can provide valuable information to interested parties in a variety
of settings. Examples include eyewitness reports of a traumatic event,
intelligence reports about the relationships between members of a covert
network, grades assigned to student essays by a group of teachers, and shared
folk medical beliefs in a particular cultural group. Cultural Consensus Theory
(CCT) is a formal, statistical way to analyze responses to questions regarding
shared knowledge, to determine if there is evidence for an underlying consensus,
and if so, to pool the responses to uncover the shared knowledge within the
group. This project will expand CCT to cover examples such as the ones above
where there is no available ground truth to determine the answers to the
questions that reflect the group consensus apart from the individuals'
responses. Estimating consensus knowledge is crucial for science and for
addressing important national problems. For example, properly pooled reports
from eyewitnesses can assist in police investigations. Proper pooling of
intelligence information about a covert network can assist in discovering its
nature. Developing better ways to pool the responses of graders can improve the
assessment of student ability, and uncovering shared medical beliefs can lead to
public health policy that brings beliefs and scientific medical knowledge into
proper alignment. Freely available software will be developed for the new models
along with user guides.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project will increase
of the scope of CCT by developing new response models, discovering their
properties, and augmenting their statistical inference. CCT models will be
developed for a number of different cases: paired-comparisons (where individuals
indicate their preferences among pairs of options); networks (where individuals
indicate which nodes in the network are connected); and similarity, distance,
and triad questionnaires (where, for example, individuals indicate how close or
how similar two items are in semantic memory). The new models will be evaluated
with statistically generated data and real experimental data.