* 1534054
* PFI:BIC A Smart Service System (ESPnet) for Enhanced Monitoring and Management of Toxic Algal Blooms
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2021
* James Birch, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 09/30/2021
* USD 1,005,653.00

This Partnerships for Innovation: Building Innovation Capacity (PFI:BIC) project
addresses a significant and growing societal problem: toxic or harmful algal
blooms (HABs), commonly called "red tides". Every year, millions of dollars are
lost due to red tides and HABs throughout the US and the world. Losses can be
direct, such as human illnesses and deaths from the consumption of contaminated
food or the mortality of fish and shellfish resources, or indirect, such as the
avoidance of all seafood products during red tides, even products that are safe.
Management of areas threatened by HAB toxins currently involves monitoring
programs that rely on weekly flesh-testing of shellfish collected from many
locations along a coast. These programs are expensive, slow, providing
protection through conservative harvesting closure policies that have not
changed for decades. Red tide management can be greatly improved through the use
of technological advances such as the Environmental Sample Processor (ESP), a
submersible, self-contained "laboratory-in-a-can" that collects water samples
and identifies molecules or genes that indicate the presence of hazardous
species of algae. ESPs operate autonomously for months and transmit data,
including environmental conditions, to shore. The goal of this project is to
develop and demonstrate ESPnet, a system that will utilize these novel
biosensors to provide environmental awareness and decision support capabilities
for resource managers charged with protecting public health and the viability of
fisheries industries and tourism from toxic HABs. This system is
transformational, as it applies a new sensor technology to a major resource
management problem that is currently addressed through monitoring programs that
are expensive, slow, and outdated. No other service system of this type
currently exists for managing HABs, microbial pathogens, or other water-borne
diseases or problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ESPnet will be based on a network of
ESPs that will supply real-time, high-frequency HAB surveillance information
through a web portal complete with automated data analysis and visualization
tools, allowing managers to view the coastal environment with unprecedented
detail so they can act decisively and effectively. The three-year project will
include field deployments of multiple ESPs at key locations along the Gulf of
Maine (GOM) coast. The project team will work with their industry partner,
McLane Research Laboratories, to modify ESP hardware and software to reduce
power consumption and extend deployments to fully sample the HAB season in the
GOM. Meeting the overall goal of this project requires a development effort to
fully automate ESP data analysis and to merge that with geospatially rendered
environmental measurements; this system must be tailored to non-experts and
available via a user-friendly data portal. Human factors will be addressed
through identification of user groups and characterization of receptivities to
the new system, optimization of the manner in which system information is
supplied to users, characterization of feedback among user groups, and
estimation of economic costs and benefits from the ESPnet technology.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses fundamental issues underlying
management of the most widespread of all HAB poisoning syndromes--paralytic
shellfish poisoning or PSP. Project activities thus have important societal
benefits. The ESPnet concept can be applied to PSP problems elsewhere in the
U.S., as well as to other HAB poisoning syndromes, and to a host of non-HAB
problems that affect water quality, such as viruses and microbial pathogens.
This project therefore satisfies the criterion "fostering connections between
discoveries and their use in the service of society". This project has extensive
undergraduate and graduate training, as multiple students and interns will be
involved. Project results will be broadly disseminated through scientific
papers, workshop and conference presentations, and discussions with the media.
This project thus meets NSF's Broader Impact Criterion II through "advancing
discovery in understanding while promoting teaching, training, and
learning".&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Primary partners include Lead institution: Woods
Hole Oceanographic Institution, Biology Department and Marine Policy Center
(non-profit research and educational institution); Industrial partner: McLane
Research Laboratories (Falmouth, MA; small minority-owned business); Academic
partner: Monterey Bay Aquarium Research Institute (Moss Landing, CA; non-
profit). Broader Context Partners include Northeast Regional Association for
Coastal Ocean Observing Systems (NERACOOS; Portsmouth, NH; regional
association); Maine Department of Marine Resources (W. Boothbay Harbor, ME;
state agency); New Hampshire Department of Environmental Services (Concord, NH;
state agency); Massachusetts Division of Marine Fisheries (New Bedford, MA;
state agency).