* 1534568
* Correspondence Mechanisms in Visual Cognition
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2020
* Jonathan Flombaum, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Hout
* 07/31/2020
* USD 286,782.00

Visual information is initially received by the eyes; however, the experience of
vision itself is the result of complex computations carried out deep within the
brain. Though many aspects of human vision are well-understood, the mechanisms
by which the visual system maps recent memory (what happened a moment ago) onto
incoming visual signals (what is happening now) remain a critical question for
cognitive science. As events unfold in real time, there needs to be a mechanism
for continually linking the current visual information with what just happened.
For example, tracking a moving object requires mapping very recent visual memory
signals onto the visual signals currently entering from the retina and tying
this information together. The same holds true when trying to detect changes in
a scene, or when trying to remember the positions of groups of objects, or even
when trying to link landmarks on a map to landmarks in real space. This research
project aims to characterize the correspondence mechanisms that enable this
mapping between the recent and the current. Understanding how the human visual
system accomplishes correspondence mappings is critical for understanding
complex visual activities and the development of specialized visual skills such
those involved in driving, radar control, video analysis, satallite imagery
analysis, and baggage screening. Understanding correspondence mechanisms could
also inform the design of artificial vision systems.

The research achieves its goals by combining eye tracking methodology and
probabilistic models derived from computer vision algorithms, along with
behavioral tasks that engage motion tracking, spatial working memory, and visual
working memory. Eye tracking is a crucial component of the project because, in
humans, the quality of received visual signals depends heavily on a source's
distance from an observer's fixation (eccentricity). The research project
therefore begins with experiments that compare observers' performance as a
function of their fixations as well as simulations by computational models that
adopt those empirically obtained fixations. Subsequent experiments then
investigate methods for facilitating and training fixation to improve observer
performance. A major implication of the research is that fixation selection
places tremendous constraints on the accuracy of probabilistic correspondence
algorithms, and as a result, on the ability to effectively obtain, store, and
retrieve visual information.