* 1534126
* PFI:BIC - Pathtracker: A smartphone-based system for mobile infectious disease detection and epidemiology
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Rashid Bashir, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 08/31/2020
* USD 1,005,692.00

This Partnerships for Innovation: Building Innovation Capacity (PFI:BIC) project
will develop a mobile sensor technology for performing detection and
identification of viral and bacterial pathogens. By means of a smartphone-based
detection instrument, the results are shared with a cloud-based data management
service that will enable physicians to rapidly visualize the geographical and
temporal spread of infectious disease. When deployed by a community of medical
users (such as veterinarians or point-of-care clinicians), the PathTracker
system will enable rapid determination and reporting of instances of infectious
disease that can inform treatment and quarantine responses that are currently
not possible with tests performed at central laboratory facilities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR) and Loop-Mediated
Isothermal Amplification (LAMP) currently represent the most sensitive and
specific approaches for identification of viral or bacterial pathogens, with
intense research focus directed towards miniaturization, acceleration, and
automation of the protocol for amplifying disease-specific DNA sequences to
easily-measured concentration. The plan is to apply the results of previously
NSF-funded advances in photonic crystal enhanced fluorescence (PCEF) and
smartphone fluorescence spectroscopy to implement PCR or LAMP assays within sub-
Âµl liquid volumes for reduction in the assay amplification time to register a
measurable fluorescent signal. Importantly, the detection approach enables
&gt;10x multiplexing of PCR (or LAMP) reactions within a chip that can be
"swiped" through a custom handheld detection instrument that interfaces with the
back-facing camera of a conventional smartphone in a manner that is similar to
reading a credit card. A mobile device software application will guide the user
through the assay process, interpret the results of the detection (including
correlation of assay measurements with on-chip experimental controls), and
communicate results to a cloud-based data management system along with other
relevant information provided by the user. Importantly, the app will enable the
user to view the results of tests performed by other users, with a mobile device
interface that enables simple visualization of the locations, times, and
circumstances surrounding positive/negative tests. The system will enable users
to request customizable alerts when positive tests occur within the network of
users, and to highlight confirmed positive cases when conventional laboratory
tests can confirm results of positive field tests. The app will track outcomes
and report statistics on system performance, including Receiver Operating
Characteristic of assays. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While the system will initially
be deployed in the context of equine infectious disease representing an
opportunity to mitigate enormous economic losses associated with infectious
disease in the horse industry, the developed technology will be equally
applicable to humans, food animals, and companion animals. Considering the
economic and health impact of ebola, HIV, tuberculosis, and malaria, when
PathTracker is fully deployed within developing nations, the potential of the
system to save lives by rapid delivery effective treatment, quarantine of
infectious patients, and rapid identification/reporting of new cases is
enormous. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At the inception of the project, the primary
partners are the lead institution: University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
(Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Department of
Bioengineering, and National Center for Supercomputing Applications); University
of Washington at Seattle (academic institution); Perkin Elmer, Diagnostics
R&amp;D Division, (Waltham, MA) (Large business); Motorola Mobility (Chicago,
IL) (Large business);and Dr. David Nash, D.VM.(Lexington, KY) (Individual
practitioner veterinarian).