* 1534264
* DMREF:  Accelerating the Design and Synthesis of Multicomponent, Multiphase Metallic Single Crystals
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2019
* Anton Van der Ven, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* John Schlueter
* 09/30/2019
* USD 1,650,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Unprecedented advances in computational
capabilities, advanced characterization techniques and the ability to generate
and harness large-scale data enable new pathways for the design and synthesis of
a broad array of advanced materials systems. However, critical gaps exist in the
infrastructure for multiphase, multicomponent metallic materials, where the
design space is extraordinarily large and synthesis processes are complex and
expensive. A multidisciplinary UCSB team will develop an integrated framework
for design of multicomponent, multiphase single crystal alloys. Novel
complementary computational and experimental tools developed will be integrated
with existing tools to address fundamental barriers that challenge the design
and synthesis of a new class of L12-strengthened cobalt-base alloys. The
emerging class of alloys promises to positively impact the temperature
capability and efficiency of a broad array of high temperature propulsion and
energy systems. The program will develop new capabilities that substantially
enhance the iterative feedback process between design, characterization and
synthesis, rapidly expanding the knowledge base for this new class of
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;New
coordinated experimental and computational tools will be developed and deployed
for discovery of new Co-base single crystal compositions. The technical
developments that will enable this approach include: 1) A self-consistent
thermodynamic framework for alloy design that rigorously couples first
principles calculations, multicomponent thermodynamics, internal stresses and
diffusion in these solid systems. 2) New parallelized, sharp interface
computational methods that can predict the behavior of multicomponent alloys in
a single crystal growth environment. 3) New approaches for rapid 3D
characterization of the material structure and parallel computational tools that
predict structure evolution in 3D. 4) Tools for prediction of basic substrate
mechanical properties and rapid characterization of mechanical properties. The
experimental and computational tools developed in this program will be broadly
applicable to the development of multicomponent metallic alloys in other
domains. Additionally, computational tools, thermodynamic, kinetic data and 3-D
data will be transferred to industry and broadly shared through a variety of
data and software hubs.