* 1534479
* SES RUI: Assessing the Effect of Systems Thinking on Decision Making
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2019
* John Petersen, Oberlin College
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 06/30/2019
* USD 329,325.00

The greatest challenges humans currently face - climate change, poverty,
epidemics, financial meltdowns - are the result of humans acting within
enormously complex systems without the ability to fully understanding how these
systems work. Many have argued that people will make better decisions under
these circumstances if they can engage in systems thinking. Systems thinking is
a way of conceptualizing reality and making decisions that emphasizes enhanced
understanding of relationships and interdependencies. This research identifies
simple and scalable methods of increasing systems thinking and enhancing
everyday decision making that do not require extensive training or cognitive
resources. In particular, this research examines whether metaphors and
conceptual models that encourage people to think about the broader system can
shift the way people think about a problem, and improve their ability to
identify effective solutions. For example, do diagrams and maps that help people
to situate themselves and visualize their relationships to ecological, social or
economic systems help them make choices that benefit the community around them?
Do some metaphors (describing a national park as the "backbone" of the park
system, as opposed to a "pearl") help people see the relationships between that
park and the larger ecological system? The most important facet of this research
from a practical point of view is the possibility that relatively simple
metaphors and conceptual models have the potential to improve decision making
among large groups of people every day.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In eight studies,
this research project identifies metaphors and conceptual models that promote
systems thinking, and test the contention that systems thinking improves
decision making. Two experiments identify systemic metaphors and test their
psychological effects, as well as their effects on risk assessment and decision
making. Two experiments test whether valuing the system in question is a
prerequisite for systems thinking to result in better decision making. Four
field studies will test the impact of systemic metaphors on conservation
behavior (electricity use) and political action (involvement in social media-
based campaigns orchestrated by the non-profit communications firm Resource
Media). These studies are important because none of the existing work on systems
thinking is grounded in psychological processes, nor has it fully evaluated the
effects of systems thinking on decision making and behavior. The research
program proposed here will use psychological theory, empirical measurement, and
experimental techniques to address these large gaps in knowledge.