* 1534686
* DMREF: SusChEM: Collaborative Research:  Rapid Design of Earth Abundant Inorganic Materials for Future PVs
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2020
* Yanfa Yan, University of Toledo
* Standard Grant
* John Schlueter
* 09/30/2020
* USD 399,876.00

DMREF: SusChEM: Rapid Design of Earth Abundant Inorganic Materials for Future
PVs

Non-technical Description: Electricity is on of the fastest growing sectors in
the U.S. and the worldwide demand for electricity is also on a rapid rise. For
many countries, their economic growth is dependent on finding low-cost and
readily available supply of electricity. Identification of new earth-abundant
semiconductors along with their optoelectronic properties and low-cost
processing technology in this project will influence how future thin-film
photovoltaics (PV) are fabricated. The successful research outcome of the
project will contrbute toward widespread use of PV as an abundant source of
electricity for a sustainable energy economy in the U.S. as well as the rest of
the world. The integrative nature of the research and education will train and
co-mentor graduate and undergraduate students in cross-disciplinary skills that
are essential for developing innovative solutions as they join the workplace and
contribute to the U.S. leadership in the burgeoning field of energy.

Technical Description: This project will develop the fundamental scientific
knowledge that will lead to the identification and large-scale use of new
semiconducting materials composed of earth-abundant elements for photovoltaics
(PV). The central aspect of the project is a close coupling among all three of
its research thrusts to: (1) conduct rapid search and rational design of
promising earth-abundant materials through computational screening using first
principles calculations; (2) synthesize promising materials by solution phase
providing exquisite control through chemistry and to measure their material and
optoelectronic properties; and (3) fabricate functioning solar cells and develop
scientific relationship between the properties estimated from the first
principles and device performance contributing toward 'inverse designs' of
material for electronic applications. An ongoing feedback among computational
estimates and experimentally measured material and electronic properties will
allow refinement of the methods in all three research thrusts leading to rapid
screening of large number of materials from a vast search space. Project efforts
will identify the most promising earth-abundant materials for high efficiency
solar cells.