* 1534413
* On Area Specific Uncertainty Measures in Small Area Estimation
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2019
* Parthasarathi Lahiri, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 09/30/2019
* USD 219,999.00

This research project will investigate new ways to evaluate small area
estimates. There is a growing demand for statistics related to small geographic
areas. These small area estimates are used by policymakers to assess the well-
being of a nation, develop public policies, and allocate funds in various
government programs. Users of these estimates generally are interested in
understanding the uncertainty that is relevant to their specific small area as
opposed to average uncertainty measures. However, most of the uncertainty
measures proposed in the literature for small area estimates are not area
specific in the study variable. This project will develop new uncertainty
measures and examine their effectiveness in measuring area specific uncertainty
in the study variable. A focus of the project will be on the mentoring of
students and early-career researchers. The new research results will be
incorporated into both a graduate course and a short course on small area
estimation. Software will be developed to implement the new techniques and will
be made publicly available.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project will
examine the versatility of the adjusted maximum likelihood method, already found
useful in certain small area problems, in obtaining reliable uncertainty
measures of the estimates that are small area specific in the study variable.
The investigator will conduct a design-based simulation and real data analysis
in order to understand the robust properties of the proposed uncertainty
measures. Data for evaluating the new methodology will be drawn from census and
household survey data. The project is supported by the Methodology, Measurement,
and Statistics Program and a consortium of federal statistical agencies as part
of a joint activity to support research on survey and statistical methodology.