* 1534188
* Standard Grant: New Approaches to Interpreting the development of science at the Marine Biological Laboratory
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2018
* Jane Maienschein, Marine Biological Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 07/31/2018
* USD 184,671.00

General Audience Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will study the
history of biological research at the Marine Biological Laboratory (MBL) in
Woods Hole, Massachusetts. The goal of the project is to analyze and interpret
how biological science has evolved at MBL. The PI and a team of graduate
students will spend nine weeks in each of two summers to carry out research on
site at MBL, working with scientists serving as volunteer consultants to
document and interpret its history. The group has identified four focal areas:
embryology, cell biology, neurobiology, and ecosystems/biodiversity. These areas
were chosen for several reasons: they are of currently particular strengths at
the MBL, they have been identified for further development, and they have
particularly rich historical materials available for study. The primary goal is
to analyze those materials in the context of other research sources to produce
traditional scholarly narratives as well as innovative digital exhibits that
interpret the history of biology at MBL. Using an existing repository and
developing digital exhibits that bring together and link all the existing
information on each defined topic in one place, the project will make research
materials and interpretative essays accessible to all users. In addition, the
project will train graduate students in ways to bring together traditional
historical research with innovative digital and computational
methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The team
will begin with these driving questions: What biological research has been done
at MBL? What research has been done because of MBL? How has that research
changed over time, and for what reasons? And how has that research helped shape
the history of biology more generally? During two summers working intensely at
MBL, the team will address these questions first by collecting, collating, and
curating research materials; and then by interpreting and analyzing these
materials. The goal is not to produce a standard or complete institutional
history but rather to focus on uniquely MBL contributions, looking especially at
scientific practices and the way MBL has worked to break down traditional
boundaries and transcend disciplines, institutions, and ranks. The research
materials as well as the research products will be made available through open
access, open source and Creative Commons licensing so that they are sustainable
and easily accessible for all. The project builds on strong existing digital and
computational infrastructure that provides functionality and sustainability and
is part of a large scale digital and computational research system and
repository developed with other funding from NSF, Arizona State University, and
other sources.