* 1534835
* Removing Barriers to Success in Mathematics: An Integrative Expectancy-Value Intervention
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Christopher Hulleman, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Jolene Jesse
* 08/31/2019
* USD 1,499,833.00

The EHR Core Research (ECR) program emphasizes fundamental STEM education
research that generates foundational knowledge in the field. Investments are
made in critical areas that are essential, broad and enduring: STEM learning and
STEM learning environments, broadening participation in STEM, and STEM workforce
development. This study extends prior theoretical and empirical work on STEM
learning and STEM learning environments into community college classrooms in
developmental mathematics. Developmental math courses are a major academic
gatekeeper for adequately preparing students for the work force, yet many
students in community colleges fail to reach college-ready math proficiency even
with remediation through developmental curricula. To address this need, this
study will examine the impact of a brief but promising psychological
intervention designed to enhance student motivation and course learning outcomes
in developmental math. The investigators hypothesize that this intervention will
lead to increased perceptions of interest and performance in mathematics, which
in turn will, in the short term, result in improved performance (increased
course pass rates) and persistence (decreased dropout rates) of students
enrolled in the community college developmental math courses that are the focus
of this study. Ultimately, the investigators anticipate the foundational
evidence generated by this study will provide practitioners with the information
necessary to optimize interventions based on individual differences and
contextual factors (practical import), and have the potential to contribute to
the development of theories about for whom and why interventions work
(theoretical important).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, this study is
designed to provide evidence of the efficacy and effectiveness of an expectancy
value intervention, combining growth mindset and utility value components.
Researchers at the University of Virginia and Valencia Community College
(located in Orange and Osceola Counties, Florida) will collaborate on a series
of trials of one of three treatment conditions (growth mindset only, utility
value only, combined growth mindset and utility value) and a 'business as usual'
control condition. Intervention trials will be contained within a semester, with
follow-ups coming from administrative data sets. At the end of the three-year
intervention cycle nine separate cohorts of students (n=5,600) will have
participated in the study, nested within class sections (n=280), nested within
teachers (n=40) at Valencia Community College. Of particular interest are the
individual- and contextual- (classroom and teacher) level factors which might
moderate or mediate the effects of the expectancy-value intervention.
Accordingly, study participants will be randomly assigned to treatment
conditions at the classroom level, enabling the investigators to explore whether
the intervention is more effective in some classrooms and/or with some teachers
than others. Primary data to explore mediating and moderating factors will be
collected via administration of a self-report student motivation questionnaire,
a teacher questionnaire, and to-be-developed instruments to survey students'
perceptions of the classroom learning context and teachers' beliefs about
learning and teaching practices in mathematics. Student demographic and
performance data will be obtained from administrative records; additionally,
instructors will be asked to provide classroom-level student performance data.
Complementary qualitative data will be collected from students and teachers via
separate student and teacher focus groups, individual student interviews, and
think-aloud protocols elaborating on the student motivation questionnaire.
Analyses of these data may have potentially important implications regarding the
benefits of explicit consideration of contexts when developing theories of
psychological interventions in education. Additionally, the study is designed to
enable investigators to replicate the intervention across multiple cohorts
(testing for consistency), and to follow students longitudinally (exploring
potential intervention effects on more distal outcomes, e.g., persistence
towards degree completion). The investigators hypothesize the expectancy-value
intervention will be both resource-efficient and practically useful - capable of
being delivered to students as online learning modules amenable to widespread
dissemination across large sets of classrooms and institutions. Following
completion of the study, (de-identified) study data will be made available to
other researchers.