* 1534114
* PFI:BIC - A Cost-effective Accurate and Resilient Indoor Positioning System
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Burcu Akinci, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 08/31/2019
* USD 1,004,843.00

This Partnerships for Innovation: Building Innovation Capacity project aims at
developing a cost effective, accurate, resilient and smart indoor localization
service to be used in built environments. Positioning systems have
revolutionized how we interact with the world around us. Outdoor mobile devices
make use of technologies like Global Positioning System (GPS) to deliver a wide
variety of location-based services. Similarly, indoor positioning systems will
enable delivery of new services that provide tremendous social and commercial
value to humans in residential and commercial built environments. Indoor
location services can be used by enterprises to track and manage assets.
Building management systems can use indoor location information to enable
services for building managers and occupants and first responders, such as
effective emergency response, indoor navigation, and perimeter protection.
Furthermore, indoor location services will enable implementation of important
services such as coordination of people in a disaster scenario (e.g., natural or
man-made (public shootings) disasters and navigation services for the blind).
Unfortunately, satellite-based approaches, such as GPS, do not work indoors due
to weak satellite signals that do not penetrate through building facades. Unlike
existing methods, the proposed smart service will achieve high accuracy and
robustness with respect to disruptions, while maintaining low installation and
maintenance costs. In addition, users will be able to use their mobile
device(s), (e.g., smartphone, tablets, smart watches), without the need to
carry/wear additional equipment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will develop
and combine ultrasound, visible light and Wireless Local Area Network
(WLAN)-based positioning techniques with Radio Frequency (RF)-based, magnetic
signatures, human ambulation models and building information models (BIMs) for
localization, tracking and visualization. The combined use of several
independent positioning techniquse not only will dramatically increase the
accuracy of positioning over any single technique, but it will add the necessary
redundancy to withstand disruption of all but one positioning service, with
provably bounded loss of performance. Even in the case of unavailability of all
positioning techniques, ambulation models, together with BIM, will be able to
provide indoor positioning at a coarser level of granularity. In turn,
redundancy can be used to perform maintenance and periodic system calibration on
any subsystem without service interruption. The impressive feature of the
proposed methodology is that all these properties can be achieved at low
installation and maintenance costs, as the system can piggyback on a building's
existing audio, lighting, and RF communication capabilities. One unique property
of the proposed positioning algorithm will be its modularity and extensibility.
Information coming from different sensors will be incorporated seamlessly,
allowing the algorithm to work under intermittent failure of one of its
subcomponents. The inclusion of ambulation models, together with accelerometer,
gyroscope and compass data available on the majority of today's smartphones,
will allow the achievement of fine-grain tracking, which will provide smooth
trajectories in place of sequence of locations. In the proposed scheme, Multi-
sensor localization and BIM play a synergetic role. BIM will contribute to
decreasing installation and maintenance costs, by providing precise positioning
of the sources of ranging (e.g., light, ultrasound, Wi-Fi antennas) and accurate
topological information to develop high fidelity ranging models. Additionally,
the semantic information provided by BIM will help with detecting infeasible
trajectories. On the other hand, Simultaneous Localization and Mapping
(SLAM)-based techniques can help refine BIMs and keep them updated. Dynamic
information can enhance BIMs by providing useful information to building
managers about traffic patterns and occupancy. Importantly, the design of the
smart service needs to be human-centered and to take into account each of the
stakeholders, i.e., owner and facilities management team, the service
developers, the users of the smart service application program interface (API),
who will develop value-added services customized for a particular facility or
more generally for many facilities, and, of course, the end-users, the occupants
and visitors of the facility, who will use the smart services themselves. To
understand the needs and wants of such distinct groups of stakeholders, the
project will directly involve them by conducting a series of focus groups.
Participatory design is an established technique where a design team works
directly with stakeholders to design an artifact or service. Stakeholders will
also be engaged in the formal testing of the software service, from installation
to maintenance, to application design and to application usage.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At the inception of the project, partners include the lead
institution: Carnegie Mellon University, (Departments of Electrical and Computer
Engineering, Civil and Environmental Engineering, and the Human-Computer
Interaction Institute) Pittsburgh, PA, with primary partners: Bosch RTC
Pittsburgh (Pittsburgh, PA, large business) and Sports and Exhibition Authority
(Pittsburgh, PA, large business).