* 1534664
* SBIR Phase II:  A New Molten-Oxide Electrochemical Process for Producing Primary Iron and Ferrochromium
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2015,02/28/2019
* Robert Hyers, Boston Electrometallurgical Inc
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 02/28/2019
* USD 596,978.00

The broader impact / commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research Phase II project is to advance the state of knowledge and industrial
practice toward cleaner, cheaper, greener steel and stainless steel. The project
will focus on the production of iron, part of a $1.1 trillion annual market
worldwide, and ferrochromium, a $2.2 billion worldwide annual market. Molten
oxide electrolysis with an inert anode has been demonstrated at the laboratory
scale to produce low-carbon iron and ferroalloys, which are the basis of many
high-performance steels. The current low-carbon metals sell at a premium.
Published cost models show that both the capital and operating cost of MOE will
be lower than competing technologies already in the marketplace. MOE can also
reduce the environmental impact of producing these metals, even with today's
electricity, and can produce even greater improvements with renewable energy. In
summary, MOE will produce primary metals of higher quality at a lower cost and
with lower environmental impact than current methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
objective of this Phase II research project is to develop a cheaper, more energy
efficient route to production of important metals including iron and
ferrochromium. Economical separation of these metals from their ores by molten
oxide electrolysis (MOE) is enabled by the recent invention of an inert anode
material. The essential next step in understanding the behavior of the new inert
anode in MOE is longer-duration testing than was possible in the laboratory
cell. This test can only be achieved at a larger scale. The models and testing
on surrogate systems in Phase I have shown the way to provide this long-duration
testing in Phase II. These tests will point the way toward industrial-scale
production of iron and ferrochromium by MOE.