* 1534941
* SI2-SSE: Enhanced Software Tools for Biomolecular Free Energy Calculations
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Christopher Roland, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 08/31/2019
* USD 500,000.00

The central role of atomistic simulation-based free energy calculations for
basic chemical and biological research is now firmly established. The free
energy is the central quantity that guides the behavior of a system at, or near,
equilibrium, determining such characteristics as molecular conformations,
molecular binding, chemical reactions, etc. Unfortunately, accurate and reliable
free energies are very difficult to calculate, particularly for many
biomolecular systems characterized by rugged free energy landscapes. Hence,
special techniques are required for calculating such free energy landscapes.
Having previously developed the so-called Adaptively Biased Molecular Dynamics
method, enhanced with other methods (either developed or adapted by our group)
for phase space sampling, this project will further develop the capabilities of
this software thereby enlarging the kinds of simulation problems that can be
tackled. The software will be released to the public as open source software and
as parts of the AMBER software package. In terms of scientific applications,
this project also will investigate the conformation and properties of proteins
with Intrinsically Disordered Regions, and the binding of DNA with a special
class of transcription factors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The single most important
quantity for describing biomolecular and chemical systems in equilibrium is the
free energy. However, calculating free energies is notoriously difficult and
computationally expensive. This problem is particularly pressing for many
biomolecular systems, which are characterized by complicated free energy
landscapes that are hard to explore with regular molecular dynamics simulations.
The PIs previously developed the Adaptively Biased Molecular Dynamics method
(ABMD) with Multiple Walkers, and Replica Exchange Molecular Dynamics (REMD)
extensions. ABMD is an umbrella sampling method with a time-dependent biasing
potential for calculating free energy landscapes and conformational sampling.
The software suite, along with Steered Molecular Dynamics (SMD) extensions, has
been released to the public as part of the AMBER software package. This project
will take this set of software tools to the next level by developing the
capability to handle quaternion-based collective variables, the so-called
Milestoning technique, and self-directed, interacting multiple walkers.
Envisioned applications relate to proteins with Intrinsically Disordered Regions
(IDRs) and mechanisms of DNA binding by basic Helix-Loop-Helix (bHLH) domains in
transcription factors.