* 1534824
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The biogeography and behavioral ecology of Pliocene hominins: A macroecological perspective
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2015,08/31/2017
* Amelia Villasenor, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 08/31/2017
* USD 9,150.00

Recent discoveries of early human ancestors (hominins) highlight the importance
of understanding how climate shaped early hominin evolution and behavior. This
project will study the ways in which hominin distributions and behavior were
shaped by local habitats between 3.2 and 3.6 million years ago in eastern
Africa. Data about modern plant and animal diversity will be integrated with
paleoecological data for the ancient environment of the same area. The
innovative combination of data sources will help to reconstruct ancient ecology
at finer-grained time intervals. Broader impacts of the project include graduate
training, public science outreach through museums and curriculum development,
and support of underrepresented minority students in the STEM sciences.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, current vegetation (isotopes from soil
carbonates) and fossil mammal databases will be standardized to make analytical
connections between ancient habitats and their associated mammal communities and
to gain insight into variation of the hominin ecological niche. The
investigators will combine theory from multiple disciplines, such as landscape
archaeology, macroecology, and taphonomy, and conduct analytical experiments to
connect hominins to environmental proxies (such as soil isotopes) at an
appropriate temporal and spatial scale. The proposed ecological relationships
are especially important to test in the mid-Pliocene (between 3.6 and 3.2
million years ago), when dietary behavior shifted significantly and innovative
behaviors may have occurred, such as the use of stone tools in the Afar basin.
Data from the project will be curated to promote the integration of future
ecological proxies and data through the use of an open source database that will
be created by the co-PI, using PostgreSQL software. The co-PI collaborates with
the Koobi Fora Field School and the Evolution in Education program at the George
Washington University (GWU) to develop curricula for students from pre-school to
university levels, and is also the co-developer of the Young Empowered
Scientists (YES!) program at GWU to bring underrepresented, minority students
into STEM sciences through mentoring.