* 1534136
* Southeastern Ecology and Evolution Conference (SEEC) Diversity Initiative; University of Georgia, March 13-15, 2015
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2016
* Lisa Donovan, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 03/31/2016
* USD 10,000.00

In order to further scientific discovery, the community of researchers needs
people that think critically, creatively, and innovatively. These qualities are
not restricted by income, race, ethnicity, or physical ability; however, the
national community of researchers still does not represent the nation as a
whole. In many STEM fields, including Ecology and Evolution, people from low
income households, racial minorities, and people with disabilities are not well
represented in leadership positions. This is harmful both to the state of
scientific discovery, and to the ideals of equality and social mobility. When
promising young scientists and researchers leave the workforce or stagnate in
lower positions, the scientific community misses out on potentially great minds
and great discoveries. This program aims to increase the inclusion of
underrepresented groups at the Southeastern Ecology and Evolution Conference by
removing financial barriers to attendance.

We will provide 15 scholarships in order to eliminate the costs of registration,
travel, food, and lodging during the weekend conference. The event will be held
at The University of Georgia on 13-15 March 2015. This small regional conference
is geared towards early career researchers, including undergraduates and young
graduate students. Attending a small regional conference is particularly
important for young researchers in underrepresented groups. Events like this can
increase interest in graduate school and scientific careers, create networking
and community-building opportunities, as well as help build strong presentation
skills.