* 1534650
* SBIR Phase II:  Natural biocides for treating bacterial pathogens in pome fruits and vegetable crops
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2015,02/28/2018
* Nicole Broekema, AmebaGone Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 02/28/2018
* USD 902,590.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project will be the development of a new natural means
of treating diseases of fruit orchards and crops as an alternative to antibiotic
use. Over 90% of the world's antibiotic use in agriculture is primarily to
control fire blight, a disease that kills fruit trees. Fire blight has emerged
as the most devastating disease of apple and pear trees worldwide. Growers apply
streptomycin or oxytetracycline multiple times during bloom and following plant
injuries to prevent the growth of the causative agent of fire blight, Erwinia
amylovora (Ea). Resistant Ea strains have been isolated, and are expected to
impact the human food chain. The proposed technology will replace these
antibiotics with the microscopic predators of bacteria, slime molds, which are
benign to humans, animals, and plants. These bacterial predators represent a new
proprietary biocontrol approach. The proposed project will focus on reducing
orchard carriage of Ea, and the general approach should be extensible to
treating agricultural infections of other species of bacterial pathogens.
Ultimately, this innovation will contribute to increased public health by
providing safer alternatives to existing antibiotics and disinfectants.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II Project
proposes a novel approach to treating fire blight, a pathogenic disease
affecting pome fruits caused by E. amylovora, and tomato canker caused by C.
michiganensis. Both pathogens form biofilms connected to their virulence in
plants. There is currently no treatment although the incidence of reoccurring
infections by E. amylovora and C. michiganensis contribute to millions of
dollars of losses in fruit production. Antibiotics and disinfectants typically
kill only growing cells. This approach consumes growing, dormant, or biofilm-
enmeshed bacteria. Inclusion of biofilms as targets will help to identify a
means to solve some of the most intractable infections known. The research
objectives of this Phase II SBIR proposal are to: 1) Screen Dictyostelid (Dicty)
isolates in vitro for biocontrol capabilities for orchards and decontamination
of plants/equipment, 2) test efficacy of Dicty candidates en planta, and 3)
design methods for spore production and packaging. For commercial applications,
the goal is to use probiotic bacteria to amplify Dicty and produce spores. For
spore preservation and dispersal, the plan is to use methods proven to be
successful and safe for other biocides. Natural biocides products will be
developed for agricultural research and to treat pathogenic outbreaks in fruit
and vegetable crops.