* 1534707
* SBIR Phase II:  Resource-efficient Remote Monitoring and Diagnostics for Cyber-Physical Systems
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2015,02/28/2019
* Vinaitheerthan Sundaram, SensorHound, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 02/28/2019
* USD 909,999.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project derives from the fact that increasing the
reliability and robustness of cyber-physical systems (CPSs) will directly
increase their adoption in real world applications. CPS technology is directly
applicable to a broad range of sectors, including utility grids, smart
buildings, manufacturing, healthcare, transportation, etc. These sectors account
for more than $32.3 trillion in economic activity, with the potential to grow to
$82 trillion by 2025 - about one half of the global economy. CPSs are thus
critical to the national interest in areas such as manufacturing
competitiveness, defense, health care, energy production and usage, and disaster
monitoring and recovery. Due to the increasing reliance on CPSs in the future,
system defects could have drastic consequences. The proposed technology could
significantly improve reliability of CPSs by catching defects before they result
in significant loss, outages, or failures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small
Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project aims to develop an
efficient remote monitoring and diagnostic software system to detect and
diagnose software defects in cyber-physical systems (CPSs). CPSs have the
potential to bring about a revolution in efficiency, robustness, and safety in
application domains such as smart utility grids and smart healthcare. To unleash
their potential, CPSs must themselves be robust. However, despite state-of-the-
art testing, software defects currently do escape into deployed CPSs. Current
state-of-practice monitoring and diagnostic systems cannot improve the situation
as they were not designed with the constraints of CPSs in mind, which include
real-time execution, unreliable links, and resource constrained processors. The
proposed technology is aimed at creating a software system capable of monitoring
embedded nodes in CPSs for anomalies and providing detailed execution
information to quickly diagnose the software defects responsible for any
anomalies. The proposed work extends the company's extensive research in
efficient collection of information for diagnosing software defects. The company
expects to create a monitoring and diagnostic software system for CPSs and
demonstrate its effectiveness on existing software defects in CPSs.