* 1534880
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Constitutions and the Political Economy of Health
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2015,10/31/2016
* Matthew Kavanagh, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* scott barclay
* 10/31/2016
* USD 31,434.00

This project seeks to understand whether and how protecting health as a right in
a nation's constitution improves the health of its citizens. Currently, just
over half of written constitutions in the world include a "right to health" in
seemingly enforceable language. Whether this is beneficial to health outcomes
and health policy, however, is not clear. Prominent ethicists suggest it should
benefit public health policy while many legal experts have voiced skepticism --
yet little empirical evidence is currently available. This project uses a mix of
quantitative analysis and qualitative field research to examine the effects of
institutionalizing health as a constitutional right. If a right to health does
operate to improve health -- expanding the power of civil society, the legal
system, and health-related officials to improve health policy and health
outcomes -- then it could be a powerful tool to improve the wellbeing of
individuals in society. If not, it may problematically distort health policy.
This project seeks to build scientific knowledge through interdisciplinary
research, addressing these unanswered questions for the fields of law, public
health, and political science. While the United States lacks an explicit
constitutional right, health policy is increasingly legalized and, with the
Affordable Care Act, the role of the state in health and of courts as arbiters
is expanding. As such, lessons from this study may provide insights applicable
to a U.S. context. In addition, this research may help national security and aid
agencies implement more effective global health programs by identifying when,
if, and how legal institutions can improve health policymaking. Globally, the
average national constitution is significantly rewritten every 20 years, so
whether a right to health is meaningful, and what factors make it so, are
important pieces of information for constitution drafters and the health
policymakers.

This study sets out to assess, in comparative perspective, the operation and
effect of a constitutional right to health as an institution within the
political economy health. Bringing insights and tools from political economy to
the study of public law can help expand the emerging field of comparative
constitutionalism -- in this case bridging the gap between existing normative
and doctrinal studies of socioeconomic rights and the large field of empirical
research on health and social policy. Adding to scientific knowledge on the
production function of population health is also a goal. This project does so
through mixed-methods "nested analysis" in South Africa, India, and Thailand
that combines a large-N statistical regression with small-N fieldwork-based case
studies. First, the study will construct a global panel dataset with national
health, demographic, economic, and constitutional characteristics spanning 40
years and use multilevel regression analysis to examine the empirical
relationship globally between a right to health and health outcomes. If the
study's hypotheses are correct, there should be observably better health
outcomes in countries with a right to health, controlling for the dominant
economic, demographic, and political explanations for national wellbeing.
Second, the study will gain causal leverage by seeking evidence directly linking
the right to health with pro-health policymaking through field work in South
Africa, India, and Thailand. Within-case analysis of interview and archival data
will allow "process tracing" of recent health and health-related policymaking to
help determine whether the statistical relationship observed in the large-N
analysis is causal. Ultimately, data from this project should provide strong
evidence about whether and how a constitutional right to health affects public
health outcomes -- with implications for health policy, constitution-writing,
and legal reform.