* 1534811
* RUI: STS: Standard Research Grant: Mathematical Explanation in Science
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2021
* Alan Baker, Swarthmore College
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 07/31/2021
* USD 149,164.00

General Audience Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will analyze case
studies of mathematical explanation in evolutionary biology to inform the
philosophical debate about the nature of mathematical explanation in science. It
will take place over three consecutive summers, and will make essential use of
undergraduate researchers in philosophy, mathematics, and biology; specifically,
it will integrate research and education by involving advanced undergraduate
students in the project. Doing so will serve to broaden the scope of
participation in science by exposing students in mathematics and in philosophy
to a collaborative style of research that is often lacking in these disciplines;
it will provide a model for institutional interdisciplinarity, fostering
intellectual and logistical connections between the natural sciences and the
humanities. The results of this project will be widely disseminated through
conference presentations and publication of articles in scholarly journals. One
overriding goal of the project is to demonstrate that close engagement with the
methodology and outputs of scientific practice can yield philosophical insights
that are both interesting in their own right and of direct relevance to working
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
results of the proposed project have the potential to contribute to ongoing
philosophical research into the relation between mathematics and the empirical
sciences. The particular focus on the explanatory role of mathematics in science
is an area of very active current debate in the philosophical literature. The PI
has been a leading contributor to these debates. The goal is to produce research
outputs that are of relevance to biology and to applied mathematics. Both of the
two core examples, periodical cicadas and bee honeycombs, are the subject of
ongoing debate among biologists and mathematicians concerning what causal
mechanisms are involved, the role played by optimization of different
parameters, and what mathematical apparatus, if any, is essentially involved.
Thus the project aims not merely to draw on data from several disciplines but to
provide research outputs that are of genuine cross-disciplinary interest.