* 1534035
* PFI:BIC - Developing Advanced Resilient Microgrid Technology to Improve Disaster Response Capability
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Thomas Ortmeyer, Clarkson University
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 08/31/2019
* USD 1,004,791.00

The Partnership for Innovation: Building Innovation Capacity (PFI:BIC) project,
led by Clarkson University researchers, aims to develop advanced resilient
microgrid technology to improve disaster response capability. Advanced resilient
microgrid technology provides continuous electric service to support critical
services to people displaced during extreme disasters; and provides electric
service to support recovery crews working to restore services. In an emergency,
the microgrid is an electrical "island", idependent of the main power grid and
serves these critical loads through local power generation. This project will
focus on the human-machine operational impacts of the microgrid both during
normal operations as well as during disaster response. The development of "smart
scheduler" technology will enable the microgrid operator and the local disaster
response team to maximize the microgrid's performance during the disaster
recovery. The microgrid must operate successfully disconnected from the grid for
two weeks or more in catastrophic situations where the level of damage is
unanticipated and the microgrid itself has experienced reduced capability.
Human-machine capability will be developed to respond to rapidly changing
community needs with a minimum of human effort.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
will complement ongoing projects to plan and design a resilient underground
microgrid in Potsdam, New York. The Potsdam microgrid features a unique
partnership of generator owners, local government, regulated utility, and
critical load entities. This diverse set of microgrid partners is key to
providing the resilience required of the microgrid. At the same time, designing,
building, and operating the microgrid as a unit with its diverse set of owners
presents a range of challenges. Developing the capability to schedule and
control the microgrid in both normal and emergency events is a critical element
of this project. Equally important is the development of a microgrid design that
provides this service at a minimum cost, by maximizing the benefit of the
microgrid assets during the normal operation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The lead
institution is Clarkson University (Coulter School of Engineering, School of
Business, and School of Arts and Sciences). The primary industrial partner on
the project is National Grid USA (Waltham, MA), the electric service provider
for a large part of New York and New England, including Potsdam, NY. National
Grid would own the underground distribution network that is the backbone of the
microgrid. The Electric Power Research Institute, Knoxville, TN, is the broader
context partner on the project. In Potsdam, NY, Clarkson University, SUNY
Potsdam, the Village of Potsdam, and Canton-Potsdam Hospital are among the
entities that would participate in the microgrid and are potential generation
owners on the microgrid.