* 1534669
* STTR Phase II:  Digital eWriter for The Classroom
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2017
* John Dunlosky, KENT DISPLAYS INC
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 08/31/2017
* USD 732,044.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase II project develops eWriter
devices for classroom use as a sustainable paper replacement technology and an
effective tool for student-teacher interaction. The eWriters provide a paper-
like writing experience and electronically capture, store, and transfer
handwritten text and images. For education, eWriters introduce a sustainable
paper replacement technology at a lower cost than other classroom technologies.
The eWriters enable handwritten student work to be wirelessly uploaded to
teachers and to virtual whiteboards. Positive societal impacts come from
improved teaching methods and student-teacher interactions, particularly for
high quality science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) pedagogy,
where handwritten notes are advantageous. The most immediate societal benefit of
educational eWriters is significant reduction in paper usage, carbon footprints,
and costs for schools. Expanding domestic high tech roll-to-roll production of
eWriters benefits the flexible electronics supply chain and materials
development. The eWriter display technology, developed and manufactured in Ohio,
is exported around the world. This project helps sustain both the U.S. economy
and the environment. Existing eWriter product, distribution, retail channels,
and marketing give a strong platform for commercialization. This project impacts
numerous and far reaching areas in education, environmental improvement,
domestic manufacturing, materials improvements, and process
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project enables digital writing for K-12
and post-secondary classrooms along with a seamless information and
communication system so teachers and students can effectively exchange
handwritten work digitally and reduce paper use. The research objectives include
the development of eWriter technologies (ruggedness, performance, design), the
development of software ecosystems for classrooms (use models, user interface
systems), and the development of usage strategies for new teaching techniques.
Multidisciplinary methods will be used involving researchers in education,
liquid crystal display technology, engineering, and software development to
successfully achieve project objectives. Experts in the application of
technology in education will develop and evaluate eWriter usage strategies for
improved instruction and student performance depending on grade level and
teaching style. This new type of education technology has tremendous and far
reaching impacts in areas of pedagogical techniques, flexible electronics,
liquid crystal and polymeric materials, and environmental sustainability. The
anticipated results are a suite of eWriter devices and systems to be deployed in
K-12 and post-secondary education. The lead organization will commercialize
these new products into educational markets leveraging existing sales and
marketing infrastructure.