* 1534138
* PFI:BIC - Smart CROwdsourced Urban Delivery (CROUD) System
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* James Schummer, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 08/31/2020
* USD 1,005,207.00

This Partnerships for Innovation:Building Innovation Capacity (PFI:BIC) aims to
develop a crowd-sourced urban delivery (CROUD) system that promises an
efficient, greener, urban delivery service system. The rise of e-commerce is
rapidly changing the landscape of retail business. By 2017, online sales will
account for more than 10% of this $4.5 trillion industry, according to a 2014
U.S. Census Bureau report. To stay competitive in this growing market, retailers
are under enormous pressure to quickly deliver the goods to their consumers at
low prices. Large asset-based carriers (e.g., UPS and FedEx) are not
particularly cost-efficient for express local deliveries in urban areas,
essentially because their distribution networks are designed to transport
through hubs rather than directly between customers and retailers. This inherent
inefficiency is aggravated by mounting demand for same-day delivery--widely
considered the Holy Grail for e-commerce at present--that requires more frequent
dispatch and in turn increases transportation cost. Recent arrival of tech
giants such as Amazon, Google and Uber in this battlefield attests to the
tremendous opportunities and challenges in the urban delivery industry.
Ironically, there exists a large volume of unused capacity in the transport
system. For one thing, because the urban delivery industry is highly fragmented,
consolidating its capacity is often difficult. Another underutilized capacity
exists in millions of private passenger vehicles on the road with empty trunks
that could be used for delivery. Addressing this lack of adequate coordination
between demand and supply holds the key to solving the express urban delivery
challenge. A promising solution, enabled by recent advances in wireless
communication and mobile computing, is crowd-sourcing technology that has been
successfully applied in passenger transport (e.g., Uber and Lyft). The
overarching goal of this project is to develop and evaluate a CROwd-sourced
Urban Delivery (CROUD) system. With CROUD, consumers will enjoy faster, cheaper
and more reliable delivery service. The retail industry will see a stronger
consumer demand. The delivery industry will improve its profitability and reduce
its environmental impact, while employing a highly mobile and efficient
workforce. The project will also educate next generation entrepreneurs by
providing training opportunities and materials for upgrading curricula in
multiple disciplines. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scientific contributions of the
project span across several disciplines, and they are closely interconnected in
supporting a human-centered smart CROUD system. First, the project will lead to
pricing mechanisms that focus on matching consumers with couriers under varying
market conditions. The use of matching models is novel in pricing analysis for
two-sided markets, such as thouse found in CROUD systems, and it promises
insights in other markets. Second, the project will help understand and predict
behaviors and choices of humans in a CROUD system, a field completely new to
behavioral econometrists. New econometric models, calibrated with behavioral
data collected in this project, will be built into management strategies to
enhance the consumer-courier-technology interaction in the system. Third, the
proposed research will develop smartphone-based motion detection methods that
are uniquely suited to track and interpret the activities of couriers. Finally,
the project will create computational tools to facilitate collaborative delivery
among couriers and to optimize routing plans based on real-time information. In
doing so, new formulations, algorithms and insights will be generated for
challenging problems in operations research and computational economics such as
network design with relays, real-time vehicle routing considering transfer and
environmental impacts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will be led by
Northwestern University through its Transportation Center (NUTC), with three
researchers from two departments: Department of Civil and Environmental
Engineering and Department of Managerial Economics and Decision Science. The
primary industry partner is Zipments Inc. (small business, New York City, New
York) and the other primary academic partner is the University of Illinois at
Chicago (UIC) (non-profit research university, Chicago, Illinois). Two broader
context partners will also join the team. They are Center for Commercialization
of Innovative Transportation Technology (non-profit research institution
operated within NUTC, Evanston, Illinois) and Center for Supply Chain and
Logistics management (non-profit research institution affiliated with UIC,
Chicago, Illinois).