* 1534590
* Standard Research Grant: The Legal Mobilization of Science in Climate Change Litigation
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* LeRoy Paddock, George Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 08/31/2018
* USD 338,092.00

General Audience Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aim of this project is to
investigate the role of science and social movement framing in court cases
having to do with climate change. That aim will be addressed by focusing on
three central questions. How do social movements frame science and new legal
theories for the courts, and how do counter-claims get leveraged in response?
How do courts respond to these cases and how do these responses evolve over time
as science becomes more refined? How do the courts' responses affect social
movements and those whose actions these movements seek to change? In order to
answer these questions, the PI and her team will use in-depth qualitative
methods, and a quantitative analysis of the database of domestic climate change
lawsuits created by Columbia University Law School. The project includes several
educational and training components. A graduate student will take part in all
phases of the research, including data collection, analysis, and dissemination,
thus gaining critical research and writing skills. The student acquire expertise
in social and legal issues related to climate change, a field with limited
training opportunities. The PI and her team will also produce a short
documentary film that portrays several of the case studies in combination with
the quantitative findings, and seek to distribute it through public television
and professional organizations in order to communicate the research findings.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of this
research will offer new theoretical interconnection between STS, social movement
studies, and legal studies. They will also contribute to the field of law and
society by exploring how the courts mediate movement concerns and counter-claims
about climate change. Judicial treatment of scientific knowledge concerning the
causes of climate-related harm is critical in all of these cases. More broadly,
the findings of this project could serve to transform our understanding of how
accountability for climate change is advanced through litigation and regulation.
They may also serve to shape future climate-change lawsuits by identifying
social movement and counter-claim processes, scientific evidence, and legal
theories that affect their outcomes. For example, if it is found that judicial
decision-making is influenced in identifiable ways by the existing scientific
literature on causation, social movement plaintiffs could be advised to pursue
cases and rely on chains of causation for which there is scientific evidence to
which courts have been receptive. Alternatively, it might be found that counter-
claims reveal the weaknesses of climate science as courtroom evidence, which
might mean that social movement organizations s must engage in legal tactics
that do not emphasize science.