* 1534866
* Individual Differences in Holistic Processing
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2019
* Isabel Gauthier, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Gottlob
* 07/31/2019
* USD 447,622.00

Recognizing and discriminating among faces and objects is a critical human
ability, particularly for jobs that require highly specialized visual skills
such as in forensics, medical imaging, and homeland security. Recent research
suggests that there is vast individual variability among people in their
perceptual abilities, including the ability to recognize faces and non-face
objects. However, people are poor at predicting their perceptual abilities
relative to others, making it difficult to capitalize on this variability. This
project applies a psychometric approach to the study of individual differences
in perceptual abilities. From a theoretical perspective, studying these
individual differences provides a new avenue for understanding mechanisms
underlying visual perception. Practically speaking, these tools can identify
individuals with the greatest aptitude for work that demands specific visual
skills, such as baggage screening, satellite imagery analysis, and radiology.
Creating and validating reliable psychometric tools in high-level vision can be
useful to basic and applied science, education, and industry. Some jobs require
hundreds of perceptual decisions each day, and some organizations rely on
combining perceptual decisions from many individuals. The ability to predict
even a small amount of variance between people could culminate in improved
accuracy, increased efficiency, and decreased cost.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project focuses on holistic processing, a visual strategy associated with face
recognition, but also with other examples of expert perception. This project
will exend recent efforts to measure individual differences in holistic
processing by creating and testing measures that will enable the researchers to
address questions about individual differences in holistic processing in a
reliable manner. The project will then explore the construct validity of
holistic processing using these measures to address several questions: Is
holistic face processing related to domain-general abilities? How is holistic
processing related to face recognition ability? How are these relationships
mediated by learning that may occur within a test? Finally, experiments will
focus on the interplay between domain-general and domain-specific factors during
the acquisition of holistic processing, asking whether holistic processing
correlates across domains, and as a function of training experiences. This
represents a bridge between experimental work on the mechanisms of acquisition
of holistic processing and an individual differences approach. These studies
will help determine whether there is one or several possible causes of holistic
processing effects, and how to choose a training method on the basis of basic
cognitive measures to achieve a given training outcome. Thus, this project will
combine correlational and experimental methods to establish the validity of
holistic processing and elucidate its role in the network of relationships
within which it operates.