* 1534006
* Global Connections and Changing Resource Use System in the Arctic
* GEO,OPP
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2020
* Christopher Monz, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Erica Hill
* 05/31/2020
* USD 194,718.00

This award provides support to U.S. researchers participating in a project
competitively selected by a 14-country initiative on global change research
through the Belmont Forum. The Belmont Forum is a high level group of the
world?s major and emerging funders of global environmental change research and
international science councils. It aims to accelerate delivery of the
international environmental research most urgently needed to remove critical
barriers to sustainability by aligning and mobilizing international resources.
Each partner country provides funding for their researchers within a consortium
to alleviate the need for funds to cross international borders. This approach
facilitates effective leveraging of national resources to support excellent
research on topics of global relevance best tackled through a multinational
approach, recognizing that global challenges need global
solutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Working together in this Collaborative Research
Action, the partner agencies have provided support for research projects that
utilize existing Arctic observing systems, datasets and models to evaluate key
sustainability challenges and opportunities in the Arctic region, to innovate
new sustainability science theory and approaches to these challenges and
opportunities, and support decision-making towards a sustainable Arctic
environment. This award provides support for the U.S. researchers to cooperate
in consortia that consist of partners from at least three of the participating
countries and that bring together natural scientists, social scientists and end
users (e.g., policy makers, regulators, NGOs, communities and industry).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Global connections and changing resource use systems in
the Arctic (CONNECT) unites the expertise from researchers in Norway, Canada,
the US, and Russia to investigate how globally connected systems influence local
sustainability, socioeconomic, and ecological practices. In particular, the team
investigates the effects of introduced extractive industries, tourism, and
communications technologies on community responses, disturbances, and ecosystem
changes. The six work packages utilize data sets and research methods developed
by the team under previously funded efforts and include community interviews,
socioeconomic and policy analyses, land use and vegetation maps, mining
development histories, and local perceptions of land use and ecosystem services.
These inputs will be used in an integrative fashion to develop model and
monitoring indicators of ecological impacts and measure the effects of global
connections on resource use systems. The project will continue its collaboration
with 28 communities and conduct re-visit workshops during the course of the
project to share progress.