* 1534083
* Confessional Reluctance and Ethics Enforcement: The Paradoxical Cost of Zero Tolerance
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Kurt Gray, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Georgia Chao
* 07/31/2019
* USD 408,752.00

Nontechnical Description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In response to recent high profile
ethical catastrophes, many organizations have adopted tougher ethical stances,
the most extreme of which are "zero tolerance" policies, in which small
infractions are substantially punished. Although punitive policies may reduce
the base-rate of ethical violations, they may paradoxically increase major
ethical infractions by discouraging employees' willingness to report violations.
This phenomenon is referred to as confessional reluctance, defined as the
resistance to disclosing ethical violations to peers and supervisors.
Confessional reluctance could turn minor ethical violations into major ethical
catastrophes, as organization members seek to cover-up their mistakes through
deception, falsification of records, and other means. This research project will
examine confessional reluctance across several studies with multiple methods,
including archival, experimental and a real-world field study. This research is
important because understanding and preventing organizational ethical
catastrophes is essential to a functioning society. Ethical breaches take
economic and social tolls among the general public, corporations and
governments. By identifying a new way of understanding major ethical breaches,
our research will suggest actionable strategies for decreasing them, including
employee selection, improving work-team functioning, and implementing more
proactive organizational ethical climates. Ultimately, this research will
provide a straightforward and empirically-backed method for making organizations
more ethical.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project proposes a multilevel model
linking punitive ethical climates, confessional reluctance and unethical
escalation, and test it through archival, field and experimental studies. To
better understand confessional reluctance - and to enable interventions to
reduce it - this research also identify learning climate, team/lead-member
exchange and prosocial motivation as key moderators of the punitiveness-
confessional reluctance relationship. Study 1 provides preliminary evidence for
confessional reluctance and its link to punitive ethical climates through an
online survey. Studies 2, 3 and 4 examine the link between confessional
reluctance, punitive ethical climate and the escalation of unethical behavior
through experimental studies. Study 4 uses company annual reports to examine the
link between punitive policies and major ethical infractions, and Study 5
provides a longitudinal test of the model in the field. This research extends
the literature by combining organizational variables (i.e., climate) and
individual variables (i.e., prosocial motivation) into a multilevel framework.
Our approach harnesses the complementary strengths of different methodologies,
including the control of the lab, the realism of archival studies, and the
generalizability of field samples. The lab studies provide rigorous
manipulations of punitive climate with realistic simulations of organizational
behavior and behavioral measures of ethical violations and confessional
reluctance. The archival study extends our model to a range of companies, and
the longitudinal field study examines our full model across branches of a
corporation. Our interdisciplinary approach uses the tools of organizational
behavior and experimental social psychology to extend our understanding of
ethical behavior. Our model is particularly transformative because it
contradicts basic intuitions about management. An understandable reaction to
ethical breaches is to make an ethical climate more punitive, but this can
paradoxically make major ethical violations more likely. Therefore, this
research suggests a concrete intervention for making organizations more ethical.