* 1534823
* Intrusive Effects of Task Irrelevant Semantic Information on Visual Selective Attention
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Sarah Shomstein, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Hout
* 08/31/2020
* USD 593,677.00

Selective attention involves the remarkable ability to dynamically search for
and select information from the environment that is relevant for the current
goal. How the human cognitive system achieves this is a fundamental question in
cognitive science. Given that what humans consciously perceive will, ultimately,
depend on where attention is directed, understanding attentional mechanisms is
an important first step toward revealing the neural mechanisms that support
conscious awareness. It has long been established that physical features, such
as spatial location or object appearance, can guide attentional selection in a
spatial task. These researchers will examine the extent to which attention can
be inadvertently grabbed by a visual item that is irrelevant to the spatial-
orienting task at hand if that item happens to be semantically related to
something recently experienced. The research team will investigate hypotheses
regarding the underlying mechanism by which this type of attentional intrusion
occurs during the process of trying to visually locate something. To further
understanding of the basic mechanism, the research team will also use
neuroimaging to examine at what neural stage in the visual system this intrusion
effect takes place. Understanding what grabs visual attention and why could have
important practical applications, such as better designing dynamic, interactive
visual displays on devices such as tablets, smart phones, or computers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research project aims to test a set of novel
predictions regarding the influence of high-level properties of a scene to
attentional selection. A major goal is to rigorously test the hypothesis that
task-irrelevant semantic information constrains attentional selection by
directly acting on space- and object-based representations: task-irrelevant
objects that semantically relate to something seen recently are more likely to
be attended. Predictions will be tested using real-world scenes, and by
utilizing real-world objects. In addition to the rigorous behavioral experiments
aimed at understanding the mechanism by which task-irrelevant but semantically
primed stimuli exert their intrusive effects on attention, the researchers will
use neuroimaging methodology to examine hypotheses regarding at what stage in
the human visual system the effects occur.