* 1534814
* Scholars Award: Heredity under the Microscope: A History of Human Chromosomes
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2015,09/30/2021
* Soraya de Chadarevian, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 09/30/2021
* USD 298,233.00

General Audience Summary

This project aims to understand what fueled research on human chromosomes, the
cellular structures carrying genetic information, during the middle decades of
the twentieth century, and to reconsider its supposed demise from the 1980s. In
the postwar era, the microscope-based study of human chromosomes was a high-
profile subject that promised to provide answers to urgent scientific, medical
and political questions and attracted much funding and attention. Yet, the study
of human chromosomes hardly plays a role in historical accounts of postwar
genetics; molecular biology has taken much of the limelight. By following human
chromosomes and the techniques and images that came packaged with them, it aims
to reconstruct where human heredity mattered and genetic knowledge was embraced,
debated, and rejected. The primary product of the research will be a book,
accessible to wide readership in the history of science and technology, science
studies and the life sciences. Historians will find a fresh perspective on an
important chapter of twentieth century science. Biologists working in the field
will gain a deeper understanding of the different strands of research that
inform current genomic practices. The study will also be accessible to a more
general readership, including science educators and policy makers, interested in
looking beyond the story of the double helix to understand how heredity became
an overriding concern in the late 20th and early 21st century.

Technical Summary

The focus on human chromosomes provides a fresh vantage point from which to
investigate the postwar history of human, medical and molecular genetics. The
study will provide a novel understanding of several key issues. The focus on
chromosomes allows the investigation to move beyond the limits of a disciplinary
history and to trace the many contexts in which chromosome techniques were taken
up and developed including radio-biological research, cancer research,
toxicology, gender testing, criminology, world-wide population studies and in
the policy arena. The study aims to recover these multiple uses of the new
technology and to reconstruct the expectations placed on the new genetic
technology. The study will also provide an integrated account of the history of
postwar genetics by considering the place of microscopical practices next to
molecular approaches in the postwar quest to study and harness heredity. While
molecular biologists have long predicted the demise of cytogenetics, these
practices have not only survived and thrived, especially in the field of
comparative evolutionary genomics and in the clinical and drug discovery
context. In light of these various facets, the research will have an impact on
archival collecting practices. It will be shown that to document the history of
postwar genetics for future historians it is necessary to have an inclusive view
of the kind of objects and documents that make up this history.