* 1534687
* CAREER: Simultaneous imaging of photoreceptor and post-photoreceptor responses in the retina
* ENG,CBET
* 11/01/2014,07/31/2016
* Xincheng Yao, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 07/31/2016
* USD 161,443.00

1055889&lt;br/&gt;Yao&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research objective of this
proposal is to investigate stimulus-evoked intrinsic optical signals (IOSs)
associated with photoreceptor and post-photoreceptor neural responses in the
complex retinal neural network. This project will start with investigating fast
IOSs in frog retinal slices. A retinal slice preparation exposes a cross-section
of the retinal layers, and thus allow simultaneous recording of fast IOSs from
the photoreceptors and post-photoreceptor neurons, with feasibility of
concurrent electrophysiological recording of targeted retinal cells. This phase
will test two hypotheses: 1) Fast IOSs correlated with early photoreceptor
activities to light stimulation occurs immediately after the stimulus delivery;
while fast IOSs associated with second- and third-order post-photoreceptor
neurons may have a time delay relative to the stimulus. 2) Fast IOSs can be used
to image oscillatory and spike neural activities generated by post-photoreceptor
neurons. The second phase of this project is to explore simultaneous optical
coherence tomography (OCT) imaging of photoreceptors and post-photoreceptor
responses in the intact eye. In order to achieve this objective, an acousto-
optic deflector (AOD) based optical coherence tomography (OCT) is proposed for
pursuing vibration- and inertia-free optical dissection of retinal neural
activities.