* 1534779
* SBIR Phase II:  Enabling Ultra-Compact Photonic Integrated Circuits with Designed Disordered Dielectrics
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2015,03/31/2024
* Ruth Mullen, Etaphase, Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Samir M. Iqbal
* 03/31/2024
* USD 1,575,998.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is to allow the Internet infrastructure to keep
up with explosive growth demand. A core aspect of Internet operational viability
is switching speed of optical devices at various points of the transmission,
storage, calculation, and access chain. Current technologies are not poised to
be able to meet the speed and stability needs of the projected growth in
Internet data volumes and access speed requirements. These are currently growing
well beyond a Moore's Law pace. Needed is a disruptive approach to optical
switching that will allow data management to keep pace with market needs.
Ability to delivery this essential capability will provide not only essential
international leadership in internet services, but also avail companies involved
in the innovation to make a substantial commercial impact directly for their
shareholders and to those of their partners and affiliates.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research phase II project
is an effort to cross the chasm between fundamental new physics insights
relating to the structure of matter and an aggressive approach to
commercializing 'Semiconductors of Light' in an emerging market for high density
optical interconnects priced for datacenters. Until recently, the only known
photonic bandgap solids were photonic crystal structures consisting of regularly
repeating, orderly lattices of dielectric materials. It was generally assumed
that crystal order was essential to have photonic bandgaps. This longstanding
assumption is now known to be false. New photonic bandgap structures,
characterized by suppressed density fluctuations (hyperuniformity), include
disordered structures that are isotropic. This means that light propagates the
same way through the photonic solid independent of direction (which is
impossible for a photonic crystal). While the layout of waveguides in
conventional photonic crystal and quasi crystal photonic bandgap materials is
tightly-constrained to follow characteristic crystal axes, the layout rules for
hyper uniform disordered solid waveguides have no such fundamental constraints.
The universal protocol and highly-efficient computational framework covering the
full range of photonic crystal, quasi crystal , and hyper uniform disordered
solid-based photonic bandgaps will be generalized to a broad class of critically
important photonic components by the application of a powerful new gradient-free
optimization methods.