* 1534524
* SBIR Phase II:  Artificial Characterization of Objects Relating to Human Tactile Perception
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2015,11/30/2020
* Richard Koffler, SynTouch LLC
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 11/30/2020
* USD 1,113,517.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is to provide a new
standard of quantifying touch for industries currently relying on qualitative
data from expert sensory panels (the tactile equivalent of professional wine
tasters). Advancing the understanding of the role and function of tactile
sensing in perception and manipulation is also essential if robots are to behave
like humans. Studies have demonstrated that humans who cannot feel due to
permanent disease or temporary anesthesia perform poorly in fine manipulation
tasks (similar to even the best robotic systems without touch). The research
proposed in this project is the next step to bring tactile sensing and sensory-
motor intelligence to the next generation of robotics. The successful
demonstration of a tactile sensor with perceptual similarity to the human
fingertip would mark substantial progress in the field of telemanipulation,
bringing the world one step closer to remote haptic perception. This Small
Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase 2 project seeks to develop the world's
first standard of human tactile perception. It has been proposed that tactile
recognition presents a more difficult problem than vision and hearing, requiring
not only intelligent sensory processing, but also intelligent algorithms to
select and control movements, which have a tremendous influence on what is
sensed. Artificial sensors that mimic the mechanical properties and sensitivity
of the human fingertip have not existed until recently. The research proposed
herein will test hypotheses that a biologically inspired robotic system can
measure properties that correspond to subjective percepts, descriptors and
associations that humans use to characterize objects by touch.