* 1534170
* Conference: Support for the 2015 Annual Meeting of the Society for Mathematical Psychology
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2016
* Jennifer Trueblood, Society for Mathematical Psychology, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 08/31/2016
* USD 5,000.00

This award provides support for student participation at the 2015 Annual Meeting
of the Society for Mathematical Psychology, to be to be held in Newport Beach,
CA in July 2015. The annual meeting will advance discovery and understanding of
theoretical problems in psychology and the social sciences. It will create an
environment in which mathematically oriented social scientists can grow and
flourish. It will promote training and learning of new models and methods for
analyzing behavioral data and make possible the broad dissemination of new
findings important in all areas of psychology, as well as economics, political
science, sociology, and anthropology. Support for student travel will allow the
organizers to involve more individuals from underrepresented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mathematical psychology is interdisciplinary by
nature, bringing together social scientists, statisticians, mathematicians, and
computer scientists to work on problems critical to behavioral and cognitive
scientists. The 2015 annual meeting will include three symposia on new
developments that have not been featured at recent meetings: (1) Dynamics of
adaptive rationality; (2) Systems factorial technology; and (3) New developments
in the analysis and modeling of naturally occurring data sets. The annual
meeting also will include a half-day professional development symposium
organized by the Women of Mathematical Psychology and a post-conference
networking event with potential industrial partners.