* 1534872
* SI2-SSE: ShareSafe: A Framework for Researchers and Data Owners to Help Facilitate Secure Graph Data Sharing
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Raheem Beyah, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 08/31/2019
* USD 506,000.00

There is a critical need for information/data sharing to solve some of our most
significant academic and societal problems. These data are increasing in size
and are becoming much more complex; in many cases, they can be considered
structured. An example of structured data is data describing disease propagation
in a specific population. Widespread sharing of data can, among many other
things, help corporations increase their revenues, help reduce the spread of
communicable diseases, accelerate the cure of some of the most significant
diseases, and enable reproducible experiments amongst researchers. Although
there is little disagreement that sharing data has tremendous benefits, it is
still not as widespread as it should be. This is, in part, due to privacy
concerns with sharing datasets. This project will develop an open source system
(ShareSafe) that allows data owners to evaluate the security (such as resistance
to de-anonymization attacks) and utility of their anonymized datasets before
release, which will help facilitate the data sharing process.

The overarching goals of this project are to develop a software framework,
ShareSafe, that (1) helps structured data owners (e.g., social network
researchers, epidemiologists) evaluate the security (against modern de-
anonymization attacks) and utility of their datasets when using simple and
state-of-the-art anonymization techniques; and (2) to provide structured data
security/privacy researchers a uniform platform to comprehensively study,
evaluate, and compare existing/newly developed techniques for structured data
utility and privacy. ShareSafe is a comprehensive, user-friendly framework with
the following capabilities: ShareSafe will enable data owners to: (1) anonymize
their datasets with all of the state-of-the art anonymization techniques; (2)
measure the utility of anonymized datasets using state-of-the-art utility
measurement techniques; (3) evaluate the practical security of their datasets by
subjecting them to state-of-the-art de-anonymization attacks; and (4) evaluate
the theoretical security of their datasets by subjecting them to state-of-the-
art de-anonymization quantification (de-anonymizability analysis) techniques.
Understanding the results from (2)-(4) allows data owners to determine which
anonymization algorithm suits their needs when sharing datasets. Finally, the
aforementioned techniques will be implemented in a uniform manner as open source
software, allowing graph data security/privacy researchers the ability to
comprehensively study, evaluate, and compare existing/newly developed techniques
for graph data utility and privacy.