* 1534120
* PFI:BIC - A Smart, "Always-on" Health Monitoring System
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2018
* Amy Paller, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 07/31/2018
* USD 1,005,284.00

This Partnerships for Innovation: Building Innovation Capacity (PFI:BIC) project
aims to develop a smart, "always-on" health-monitoring system capable of
transforming healthcare from reactive and hospital-centered to proactive,
evidence-based, individual-oriented and human-centered. In particular, the
project seeks to overcome use problems with mobile-wearable electronics systems
that have undermined long-term patient acceptance. Based on the "epidermal"
electronic platform developed by the principal investigators, the system will
offer "skin-like" properties, to enable intimate, complete, non-invasive
integration with people in ways that are impossible with any technology that
exists today. This mobile-wearable health-monitoring system will be mechanically
"invisible" (i.e., not constraining natural motions or processes of the skin),
and will be compatible with daily life activities to ensure long-term sustained
engagement of users. It will interact with people through self-detection, self-
diagnosis and self-monitoring and will allow clinicians to monitor their
patients through wireless communications and data transmission to facilitate
self-correcting and self-controlled functions. It will allow the general public
to continuously assess personal health and well-being. Continuous monitoring of
medical devices may help to prevent serious medical problems through early
intervention, particularly in high risk groups of people, thereby providing
critical capabilities to the healthcare service system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
pursuing the basic goal of spurring the development and maturation of flexible
skin-applied sensors with wireless connection to monitoring and diagnostic
systems, the project combines the research expertise of the principal
investigators in the core intellectual content of the proposed platforms, which
includes nanomaterials, sensors, advanced signal processing, system design,
industrial design/human factors and clinical studies. This integration will lead
to smart systems that have the potential to transform healthcare. The research
entails the following:&lt;br/&gt; * Development of "skin-like" temperature,
hydration, and electrophysiology sensors, with wireless operation. These systems
will exploit unique hardware, formed using extensions of ideas from the
principal investigators' recent work on epidermal electronics and
sensors.&lt;br/&gt; * Studies of interactions between this technology and
people, particularly in order to account for human factors relevant to the
technology development to ensure lifestyle compatibility.&lt;br/&gt; *
Development of effective and robust computational modeling and algorithms for
statistical signal processing of the sensor data and pattern recognition to
create a user-friendly interface for clinicians, patients and even the general
public to enable the interpretation of these data and their implications for
health and well-being.&lt;br/&gt; * Application of the proposed health
monitoring system to skin. The continuous capture, storage and transmission of
sensor data will be critical to the design of these smart, "always-on" health-
monitoring systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The mechanical "invisibility" of the
wearable devices means that they do not interfere with people's daily lives.
Accounting for lifestyle compatibility can be illustrated as follows: the less
behavior change a device requires in order to simply wear it, the more likely it
is that it will drive long-term sustained engagement for users and thus overcome
the major limitation of most wearable devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary
partners at the inception of this research include the Lead Institution:
Northwestern University, McCormick School of Engineering and Feinberg School of
Medicine; MC10, Inc (Cambridge, Massachusetts, small business); and University
of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign (Champaign, Illinois, non-profit, educational).