* 1534673
* The Second Polar Data Forum: Understanding the Polar Regions through Globally Collaborative Data Management
* GEO,OPP
* 03/01/2015,02/29/2016
* Peter Pulsifer, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Marc Stieglitz
* 02/29/2016
* USD 49,024.00

The proposal is for hosting the Second Polar Data Forum (PDF II) in Waterloo,
Canada on October 2015. The PDF II will be building on the success of the first
Polar Data Forum (PDF I) held in Tokyo, Japan, October 2013. The goal of the PDF
II is to refine relevant themes and priorities and establish actions to address
the target issues. This includes meeting the needs of society and science
through promotion of open data and effective data stewardship, establishing
sharing and interoperability of data at a variety of levels, developing trusted
data management systems, and ensuring long-term data preservation. The workshop
will provide a critically important venue for U.S.-based and funded polar data
initiatives and to showcase polar data management systems funded by the National
Science Foundation (NSF) and other U.S. agencies, while learning from global
partners and working collaboratively to continue developing an international
vision and action plan. Beside providing a contribution to managing polar data
on a global scale, making data available to future generations, the workshop
will involve young researchers and underrepresented groups through the
engagement of Indigenous organizations to ensure participation of Indigenous
people of the Arctic. Moreover, a data management training workshop targeted at
the needs of graduate students and researchers is being planned, co-organized by
APECS and the ArcticNet Student Association.