* 1534627
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Multilevel Modeling Analysis of Cross-Cultural Data
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2015,01/31/2017
* Richard Mcelreath, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 01/31/2017
* USD 30,941.00

Social and behavioral scientists recognize that conclusions drawn from research
in affluent western settings may not accurately represent people in other
settings around the globe. Therefore, they are turning to cross-cultural samples
to assess, contextualize, and explain the range of human variability. For
example, if they find that individuals in subsistence-oriented horticulturalist
societies have different norms of fairness in economic transactions than do
members of western societies, they might find that the explanation lies in
differences in ecology or group size. Thus cross-cultural comparisons help
social scientists to build theories of human and social variability that apply
to all human societies. To answer such questions, social scientists increasingly
rely on cross-cultural samples, with collaborations among researchers who
collect comparable data in different settings around the world. As compared to
random samples from a single population, however, these studies typically result
in complex hierarchical data structures that require advanced statistical
methods, but that are well suited to characterize the range of variation in
cross-cultural samples.

This award will allow two anthropologists to develop statistical methods for the
analysis of cross-cultural data, specifically a compilation of wildlife harvests
by hunters in 21 subsistence-oriented societies. The analysis focuses on the
ways in which hunting proficiency varies across the lifespan, testing the
hypothesis that the extension of the human juvenile period relative to non-human
primates is an adaptation that promotes the gradual mastery of the complex
foraging strategies that distinguish the human niche. More broadly, this
research informs expectations about senescence and the role of experience in the
maintenance of skills-based performance among aging adults. The compilation of
data includes the outcomes of approximately 20,000 hunting trips by more than
1,000 hunters. Whereas previous analyses of cross-cultural data have often
relied on aggregations and averages, this award will allow for the develop of
multilevel modeling approaches that account for the complex data structure and
the challenging nature of the outcome variable, a mixture of zeroes and
continuous positive values that is difficult to analyze via conventional
statistical methods. The statistical models in this project will demonstrate the
range of variation in age-related patterns across study sites, which has
implications for the extent to which individual societies can serve as models or
analogues for prehistoric contexts. In addition to a substantive analysis of a
uniquely expansive dataset of hunting returns, this research will also result in
the introduction of methods that can be adapted to similar analyses of
unaggregated cross-cultural data. Given the renewed emphasis on cross-cultural
research by social scientists, such methods are increasingly needed for the
large, structured datasets that result from compilations and collaborations.