* 1534132
* Understanding the Behavior of Policymakers: Accountability, Other-Regarding Behavior and Fiduciary Motivation
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2015,01/31/2021
* Allan Drazen, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 01/31/2021
* USD 290,000.00

This award funds research that will use formal modeling and empirical methods,
including laboratory decision making experiments, to develop and test a number
of hypothesis about the factors that determine the behavior of elected group
leaders. The overall goal is to consider how the way a leader was selected
affects his/her leadership decisions. For elected leaders, concern for one's
supporters, the desire for re-election, and a fiduciary interest in the group's
overall wellbeing may interact to determine how leaders make decisions.
Appointed or promoted leaders would make different decisions. The project
advances science by developing and testing richer theories of leadership. The
work may give us new practical insights on the best way to choose leaders for
groups. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Current theories in political economy view
policymakers (whether they are elected or appointed) as economic agents with
their own motivations and objectives. However, these leaders generally have a
mix of objectives, ranging from ideology to re-election to concern for the
public good. The project examines how this mix of objectives affects leadership
decisions. The first part of the project considers structural estimation of a
political agency model. The second part of the project includes theoretical and
empirical investigation of other-regarding? behavior by office holders who are
not driven by re-election. The last part of the project uses lab experiments to
test the theory that other-regarding behavior by policymakers is in part the
result of a fiduciary motive. That is, simply holding an elected office makes
individuals more likely to value the common good.