* 1534704
* SBIR Phase II:  Integration of carbohydrate and gaseous fermentations for maximum C3 and C4 chemical yield
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2015,11/30/2017
* BRYAN TRACY, White Dog Labs Inc
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 11/30/2017
* USD 844,834.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research Phase II project is to develop renewable and domestic chemical
production and transportation fuel technologies that are cheaper, greener and
more sustainable. Additionally, chemical companies are constantly looking for
ways to improve business sustainability by reducing carbon footprints along with
cost of manufacturing. Mixotrophic fermentation can be a step-change improvement
in microbial fermentation for the production of numerous intermediate and
commodity chemicals. Yields from feedstock can be increased substantially, and
CO2 gas produced from the fermentation, as a waste byproduct can instead be
captured and assimilated into valuable chemicals, which translates into a
significant improvement in yield and productivity for any applicable commodity
or intermediate chemical production process. Consequently, the commercial and
environmental implications of this innovative technological approach are
tremendous. Furthermore, this project could significantly enhance scientific and
technological understanding of microbial physiology and metabolism during gas
and carbohydrate fermentation.

The objectives of this Phase II research project are to develop and scale-up
platform strains for C3 and C4 chemical production using carbon efficient
pathways. The approach being developed is referred to as Anaerobic Non-
Photosynthetic (ANP) mixotrophic fermentation, and process advancements will
focus on bioreactor operation parameters, media formulations, and integration
with product separation. By the end of this project, the project will likely
have demonstrated and validated enhanced mass yield of C3 and/or C4 metabolite
production at pilot-scale using ANP mixotrophic fermentation.