* 1534850
* Geometry of Convex Optimization
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2018
* Javier Pena, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 07/31/2018
* USD 300,000.00

Certain geometric constructions play a central role in convex optimization - a
vital computational technology for a variety of applied disciplines including
data and imaging sciences. The very definition of convexity is purely geometric:
a set is convex if it contains the segment joining any two points in it. Certain
properties of convex objects provide the backbone for powerful optimization
theory, and geometric constructions form the core of a variety of effective
algorithmic techniques for solving optimization problems. The overarching goal
of this research project is a deeper development and tighter integration of
geometric properties for convex optimization problems. The main driving force
for this project is the design of novel and more powerful algorithmic schemes.
Given the role that convex optimization plays in a variety of timely
applications, this research will provide opportunities for training doctoral
students and for synergies with scholars in multiple disciplines including
operations research, machine learning, and mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
main long-term goal of this research plan is to design new algorithms for convex
optimization problems via a careful blend of oracles, variable metrics, and
adaptive problem preconditioning. To that end, this research project will pursue
activities along four main threads. The first thread concerns the design of new
algorithms by harnessing the power of separation oracles and space dilation. The
second thread will focus on variants of the von Neumann and the Frank-Wolfe
algorithms with away steps for faster convergence and sparsity. The third thread
concerns refinements of conditioning for convex optimization problems. Special
emphasis will be placed on extending the existing theory to problems with flat
and nearly flat geometries. The fourth and most ambitious thread of this project
will develop novel algorithms that adaptively precondition the problem at hand
to rectify potential difficulties due to poor geometric structure such as those
that emerge in degenerate or nearly degenerate problems. This last research
thread may shed new light into one of the main open problems in computational
mathematics, namely the existence of a strongly polynomial-time algorithm for
linear programming.