* 1534829
* Investigating Motivation and Transfer in Physical Science through Preparation for Future Learning Instruction
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2019
* Timothy Nokes-Malach, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Dawn Rickey
* 08/31/2019
* USD 593,278.00

A critical problem in science education is to understand how students transfer
their prior knowledge and experience acquired in one situation to solve novel
problems in another. Not only do students struggle with conceptual understanding
and transfer, but they also show declines in motivation for science during the
middle school years. Prior research suggests there is great potential and
opportunity to address these challenges by integrating past work on cognitive
and motivational approaches to understanding learning and transfer. In this
project, researchers will integrate these separate strands of past work by
exploring the relations between different types of instructional activities,
student motivation (i.e., their goals, interest, and perceptions of autonomy),
and transfer in the context of 6th grade physical science units. They will
investigate two forms of instructional activities, comparing "tell-and-
practice", in which students receive direct instruction followed by problem
solving, to "preparation for future learning" (PFL), in which students first
engage in inquiry tasks and then are given direct instruction. The results of
the studies will provide valuable insights into the relations between students'
thinking processes, motivation, and instruction in promoting science knowledge
transfer. In addition, by involving a diverse student population and conducting
frequent assessments, the learning activities will be shaped to be beneficial to
both students from majority and underrepresented groups, and to both girls and
boys.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The EHR Core Research (ECR) program emphasizes
fundamental STEM education research that generates foundational knowledge in the
field. Investments are made in critical areas that are essential, broad and
enduring: STEM learning and STEM learning environments, broadening participation
in STEM, and STEM workforce development. This ECR project will test and revise a
theoretical framework for transfer that integrates cognitive and motivational
factors and processes. The project team will investigate hypotheses derived from
this framework including: (a) test whether key aspects of 6th-grade students'
motivation (goals, interest, and perceived autonomy) predict specific types of
transfer outcomes including near, intermediate, and far transfer; (b) test the
extent to which standard tell-and-practice and PFL learning activities promote
learning, motivation, and transfer; and (c) explore and test the hypothesized
motivational and cognitive mechanisms underlying transfer success and failure.
Methodologically, the project team will combine instrument development and
assessment, carefully controlled in-vivo classroom studies with a diverse body
of students, and verbal protocol analysis of dialogue. The results will inform
the development of a new theory of knowledge transfer that will have
implications for science education and instruction.