* 1534532
* SIGGRAPH Pioneers Mentoring
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2018
* Marc Barr, Association Computing Machinery
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 05/31/2018
* USD 15,000.00

This is funding to support high school student involvement and attendance at the
next three ACM SIGGRAPH conferences (2015-2017). SIGGRAPH is the premier
computer graphics conference in the world, attracting over 15,000 attendees
annually and filling over 100,000 feet of exhibition space. The conference film
show is a renowned venue for viewing the latest advances in animation and
visualization. Although many attendees come just for the exhibition and film
show, the conference has long been the premier forum for publishing and
presenting technical papers in computer graphics. The SIGGRAPH Pioneers (20+
years of work in the field) started a mentoring program in 2003 with the goal of
adding more students to the technology pipeline by exposing them to this
exciting research at a young age. While the number of student participants each
year is relatively small in number, the impact has been high because the
students do not merely attend the conference but rather are mentored by senior
members of the community on a personal basis; each Pioneer is assigned no more
than two students, and guides them to talks, courses, etc. that may not have
been on the student's radar. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit and
broader impact of this activity lie in the educational opportunities afforded to
the high school students by the mentoring process. The program also focuses on
underrepresented groups (e.g., women, Hispanics, and African Americans) who
would have no opportunity to hear about SIGGRAPH, let alone attend, without the
mentoring program. The students are exposed to the latest research and hardware
covering the use of computer graphics for numerous topics that benefit society
ranging from engineering design to entertainment. All of the money goes to the
student participants; the mentors work purely on a volunteer basis, and the
submitting organization imposes no charges or indirect costs. Written student
feedback has, in the past, been extremely favorable.