* 1534684
* SBIR Phase II:  Variable Capacitance Machines for Use in Linear Actuators for Industrial Automation
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2018
* Justin Reed, C-Motive Technologies Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 08/31/2018
* USD 875,307.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is to develop a novel
platform technology: a high-torque electrostatic motor (EM). This readily
scalable platform machine technology can provide any desired torque or power
rating necessary along with increased energy accessibility and reduced
energy/operating costs compared to traditional steel-copper-magnet based motors.
Instead of using permanent magnets or wire coil mechanisms, this motor exploits
electrostatic forces between closely spaced, conductive metal plates to create
an electric field, with shaft-torque capabilities far beyond those of
conventional machines. By allowing industry more efficient operations, resources
will be freed for continued innovation, spurring economic growth. This EM uses
domestically-sourced materials like aluminum, steel, and plastic instead of rare
earth elements like neodymium, dysprosium, or samarium used in traditional
motors, thus reducing both dependence on foreign supply chains of rare earths
and market volatility. EMs will be lighter-weight and less expensive to produce
than traditional motors. Value is offered to numerous commercial markets,
including electric/hybrid-electric cars, industrial automation, renewable energy
(wind turbines), and machines operating in extreme environments (aerospace or
down-hole drilling) through lower materials costs, increased reliability, higher
efficiencies at low speed, and reduced weight.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Small
Business Innovation Research Project (SBIR) Phase 2 project will expand
understanding of electrostatic machinery, including operational principles,
design principles, and strengths/weaknesses of this novel platform technology.
This represents the first significant breakthrough in motor/machine technology
in almost 150 years. Previously, electrostatic technology had few applications
due to a limited body of knowledge, despite occasional study throughout the last
century. This was primarily due to technological limitations (low capacitance,
the necessity of vacuum used as an insulating medium), whose solution required
knowledge spanning multiple technical fields (electric field theory, chemistry,
mechanical engineering, material science, and power electronic controls). By
addressing these technological limitations in P-I, this project already expanded
the body of pertinent engineering and physics knowledge. This P-II project
offers opportunities for additional study ranging far beyond those currently
envisioned. For example, optimizing electrostatic/mechatronic systems such as
sophisticated electrostatic drive systems will likely involve the use of highly-
engineered materials (metamaterials and composites); next-generation 3D
multiphysics simulation platforms to simultaneously solve fluid dynamic,
electrostatic, and thermal behaviors; and development of chemical synthesis
processes to maximize electrostatic force production. Advanced manufacturing
technologies will likely emerge, leading to possibilities including injection
molding or 3D printing of a machine.