* 1534930
* CAREER:  Revealing Kinetic Pathways by Pulsed-Film Pyrolysis of Cellulosic Biomass
* ENG,CBET
* 08/25/2014,08/31/2018
* Paul Dauenhauer, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 08/31/2018
* USD 333,993.00

The conversion of lignocellulosic, non-food biomass by combustion, pyrolysis, or
gasification provides a sustainable set of technologies for the production of
second generation biofuels that can have significant impact on energy
independence, economic growth, global emissions, and our society. However,
despite intensive research for the past several decades, there is still a lack
of fundamental knowledge pertaining to these systems including reaction
pathways, intermediates, and detailed kinetics. It is this kind of information
that has led to the successful development of the refinery industry in the past
century and which is critically needed for biomass utilization. The lack of
progress on fundamental understanding of these conversion technologies is
partially rooted in the multiphase and multi-scale nature of the raw material
and the associated complexity of a large reaction network convoluted with
transport effects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Our objective in
this research is to develop the first kinetic description of the individual
molecular reactions of cellulose pyrolysis by developing and utilizing a novel
experimental technique referred to as ?pulsed-film pyrolysis,? or PFP. The
proposed PFP technique aims to rapidly heat micro-scale films of cellulose to
400-600 Â°C, whereupon isothermal pyrolysis occurs for a defined increment of
time (e.g. 10 ms), followed by rapid thermal quench. Kinetic information on the
rate of reaction will then be obtained from characterizing the quantity and type
of chemical species produced for each consecutive thermal pulse. The research
plan&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1.) Develop the technique of pulsed-film pyrolysis:
Three tasks will focus on designing, constructing, and testing the pulsed-film
technique for cellulose pyrolysis. Utilization of multi-physics design models
and novel reactor construction will allow for the first experimental system
capable of transport-free kinetic experiments at high temperature. is divided
into two specific aims:&lt;br/&gt;2.) Measure the kinetics of cellulose
pyrolysis: Three tasks will measure rates of formation of primary products (e.g.
levoglucosan and furans), secondary reactions of levoglucosan, and condensed-
phase reactions to reduce cellulose to reactive oligomers.&lt;br/&gt;At the
completion of these two aims, it is anticipated that the kinetics of the major
pathways of cellulose pyrolysis will be measured for the first time.
Intellectual merit: The proposed research will transform&lt;br/&gt;our
understanding of the reaction mechanisms and kinetics of solid and condensed-
phase biomass chemistry. A compelling aspect of this research is that it
provides the first strategy for experimentally measuring the activation energies
associated with the formation of key pyrolysis products, which can be compared
with ongoing computations to elucidate for the first time the mechanisms of
biomass pyrolysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The scientific
discoveries of biomass reaction pathways and kinetics will provide the critical
data for constructing first-principles kinetic models which can be used to
optimize pyrolysis reactors. Improved biomass processes broadly impact the
country by producing higher quality biofuels with lower cost and reduced
environmental impact. Additionally, the discoveries and fundamental insights
from the proposed research on the pyrolysis of biomass will provide a plethora
of opportunities for developing instructive material to educate prospective
undergraduates, high school students and the general public on the value and
environmental impact of biomass conversion to fuels and chemicals. We propose to
develop an integrated strategy with broad impact which combines the education of
high school teachers and the instruction of undergraduates to develop
presentations for public symposia on the topic of biomass technology,
environmental impact and policy. A year-to-year development plan has been
proposed for conducting public symposia, which will be broadcast on the internet
along with educational materials for broad dissemination. Integrated with the
symposia will be an undergraduate course focused on renewable energy as well as
an NSF-RET proposal for hosting science teachers and developing learning modules
for K-12 students in schools with high concentration of underrepresented
minorities (Springfield, MA, &amp; Milwaukee, WI). Our approach to education
will contribute to ensuring that students from economically depressed
backgrounds and underrepresented minorities have access to inspiring examples of
engineering science and technology and that the general public is well-informed
on the importance of biomass conversion as a sustainable and environmentally-
friendly means of achieving the national goal of independence from imported oil.