* 1534400
* Collaborative Research: Multilevel Regression and Poststratification: A Unified Framework for Survey Weighted Inference
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2015,03/31/2018
* Yajuan Si, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 03/31/2018
* USD 328,667.00

This research project will develop a unified framework for survey weighting
through novel modifications of multilevel regression and poststratification
(MRP) to incorporate design-based information into modeling. Real-life survey
data often are unrepresentative due to selection bias and nonresponse. Existing
methods for adjusting for known differences between the sample and population
from which the sample is drawn have some advantages but also practical
limitations. Classical weights are subject to large variability and can result
in unstable estimators, while regression approaches present computational and
modeling challenges. The new framework developed by these investigators will
allow adjustment for selection bias and nonresponse as well as improvements in
design-respecting inference. Using this approach, survey analysts will be able
to properly account for non-ignorable design issues in the regression framework,
and practitioners who conduct surveys in government, academic, commercial, and
non-profit sectors will be able to construct statistically efficient survey
weights in a routine manner. This new framework may be applicable to problems
resulting from the newly emerging explosion of "big data," such as integration
of surveys from multiple sources, analysis of streaming data, and respondent-
driven sampling. The project will develop software that can be accessed by the
general research community.

This research project will connect survey weighting with poststratification
under the framework of MRP. In MRP, data are partially pooled during the
modeling process and then local estimates are combined via poststratification to
obtain the population inference. This smoothed estimation borrows information
from neighboring poststratification cells and allows flexible multilevel
modeling strategies that have the potential to be robust to model
misspecification. The project generalizes MRP to handle weighting adjustments
for regression, deep interactions, calibration for non-census variables, complex
survey design, multistage sampling, multiple survey frames, and other
complications that arise in real-world survey analysis. The new methods will be
applied to two ongoing surveys, the New York Longitudinal Poverty Measure study
and the Fragile Families and Child Wellbeing study. Computations will be
performed using the open source Bayesian program Stan and will be freely
disseminated. The project is supported by the Methodology, Measurement, and
Statistics Program and a consortium of federal statistical agencies as part of a
joint activity to support research on survey and statistical methodology.