* 1534318
* The role of noise in information-theoretic models of sentence comprehension and production
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2015,02/29/2020
* Edward Gibson, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Tyler Kendall
* 02/29/2020
* USD 366,881.00

Human language as it is produced and understood is full of errors: people make
speech errors, they make typographical errors when typing / texting, and there
is often background noise that makes it impossible to perceive words accurately.
Given the noisy nature of human language in practice, it is surprising that
people can understand one another so well. The question of how people can
communicate given noise is not yet solved, and is the focus of our work.
Understanding how humans can understand noisy language is critical for two
reasons. First, language technologies must be capable of processing noisy
language input: translation services need to account for errors in the text
being translated; search engines need to process noisily-generated web content.
Evidence concerning how humans understand language in noise can lead to
improvements in the design of language technologies. In addition, until dialogue
systems can produce coherent language responses--likely decades away--any
practical application of such systems must be designed with an understanding of
how humans deal with noisy or confusing language input. Second, on the clinical
side, understanding how humans understand language which might contain errors
will provide insights into language comprehension disorders. Recent research has
shown that individuals with aphasia appear to assume the presence of more errors
in the input than healthy participants, and thus show stronger reliance on their
prior beliefs about the world when interpreting language. Applications of this
work may lead to more efficient diagnosis and treatment options for such
patients.

The goals of the proposed research are two-fold. First, the researchers will
investigate noise in the process of language comprehension, where noise falls
into three categories (a) deletions, such that the listener / reader might miss
something that was intended; (b) insertions, such that the producer might
accidentally insert something; and (c) swaps, such that the producer might
accidentally switch elements in the stream. Second, the researchers will
investigate an information-theoretic approach to memory in sentence production,
where memory is a source of potential errors in language use. Recent human
vision research suggests that memory capacity is best modeled as a limitation on
the complexity of the representations, in terms of information-theoretic units
called "bits". Simple representations require very few bits of information, but
complex representations require many. The proposed research extends this idea to
language, such that high-frequency words and phrases such as "the boy sees the
girl" should be stored easily in memory, while less frequent components such as
"the woman who the man met was tall" should be difficult to store in memory.