* 1534195
* Community College Biology Education Research Meeting
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/2015,08/31/2016
* Jeffrey Schinske, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Ellen Carpenter
* 08/31/2016
* USD 49,321.00

The University of Texas at Austin and De Anza Community College will be
addressing the dearth of discipline-based education research, particularly
Biology Education Research (BER), at the nation's community colleges. The
project team will convene a meeting of national leaders in BER, community
college biology teaching, action research, and community-based participatory
research. The meeting will characterize the state of community college BER,
including what issues or topics have been studied and where gaps exist. Further,
it will generate a plan to identify constraints and affordances community
college faculty encounter when conducting and publishing Biology Education (Bio-
Ed) studies and a plan to identify support strategies that will enhance the
number of faculty conducting and publishing community college Bio-Ed studies.
Finally, the meeting will nucleate a network of individuals interested in
conducting or participating in community college Bio-Ed
studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Participants will represent diverse theoretical,
practical, and institutional perspectives important to fostering BER in
community colleges and will include journal editors, BER scholars, and community
college faculty. The meeting will also include experts in the variety of
research traditions that ensure active involvement of the community being
studied and equitable consideration of community interests. The project will
have three outcomes: 1) a meeting report that will be submitted for publication
in a peer-reviewed journal and a complementary set of editorials and letters to
editors of other STEM- and Bio-Ed journals to draw attention to the report; 2) a
set of plans for a collaborative research project to identify factors that
enable or limit community college faculty in conducting and publishing BER; and
3) a network of individuals dedicated to fostering BER in community colleges and
accomplishing emergent meeting goals. The meeting will also serve as a
foundation for generating evidence-based strategies to address the dearth of BER
at the community college level.