* 1534701
* SBIR Phase II:  Nondestructive/noninvasive three-dimensional imaging with Gabor-domain optical coherence microscopy
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2015,05/31/2020
* Cristina Canavesi, LighTopTech Corp.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 05/31/2020
* USD 1,113,353.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will explore the
applicability of a Gabor-domain optical coherence microscopy (GD-OCM) instrument
to image and evaluate optical materials as part of the manufacturing process.
The immediate broader impact of this project is to effectively provide both
qualitative and quantitative information about product quality in manufacturing,
with an initial focus on contact lens manufacturing. Providing high-speed,
industrial, micrometer-level resolution in all three dimensions, GD-OCM enables
contact lens manufacturers to replace multiple inspection steps with a single
measurement done automatically, reducing the opportunity for damaging the
samples and human error, and ultimately leading to increased productivity and
yield. The resulting improvements in contact lens performance and extended wear
effects are poised to have a positive impact on a significant percentage of the
population. Recent evaluations of GD-OCM have indicated its ability to provide a
new wealth of characterization methods for quality control of various materials
that are otherwise impossible to characterize nondestructively, including
gradient refractive index polymers, glass and layered structures. Additionally,
GD-OCM will enable new advances in a wide variety of scientific fields via its
capability to non-invasively optically section samples of a variety of material
types. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this Phase II project is to
establish the effectiveness of the emerging GD-OCM technology for nondestructive
on-line metrology of contact lenses in manufacturing. Quality control and
detection of product-significant defects, and a corresponding increase in
production yield, represent the value proposition for the introduction of GD-OCM
instrumentation into the contact lens production environment. The project will
result in two major outcomes: 1) implementation of a robust production-
environment instrument to effectively provide micrometer-level resolution in all
three dimensions and quantification of yield-relevant contact lens quality
metrics not previously available in a single instrument; and 2) demonstration of
the technology for inspection in a production environment to rapidly and
accurately monitor defects and quantify contact lens quality using product
relevant metrics. This nondestructive, on-line optical inspection system can
have significant impact not only on the process control and thereby yield of
contact lenses, but also in manufacturing of layered materials in general,
including polymers, plastics, and glass. Longer-term, the technology offers new
paths for tissue imaging, guided surgery, and monitoring of eye disease.