* 1534469
* SBIR Phase II:  Rapid Pathogen Diagnostics and Biosurveillance using Multiplexed High-throughput Sequencing
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2015,10/31/2019
* Eduardo Castro-Nallar, Aperiomics, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 10/31/2019
* USD 1,143,384.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is to improve our ability to fight infectious
diseases that negatively impact agricultural yields and reduce the efficiency of
global food production and distribution systems. This innovation will enhance
scientific and technological understanding by leveraging the power of high-
throughput sequencing and bioinformatics to provide a pathogen identification
and surveillance tool with demonstrated efficacy against known and unknown
infectious agents. This platform is fast, sensitive, and cost-effective, and can
be used for any animal sample to detect virtually all possible microbes even
microbes that have never before been characterized. Hundreds of samples can be
rapidly screened without relying upon known genetic/genomic data of microbes.
The global molecular diagnostics market is expected to grow at a compound annual
growth rate (CAGR) of over 14% from 2012 to 2017, with infectious disease
testing being the leading application at 26% share, therefore the commercial
opportunity of this project is vast.

The proposed project follows up on the validation of the diagnostic platform
(SBIR Phase I) and delves deeper into improving virus detection and genetic data
generation. In addition, this proposal seeks to develop a basal informatics
infrastructure that together with sample preparation improvements will be
conducive of scalable, high-throughput analysis of several samples. Current
diagnostic methods rely on what is already known about target microbe genetics,
and provide limited information in the form of presence/absence of a known
target sequence. The SBIR Phase I was instrumental to lowering the technical
risks associated with a high-throughput unbiased pathogen detection platform
based on DNA sequencing and Bayesian statistics. In the pursue of standardizing
and validating our metagenomics pathogen identification platform, this project
proposes to: 1) improve viral detection capabilities and accuracy, 2) develop
new functionalities, and 3) incorporate Phase I and Phase II advances into an
integrated in-house web-accessible interface.