* 1534699
* SBIR Phase II:  Development of a Microscope to Detect Cellular Motion in Three-dimensional Tissue
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Ran An, Animated Dynamics, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 08/31/2018
* USD 1,004,066.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is to develop a new microscope that integrates
biodynamic imaging with conventional phase contrast microscopy for use in drug
development and other research applications. Accurately capturing the signatures
of three-dimensional biological systems provides more realistic measures of drug
efficacy and response heterogeneity - two critical aspects of the drug-
development process that help find the right drug doses and combinations to kill
cancer cells with minimal toxic side effects. This tool will extract functional
information at greater tissue depths than conventional microscopies by using
cellular motions inside living tissue. The motion is detected by reflected light
that carries with it important information about the action of drugs inside 3D
tissue, allowing drug evaluations in heterogeneous three-dimensional tissues
systems, and providing new insights for pharmaceutical development.

This SBIR Phase II project provides a tool capable of extracting high-content
information from inside three-dimensional living tissue culture and tumor
biopsies. It extracts this functional information at greater tissue depths than
conventional microscopies by using Doppler tags on light scattered from
intracellular motions inside living tissue. These novel Doppler tags carry
phenotypic profiling information about the action of drugs inside 3D tissue,
allowing drug evaluations in heterogeneous three-dimensional tissues and
providing new insights for pharmaceutical development and therapeutics. The
project goals are to construct a new type of microscope based on the detection
of cellular motions, and to integrate the microscope with a software platform
that is easy to use by customers. Upon completion of this Phase II, a commercial
biodynamic microscope product will be ready for value-added resale of leading
microscopes to life sciences customers.