* 1534481
* Support for Students, Post-Docs, and Community College Faculty to Attend 2015 ASME Applied Mechanics and Materials Conference (McMat2015), Seattle, Washington; June 29-July 1, 2015
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2015,09/30/2015
* Junlan Wang, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* kara peters
* 09/30/2015
* USD 12,000.00

The ASME Applied Mechanics and Materials (McMat) meeting is a quadrennial
conference jointly established by the divisions of Applied Mechanics and of
Materials of the American Society of Mechanical Engineers (ASME). This meeting
covers all aspect of mechanics and materials, from experiment, computation to
theory. It provides a unique platform for researchers from industry, academia
and national labs to come together to present, share and identify the most
important developments, trends and innovations in the field. The upcoming McMat
2015 conference, to be held in Seattle, Washington, June 29-July 2, 2015, places
special emphasis on advancing the knowledge in the emerging areas of energy,
health, soft electronics, advanced manufacturing, and mechanics and materials
education. This award will provide partial travel support for beginning
researchers including graduate students, postdocs as well as community college
faculty members to attend the conference. Special effort will be made to
identify and support women and under-represented minority members as they are
currently under represented in the mechanics and materials field.

The McMat 2015 is one of the most well attended conference in the mechanics and
materials field expecting over 400 participants from over 30 countries. This
travel award will foster a greater and more diverse conference participation of
US young scholars. It provides a unique opportunity to research active graduate
students and postdoc researchers, and community college instructors in mechanics
education, to learn about the most recent and important developments and
innovations, and to interact with the researchers who are actually working on
the forefront of these areas. In addition, the award will promote the
participation and recognition of women and underrepresented minorities in the
mechanics and materials field.