* 1534785
* SBIR Phase II:  Development of High Speed Process Technology for the Manufacturing of Cost Effective Polymer Rebar
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2015,01/31/2019
* Matthew Kero, Neuvokas Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 01/31/2019
* USD 1,403,184.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will focus on
developing the process required to produce fiber reinforced polymer (FRP) rebar
at scale. FRP rebar offers significant performance advantages when compared to
uncoated steel rebar. These advantages include a sevenfold weight reduction, no
corrosion - which in turn permits a 30% reduction in concrete usage (and a
corresponding 15 billion ton reduction in CO2 emissions) - and equivalent
tensile strength at smaller diameters compared to steel rebar products. FRP
rebar is being produced but has limited market acceptance due to its high cost.
The high-speed process to be developed in this project will allow price parity
when compared to uncoated steel and enable a hundredfold improvement in process
speeds compared to current FRP manufacturing. Combined, these improvements will
allow entry to the $140 billion global market for steel rebar and allow mass
market adoption of FRP rebar. Additionally, basalt mine waste will be explored
and, where possible, utilized as a raw material for fiber production. The
broader impact/commercial potential of this project includes job creation and
environmental impacts. With implementation of this process up to 35
manufacturing jobs can be created immediately. The company's high speed process
combines a thermoset resin and basalt fiber as primary reinforcements within the
FRP composite. A consortium of pultruders has collectively organized the Fiber
Reinforced Polymer Rebar Manufacturers Council and has developed FRP rebar into
a viable product over the last 20 years, with a $1.2 billion market at present.
Currently, no FRP rebar product is offered at price parity with uncoated steel
rebar, and to reach this price parity a high speed process has been invented.
This novel process will be optimized and further developed by the completion of
this Phase II SBIR project. Basalt fiber, an emerging material with the
potential to replace carbon and other fibers in a variety of applications will
be brought into large-scale industrial usage with the completion of this
project. The Phase I project permitted the determination of the performance
characteristics of thermoset resins which have not been commonly used in
pultrusion, enabling product validation. This Phase II project will address a
range of manufacturing challenges that will be encountered in the production of
FRP rebar at industrial scale, allowing a commercially viable final product that
can be offered at price parity with steel rebar.