* 1534475
* State-of-the Art Conference: Magnetically Stimulated Soft Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2016
* Sergiy Minko, University of Georgia
* Standard Grant
* Joseph A. Akkara
* 04/30/2016
* USD 7,400.00

Non-Technical: This award by the Biomaterials program in the Division of
Materials Research to University of Georgia is to support students and faculty
members to attend the conference titled "State-of-the art conference:
Magnetically stimulated soft materials" in Athens, Georgia. This award is
cofunded by the Particulate and Multiphase Program (ENG/CBET). The focus of this
two-day symposium is on biomaterials that combine two or more functionalities
when at least one of them is sensitive to remotely generated magnetic signals
that trigger changes. The symposium builds upon earlier successful conferences.
This conference is expected to provide the mechanism for the exchange of ideas
and the generation of new approaches and technologies in such areas as smart
biomaterials, fibers and textiles, microactuators, sensors, drug delivery
systems, and biomedical materials and devices. The broader impact goal of this
proposal is to increase the participation of students and underrepresented
minority students in science and engineering areas. The conference format will
provide students with various opportunities to attend state-of-art lectures by
top scientists and meet with them, communicate and present their results, and
participate in discussions in the conference rooms, during poster sessions, and
conference breaks.

Technical: This conference aims at binding a number of recently opened
possibilities to generate functional biomaterials that combine two or more
functionalities when at least one of them is sensitive to remotely generated
magnetic signals that trigger changes and responses in soft biomaterials.
Remotely controlled materials promise a number of applications, specifically at
the microscopic scale. Homogeneous external fields provide energy sources that
are sufficient to overcome thermal fluctuations and align building blocks in a
broad range of dimensions from a few nanometers to micrometers. Since this field
would greatly benefit from multidisciplinary interactions from chemists,
biologists, physicists, and engineers, the main goal of this conference would be
to create a technical and professional environment in which participants from
diverse disciplines could interact. This conference is designed to discuss
recent trends and activities related to magnetically activated soft materials
and initiation of future collaborations among the attendees. These soft
materials are unique materials, properties of which could be controlled,
transported and imaged using external fields. The following specific topic areas
will be highlighted at this conference: a) spintronics; b) ferrofluids and
microfluidics; c) polymer and polymeric composite systems and devices; d) self-
assembly, nanomanufacturing and microstructures; e) biomedical applications and
drug delivery; and f) career and professional development opportunities for
students.