* 1534771
* SBIR Phase II:  Novel Compositions for Narrow Bandwidth Light Emitting Diode Phosphors
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2018
* Jonathan Melman, EIE Materials, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 07/31/2018
* USD 1,135,625.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is the development of a novel phosphor material
system that drives up to a 20% improvement in energy efficiency of phosphor-
converted LEDs (pcLEDs) over current state-of-the-art phosphor material systems
in nearly all pcLED applications. The market for LED phosphors in 2012 was
roughly $500 million and is expected to reach $1.2 billion by 2016. The 20%
improvement in the packaged LED efficiency will also trigger a cascade of
tangible impacts at the end-product system level such as using fewer LEDs,
increasing efficacy (lumens per watt) and mobile device battery life, reducing
electronic driver complexity, reducing heat, a thinner form factor, and a far
more brilliant color gamut. The anticipated results from this grant will satisfy
the 2020 goals for down-converting materials laid out in the U.S. Department of
Energy's 2013 Multi-Year Program Plan, bringing these efficacy and efficiency
goals and standards to market four years ahead of schedule.

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project aims to further develop
a novel and proprietary phosphor material system for use in phosphor-converted
light-emitting diode (pcLED) applications that will improve pcLED efficacy up to
20%. In display backlighting, 20-40% of the light emitted by the state-of-the-
art phosphors miss the sweet spot of the display's color filters resulting in
unused light and wasted energy. Similarly, in general lighting approximately 15%
of the emitted light falls outside the visible spectrum, again resulting in
wasted energy. The technology developed is a phosphor material utilizing a novel
chemistry that exhibits a narrow light emission spectrum to increase LED
brightness and energy efficiency by 10-20% in display backlighting and up to 15%
in general lighting applications. Prototype materials have been synthesized that
exhibit a narrow emission peak at target wavelengths, and the next steps include
optimization and characterization of the most effective compositions. The
anticipated results of this project are narrow-band phosphor materials that
exhibit performance and reliability characteristics commensurate with industry
standards.