* 1534536
* Moral Personhood and Social Belonging
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2015,12/31/2016
* Lauren Meeker, SUNY College at New Paltz
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 12/31/2016
* USD 46,991.00

Do local communities continue to constrain moral choices and actions in an
increasingly interconnected world? Globalization has altered the terrain of
communities everywhere. Borders appear less distinct as markers of place or of a
unique cultural identity. At the same time, people remain embedded in
influential social, kin, and religious networks. How do people respond to these
different and often conflicting pressures? Their responses, sometimes benign but
also sometimes terrorist, increasingly affect us all. Examining the micro-
processes through which people at the local level adapt their absolutist moral
systems to changing configurations of self, community, and nation will provide
critically important data for social scientific theory of how globalization
affects and produces morally grounded action.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
funded by this award is framed by these questions. The researcher,
anthropologist Dr. Lauren Meeker (State University of New York, New Paltz), will
undertake an ethnographic study of the relationship between social belonging and
moral personhood. The field research will be conducted in a village community in
rural northern Vietnam. This is an excellent site in which to pursue these
questions because this very traditional village was affected by the government's
previous rules against the traditional rituals that ground their moral system.
Now, although they are again able to perform the rituals, the government is
promoting such activities as national heritage, a Western concept introduced
through globalization. The researcher focuses on two broad questions: First, how
is contemporary moral personhood negotiated, embodied, and shaped in and across
popular Buddhist, communal, and lineage rituals in the village? Second, what do
local ritual practices reveal about the relationship between heritage, place and
identity in post-reform Vietnam? Data will be gathered through participant
observation in daily life and at the annual village festival and other important
rituals, as well as semi-structured and informal interviews with ritual experts
and participants. The researcher will study how morality is defined and
expressed and how perceptions of morality coincide or differ across ritual
contexts. In addition, she will document and look at the effects of changing
social ties in the village, in particular those resulting from recent attempts
by lineage elders to expand extra-village connections. Understanding how
villagers are responding to intensified and broader contact with others and how
they reconcile those responses with moral responsibility to their local
community is a central goal of this investigation into how conceptions of moral
personhood are shaped and expressed through local practices affected by external
interventions.