* 1534685
* SBIR Phase II:  Leveraging Health Information Technology to Improve Communication Between Cancer Patients and Providers
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2015,11/30/2018
* Howard Isenstein, Care Progress, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 11/30/2018
* USD 1,024,282.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is to improve outcomes for patients in cancer
treatment. Such patients often suffer from side effects of cancer treatment,
such as dehydration and nausea. By enhancing communication between providers and
patients, the project seeks to better manage such symptoms and thereby improve
outcomes for patients, including lower readmission and emergency department
visits and associated costs for Medicare, Medicaid and private payors. The
project will enhance scientific and technological understanding by creating a
knowledge base of symptoms patients are experiencing. If we are successful we
will be able to improve cancer treatment and lower costs in the United States at
a time when the number of cancer patients is projected to increase
significantly. These benefits are likely to create strong commercial demand for
our product from hospitals, Accountable Care Organizations and outpatient cancer
centers, which are increasingly under pressure by legislation and private payors
to reduce treatment costs.

The proposed project seeks to address the problem of poor communication between
providers and cancer patients (which is partially responsible for extremely high
readmission and emergency department visits) who are experiencing nausea,
dehydration, neutropenia and other side effects. The project seeks to obtain
patient symptoms and report them to providers for potential earlier intervention
and outcome improvement. The methods to be employed include assembling an expert
panel, creating software and then conducting a feasibility trial. Key goals
include demonstrating the feasibility of obtaining patient symptoms and that
providers find the information useful and actionable