* 1534304
* DMREF: Collaborative Research: An integrated multiscale modeling and experimental approach to design fouling-resistant membranes
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2016,09/30/2021
* Sapna Sarupria, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 09/30/2021
* USD 969,089.00

1534304(Sarupria) & 1533874(Battiato)

This project addresses a grand challenge facing society today--how to make clean
water available to a growing population at low cost. Membranes used in water
treatment processes are exposed to feed waters containing organic, inorganic,
and biological species, which leads to fouling and loss of membrane productivity
over time. Since performance loss due to fouling is one of the largest costs
associated with membrane processes in water treatment, discovery of new surface
treatments that limit fouling would have significant economic and societal
impacts. Fouling propensity of a membrane depends greatly on its surface
properties such as chemistry and morphology. The goal of this project is to
develop the multiscale mathematical framework to predict fouling behavior on the
surfaces of membranes with different geometric patterns and chemical coatings.
The ability to predict fouling properties of new membrane surfaces in silico
will accelerate the discovery of novel membrane designs and decrease the time
from laboratory to market.

In this project, comprehensive studies involving iterative feedback between
computational modeling and experimental measurements will be performed to test
two main hypotheses: (1) targeted combinations of geometric and chemical
patterns on a membrane surface will significantly reduce membrane fouling, and
(2) experimentally-trained multiscale computational models will accelerate the
discovery of novel geometric and chemical surface modifications that
significantly reduce membrane fouling. This research will (i) produce a
mathematical framework and corresponding models to identify the physical
mechanisms and geometric features controlling mass and momentum transfer through
and over micro- and nanopatterned membranes, (ii) provide a deep understanding
of how foulants and energy fluxes are controlled and regulated by complex
topologies, and (iii) elucidate how the macroscopic behavior of filtration flow
rates and reactive transport processes are coupled with phenomena at the micro-
and nano-scale. This work will be transformational because delivering an
experimentally-validated computational framework will enable rapid screening of
many membrane surface modifications to short-list the most promising ones for
further testing, and it will lead to a leapfrog improvement in membrane
filtration technologies. This project will provide a multidisciplinary
environment for training graduate and undergraduate researchers. New
communication platforms such as Zoom video conferencing will be used to deliver
virtual science demonstrations and laboratory tours to elementary school
students. Virtual and interactive conferences will be held bi-annually to
educate a broad audience about membrane science, water purification and
materials engineering.