* 1534712
* Partial support for the Fourth International Conference on Effects of Noise on Aquatic Life
* GEO,OCE
* 03/15/2015,02/28/2017
* Arthur Popper, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 02/28/2017
* USD 28,071.00

This award provides partial support for The Fourth International Conference on
the Effects of Noise on Aquatic Life will take place in Dublin, Ireland, July
10-16, 2016. This meeting follows the very successful meetings on the same
general topic held in Nyborg, Denmark (2007), Cork,Ireland (2010), and Budapest,
Hungary (2013). The major goal of the conference will be to define the current
state of knowledge on the impact of underwater noise and, in particular, explore
the progress made in this field in the three years since the previous
Conference. The extension of renewable energy and petroleum projects to offshore
waters, the prospect of industrial development of previously pristine waters
(e.g., polar regions), and recent proposals to open new areas for petroleum
lease (e.g., US Atlantic coast) has resulted in greater interest in the effects
of underwater noise on aquatic life on the part of regulators, industry, and
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The meeting should help shape future research
and understanding of effects of noise on aquatic life. Based on experience from
the earlier meetings, the interactions and networking that took place has
resulted in new collaborations between investigators, a broader understanding of
the science that can be used in their work by regulators, a better understanding
of regulatory issues by scientists and industry, and substantial cross-
fertilization of experimental design and approaches by investigators.