* 1534094
* Improvements In Radiocarbon And Archaeomagnetism Dating Techniques
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Roderick McIntosh, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2018
* USD 86,419.00

Radiocarbon has been truly revolutionary in its contribution to our knowledge of
world prehistory. However, over 60 years on, there are still weaknesses
(irresolvable due to the basic physics of the method) that limit its
effectiveness when applied to certain key periods in the human past. A newer
dating method, archaeomagnetism, has proven its effectiveness in resolving two
of these weaknesses. One is the large standard deviation (the +/- range of
dates) that often extends longer than the beginning and end of the event one
wishs to date, and the other is the periodic flattening, or plateau-ing, of the
radiocarbon calibration curve (by which one derives calendar dates) such that
nothing between 800 and 400 BCE (before the common era) can be dated more
precisely than 400 years (the so-called "Hallstatt Plateau" cursed by
prehistorians around the globe). The last millennium BCE is precisely when many
innovations at the core of world history - beginnings of states and cities,
emergence of crafts and metalworking to name just a few - had their explosive
beginning and rapid evolutions. The Yale Archaeomagnetism Laboratory, opened in
2013, is dedicated to application of the method worldwide. The present project
is integral to the next stage of the lab's development which will feature not
only high-precision dating of archaeological materials, but also the development
of methods to derive data from archaeological contexts on changes to the
intensity of the Earth's magnetic field data critical to geophysicist's attempts
to understand the fundamental mechanics behind the generation of the magnetic
field. The Yale Archaeomagnetism lab was founded explicitly to address the
worrying lag in the production of archaeological scientific data in America
compared to the outpouring of those results coming from Europe (the so-called
"Quiet Crisis" in American archaeology).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The refinement of
high-precision archaeomagntic dates and the generation of heretofore unique
magnetic intensity data rely upon finding archaeological sites with deeply
stratified deposits, with an abundance of burnt features (hearths, furnaces,
fired houses), built of earth of the correct mineralogy so that those features
record the Earth's magnetic signal at the time of burning. Along the Middle
Senegal Valley in West Africa, at sites with evidence of Africa's earliest iron
smelting (first millennium BCE) and of the continent's earliest "state" (Takrur,
first millennium CE), the project team already has two decades of experience
excavating features with exactly those characteristics. This two-year project
will result not only in the generation of data to push the science forward, but
also in the training of six Senegalese students and researchers in sample-taking
(so the dating can continue beyond the two years of NSF funding). The newly
refurbished radiocarbon laboratory at the University of Dakar, Senegal, will use
radiocarbon samples taken at these sites in tandem with the archaeomagentic
samples as a necessary part of its renewal, a process of returning it to service
after nearly thirty years that has been delayed for lack of samples. Lastly, but
not least, one simply cannot answer core questions about one of the most
spectacularly innovative periods in the prehistory of Africa, taking place along
the Middle Senegal during those two millennia, without dates of higher precision
than conventional radiocarbon can provide.