* 1534698
* Developing Math/Science Teacher Leadership: A Consensus Approach to Evaluating Program Quality
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2017
* Barbara Miller, BSCS Science Learning
* Standard Grant
* Earnestine Psalmonds
* 08/31/2017
* USD 299,963.00

This ECR synthesis project will build consensus on the key attributes of high-
quality math/science teacher leadership development programs. The ECR program
emphasizes fundamental STEM education research that generates foundational
knowledge in the field. Investments are made in critical areas that are
essential, broad and enduring: STEM learning and STEM learning environments,
broadening participation in STEM, and STEM workforce development. The program
supports the accumulation of robust evidence to inform efforts to understand,
build theory to explain, and suggest intervention and innovations to address
persistent challenges in STEM interest, education, learning and
participation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project objectives are to 1) review the
literature on math/science teacher leadership development and descriptions of
existing programs; 2) organize a symposium of knowledgeable practitioners,
researchers, and policymakers to build consensus on attributes of quality
programs; and 3) communicate the consensus attributes and recommendations for
implementation and future work to stakeholders. The researchers argue that a
workforce development systems approach to teacher leadership development
considers not only training/development but also the systems and structures that
shape it, including infrastructure development, organizational development,
recruitment/retention, and research and evaluation. Thus, using a workforce
development perspective, the researchers can look at how teacher leadership
development is embedded within the system in which math/science teachers
collectively work, noticing where there are advances, gaps, or deficiencies. The
project will produce critical guidance for the design of teacher leadership
development programs that is grounded in scholarship and exemplary practice and
that represents consensus among leaders in the field. It will help decrease
fragmentation across the math/science education system and facilitate more
thoughtful connected approaches to teacher leadership development.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific research questions are: 1) What patterns
exist among attributes of math/science teacher leadership development programs?
2) What patterns exist in how leadership development programs define and measure
program quality? 3) What evidence exists for the effectiveness of leadership
development programs? The researchers will apply a coding scheme matched to the
research questions and a two-coder process to analyze the information to test
whether math/science teacher leadership programs predominantly focus a) on
improving individual teachers? classroom practice to prepare them to serve as
instructional leaders in their schools or districts and b) on developing teacher
leaders (individuals) rather than building capacity for teacher leadership. They
will include initially approximately 20-30 studies on this topic.