* 1534340
* DMREF: Collaborative Research: The Synthesis Genome: Data Mining for Synthesis of New Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2019
* Gerbrand Ceder, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* John Schlueter
* 09/30/2019
* USD 792,585.00

NON-TECHNICAL:

Development of new materials is the key to addressing many of the technical
challenges our society faces from energy storage to water treatment and
purification. To offer just a few examples: in the oil industry, new materials
are needed to withstand aggressive conditions, where failure comes with
tremendous cost; electrified vehicle drive trains will be advanced by higher
performing battery electrodes; carbon dioxide capture requires inexpensive new
materials with the proper thermodynamic and kinetic behavior towards absorption
and release. The rapid design of novel materials has been transformed by
approaches where properties for many tens of thousands of materials can be
predicted or inferred by a computer. The pace of commercially-realized advanced
materials seems now to be limited by trial-and-error synthesis techniques. In
other words, researchers have accelerated the process of knowing what to make
such that the bottleneck is now how to make the structures. This research will
learn from existing knowledge to develop insight on the synthesis of inorganic
compounds. The analytical foundation of these activities stems from advances in
machine learning that has allowed computers to excel in typically "human" tasks
such as health care diagnoses and game show participation. This research will
further accelerate the goals of efforts such as the Materials Genome Initiative
for Global Competitiveness by enabling efficient synthesis of novel materials
thereby speeding up evaluation of newly suggested materials.

TECHNICAL:

Materials are a key bottleneck in many technological advances such as efficient
catalysis, clean energy generation, and water filtration. Materials Genome
Initiative-style efforts have produced several examples of computationally
designed materials in the fields of energy storage, catalysis, thermoelectrics,
and hydrogen storage, as well as large data resources that can be used to screen
for potentially transformative compounds. These successes in accelerated
materials design have moved the bottleneck in materials development towards the
synthesis of novel compounds, and much of the momentum and efficiency gained in
the design process becomes gated by trial-and-error synthesis techniques. This
research will do for solid state advanced materials synthesis what modern
computational methods are doing for materials properties: Build predictive tools
for synthesis so that targeted compounds can be synthesized more rapidly. This
work will combine knowledge regarding synthesis, first principles modeling, and
data mining to suggest synthesis routes for novel compounds.