* 1534063
* STTR Phase II:  Nanofiber Fabrication via Melt Coextrusion for Fuel Filter Membranes
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2015,02/28/2018
* Michael Ponting, PolymerPlus LLC
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 02/28/2018
* USD 868,357.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer Phase II project is to demonstrate a low cost, environmentally friendly
co-extrusion fabrication method for producing high surface area micro- and
nanofiber based nonwoven fuel filter sheets. The micro-/nanofiber nonwoven
structures are fabricated from two different hydrophilic and hydrophobic
polymers in a melt co-extrusion and subsequent exfoliation processing step. The
resulting porous filtration media sheets have been shown to possess superior
strength, tailorable pore sizes, and fuel filtration efficiency on par with
currently utilized commercial fuel filter products. These accomplishments
signify a path forward to a highly scalable manufacturing process for producing
low cost thermoplastic filter products in addressing the increasingly stringent
EPA regulation of ppm level water contaminant. The reduced manufacturing process
complexity in melt co-extrusion is estimated to provide up to 60% reduced
production costs when scaled to commercial production quantities. Additionally,
a significant environmental impact will be realized through adoption of this
novel production technology over competitive processes owing to its ?greener?
solvent-free manufacturing aspects that eliminates the annual need for millions
of gallons of organic solvents and supporting reclamation equipment currently
utilized by the filtration industry in creating elctrospun and wet-laid
composite nonwoven filtration media.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of this
Phase II research project are to fabricate nano/micro scale nonwoven fibrous
filter mats for fuel filters via a novel melt co-extrusion approach, with high
fuel/water filtration efficiency and superior mechanical properties, in a
commercially relevant production scale, towards addressing the stringent EPA
2010 filtration regulations and its upcoming revisions in 2015. The first
generation filter prototypes fabricated in Phase I STTR program exhibited up to
a ten-fold increase in surface area, up to a two-fold increase in porosity and
up to a six-fold the deformation strength of the commercial filters. The
coextruded microporous filter fiber size distribution was comparable to a
commercial melt-blown process sample and superior to the leading wet-laid
technology samples. Preliminary filtration efficiency experiments on the
coextruded micro-fiber filtration media prototypes exhibited 60 to greater than
80 % separation of water from ultra-low sulfur diesel as compared to 80 % water
separation using commercial filter under same testing conditions. The commercial
interest for the new multilayered, coextruded filtration media processing
technique is centered on identification of new filtration media film polymer
materials, achieving nano-sized pore distributions for improved filtration
efficiency and achieving scale-up production cost savings through the improved
filter film processing technique.