* 1534836
* SI2-SSE: TestRig 2.0
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2015,02/28/2017
* Christopher Rapier, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Rajiv Ramnath
* 02/28/2017
* USD 287,308.00

Advances in computation, modeling, and digital collection have led to an
exponential growth in the size of scientific data sets. This 'Big Data' is
transforming the process of scientific discovery. However, many scientific
workflows require that the data be transferred, via networks like the Internet,
to an optimal location for analysis and collaboration. Unfortunately, scientists
often encounter performance problems on these networks. To resolve these
problems, researchers depend on the expertise of engineers at Network Operations
Centers (NOCs) for diagnosis and resolution. Resolving these problems often
requires a cycle of interactions between the user and engineer that can last for
days if not weeks, seriously hindering the scientific workflow. This project,
known as TestRig 2.0, will short circuit this cycle by deploying a simple, easy
to use system that will automatically collect a wide variety of important
network diagnostic information. TestRig 2.0 will distribute dynamically
generated test environments that are tuned to the specific needs of NOC
engineers. TestRig 2.0 will automatically runs a series of tests against the
infrastructure, collect the results, and transfer them back to the NOC engineer.
TestRig 2.0 will also conducted a coarse analysis of the collected data so as to
give the engineers some initial insight into the collected
metrics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, researchers at Pittsburgh
Supercomputing Center (PSC) propose to build a system, TestRig 2.0, that will
quickly and easily gather a wide range of important network diagnostic
information. This system includes a centralized management server that
dynamically creates and configures client optical disk image files (as defined
by ISO 9660). This server will be at PSC; it will provide TestRig 2.0 services
to multiple geographically diverse NOCs via a free subscription model. These
bootable images will provide a known good TCP stack configuration and system
environment. TestRig 2.0 will use this baseline environment to perform tests
against the perfSONAR monitoring infrastructure and also collect other pertinent
data. The resulting data will undergo an initial automated coarse analysis by
the client in order to provide engineers initial insight into the data. The
resulting analysis and raw data will then be packaged and transferred back to
the appropriate NOC for analysis. The client ISO creation process will include a
unique dynamically generated public/private key pair. This key pair will be used
for the authentication of the client ISO, distribution management, and user/test
management. The rapid collection of pertinent data will enhance the process of
scientific discovery by allowing researchers to focus on their research, instead
of running tests for network engineers. By providing a framework for the use and
development of post-collection data analysis, the system will lower the bar
required for effective network diagnostics across a wide range of support
personnel.