* 1534472
* Bayesian Methods for Meta-Analysis in the Presence of Publication Bias
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Joachim Vandekerckhove, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 08/31/2018
* USD 260,000.00

The differential rate of publishing between positive and negative results, which
has been called publication bias, is of increasing concern in the social and
behavioral sciences. This research project will develop a new approach to meta-
analysis that explicitly takes into account the possibility of a biased
publication process. Meta-analysis has been instrumental in interpreting the
claims made in the academic literature. However, academic journals, especially
in the social and behavioral sciences, seem to strongly prefer manuscripts that
posit the existence of an effect rather than non-significant outcomes. This
hinders classical meta-analysis methods because the aggregate of a biased set of
empirical results will be biased as well. The new approach will allow for better
aggregation of published results and will provide a more accurate view of the
effect of various experimental manipulations and treatments. Software will be
developed and published that implements this approach for a variety of
situations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project will develop a new
approach to meta-analysis called "statistical mitigation" that combines
behavioral models with state-of-the-art statistical methods. The approach will
be based on a Bayesian model averaging technique in which effect size estimates
are computed using a set of plausible selection models and averaging across
these selection models. With this approach, it will be possible to isolate the
signal of true effects within the noise of measurement error. The investigator
will test the method under various circumstances, compare the new approach to
existing methods for inference in the presence of publication bias, and perform
simulations to assess the efficiency of the method. With a single approach to
meta-analysis, researchers will be able to account for the possibility of
publication bias, confirm or disconfirm null and non-null hypotheses, and do
effect size estimation.