* 1534826
* DMREF: GOALI: Mechanistic and Microstructure-Based Design Approach for Rapid Prototyping of Superalloys
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2019
* Stephen Niezgoda, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* John Schlueter
* 09/30/2019
* USD 1,567,428.00

Non-Technical Summary:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Increasing the high temperature
strength and durability of superalloys used in aerospace turbine engines will
lead to enhanced engine efficiency and reduced fuel consumption and carbon
emissions. Presently, improvement in superalloy performance has relied on trial-
and-error alloy modification, which is utterly insufficient for materials
innovation to keep pace with new engine design, leading to inevitable compromise
in fuel efficiency and emissions goals. This award supports research that will
develop a novel and efficient approach to connect alloy composition,
microstructure and properties and enable more rapid and cost-effective
superalloy advancement. The approach employs an innovative combination of cost-
effective, rapid prototyping of highly relevant alloy compositions, with
extensive modeling at essential length scales, and validating experiments and
characterization tasks. Addressing these challenges will require close
interaction with the project partner, GE Global Research, bringing practical
experience and processing facilities to the
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Summary:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Improvement in superalloy performance has relied
on trial-and-error alloy modification, which is insufficient for materials
innovation to keep pace with new engine design, leading to inevitable compromise
in performance and fuel efficiency goals. This award supports an integrated
experimental and computational research that aims to improve our basic
understanding of these important alloys, develop predictive models of behavior
from atomistic through mesoscale to aggregate (polycrystalline) levels, and to
demonstrate the capabilities of the modeling tools developed through
optimization of superalloys for performance at high temperature. The program is
enabled by a novel rapid prototyping approach that will for the first time
explore the inter-related effects of superalloy composition, microstructure,
deformation mechanisms and creep response by producing a series of six-component
alloys via a cast and wrought process at GE-GRC. This will be demonstrated by
predicting optimized alloy composition / microstructure with enhanced properties
relative to a present commercial alloy. Addressing these challenges will require
close interaction with the GOALI partner, GE Global Research, bringing practical
experience and processing facilities to the project.