* 1534503
* DMREF: COUPLED: Computation Of Undiscovered Piezoelectrics and Linked Experiments for Design
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Paul Constantine, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* John Schlueter
* 08/31/2020
* USD 1,499,976.00

NON-TECHNICAL:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Piezoelectric materials convert between
electrical and mechanical energies and are critical components of many modern
amenities, including ultrasound, wireless communication, innumerable sensors,
and energy harvesters. Designers of piezoelectric devices today are forced to
select either simple materials with moderate performance or complex alloys that
have been empirically optimized over decades for unrelated applications. Instead
of the historical trial-and-error approach focused primarily on a single class
of high strain materials, this project will use emerging high-throughput
computation and experimental techniques to enable discovery and design of new
high-performance piezoelectric materials relevant across all use scenarios with
an initial focus on nitride alloys. By developing and providing an openly-
accessible database of both calculated and measured material properties, this
project will invert the entire process of piezoelectric materials selection and
design. An international industrial advisory board will help to ensure relevance
and accelerate deployment of new materials across multiple industries. The
project will train members of the next generation workforce in the innovative
mindset that with the right tools and approaches, new material development can
take months rather than
decades.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One
attraction of piezoelectrics is their utility across a huge variety of
applications, but in many cases, the materials parameters corresponding to
optimal performance in one application space share little with those needed for
other applications. Computational methods based on density functional theory
(DFT) can now calculate materials properties such as elastic compliance, static
permittivity, piezoelectric coefficients, and electromechanical coupling
factors, and these calculations can be combined with emerging high-throughput
screening methods. Using high-throughput fabrication, characterization, and
measurement capabilities as well as the mathematical tools to guide design and
quantify uncertainty, this project will develop an openly accessible database of
calculated and measured piezoelectric properties. These data will also be
converted to useful information via a web portal consisting of searchable
parameter sets as suggested by a (no-fee) international industrial Advisory
Board. This project will couple high-throughput simulation and experimental
techniques to enable discovery and design of new high-performance piezoelectric
materials relevant across all use scenarios with an initial focus on nitride
alloys. The field of nitride piezoelectrics is perfect for demonstrating the
promise of materials design because appropriate computational tools already
exist, decades of empirical results in oxide piezoelectrics can guide work
within the enormous white space of opportunity, and existing and emerging
commercial applications are poised for rapid adoption.