* 1534976
* Egregious Polluters: A socially-structured explanation of disproportionality in the production of pollution
* SBE,SES
* 01/01/2016,08/31/2022
* Simone Pulver, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Songqi Liu
* 08/31/2022
* USD 349,308.00

Non-Technical Description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is a three-year
program of basic research designed to examine the social structures that give
rise to patterns of inequality (i.e. disproportionalities) in the production of
pollution. Although others have noted that a key feature of economic and social
impacts on the environment is unevenness in the creation of and exposure to
impacts, few have sought to evaluate the socially-structured factors that create
and support such disproportionality. Towards this end, this prjoect focuses on
three research questions: 1) How has disproportionality in the production of
pollution changed over time? 2) What drives changes over time in
disproportionality in the production of pollution? 3) What factors account for
the persistence of egregious polluters? This project will answer these questions
by using both quantitative and qualitative comparative techniques that analyze
facility-level emissions for over 600 establishments in the pulp and paper
milling, printed circuit board manufacturing, and PVC pipe manufacturing
industries in the U.S. This inquiry offers a new framework within which to
analyze the production of environmental harm, challenging several common
assumptions; namely the notion that environmental harm is proportional to
economic growth and that firms are disconnected decision-making units. In
addition to theoretical and empirical insights, a disproportionality approach
also has direct implications for the regulation of pollution. Rather than
setting absolute standards for an entire industry, a disproportionality approach
focuses on identifying egregious polluters and enabling the reconfiguration of
production among those who are the worst actors. Improving the environmental
performance of a select few egregious polluters can significantly reduce the
pollution burden generated by an industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The focus of this project is on facility
pollution production metrics and socially-structured drivers of change over
time. The analyses will rely on US EPA's Toxics Release Inventory (TRI) data
from 1988 to 2012 for three industry classifications: printed circuit board
manufacturing (NAICS 334412), PVC pipe manufacturing (NAICS 326122), and pulp
and paper milling (NAICS 3221). To answer the first research question (assessing
the temporal dimensions of disproportionality), TRI data will be used to
calculate several annual measures of disproportionality (Gini coefficients,
lower-tail inequality ratios, relative ranking scoring, and spatial techniques)
within each case study industry, using both raw and size adjusted facility-level
data. To answer the second question (an assessment of the drivers of temporal
changes in disproportionality in industrial pollution), analytical techniques
such as regression and/or Qualitative Comparative Analysis (QCA) will be used to
to evaluate eight hypotheses, related to industry visibility, capital costs,
contribution to GDP, offshoring, growth and decline, regulation, and niche-
seeking behavior. The dependent variable in this will be annual measures of
disproportionality by industry and/or ranks of individual facilities within the
disproportionality distribution, yielding a total of seventy-five observations
of disproportionality over the twenty-five year study period. To answer the
third research question (assessing the persistence of disproportionate
patterns), two most polluting facilities will be selected, based on multi-year
average, size-adjusted TRI data, from each case study industry. The research
team will then develop profiles of these six facilities, collecting data on
operational characteristics, financial performance, characteristics of the
communities in which they are located, interactions with regulators and the
history of the facility within the community. Data will be gathered both through
archival sources and through on-site interviews with facility managers,
representatives of local government, and community organizations. Interviews
will focus on the relationship between the facility and the local community. The
goal of these facility profiles is to analyze the socially-structured factors
that allow for the persistence of egregious pollution.