* 1534903
* Injection Induced Seismicity in Hot Resevoirs
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Steven Glaser, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 08/31/2019
* USD 356,464.00

Enhanced geothermal systems are potentially a major contributor to the nation's
supply of clean, sustainable energy. An enhanced geothermal reservoir is an
engineered subsurface heat exchanger designed to improve a conventional
hydrothermal reservoir, or to create a circulation system where hot reservoir
rocks have low permeability. This is most often done by injection of pressurized
fluids. This injection has been shown to induce seismicity. Understanding why
injection-induced seismicity occurs is fundamental for utilizing this resource.
Understanding the mechanisms of induced seismicity is also necessary for the
exploitation of the country's rich deposits of shale gas, and for carbon
sequestration. Because the in situ mechanisms of injection induced seismicity
are so complex, there still is a lack of deep understanding. The project will
carry out a set of experiments in very specialized equipment that can model the
Geysers geothermal field. This will bring the understanding needed to engineer
for the mechanisms behind induced seismicity so that subsurface injection of
fluids for energy resources can be used without causing earthquakes

The project is based on a carefully designed sequence of tests, each informing
the next. The first stage is the investigation of the effects of fault unloading
vs. increased shear loading on foreshocks and rupture. Preliminary work by
Glaser shows that the dynamics are quite different. These experiments will take
place in a laboratory earthquake machine. The next set of experiments will take
place in the Glaser lab's true-triaxial geothermal reservoir simulator. Integral
to this device is a high pressure boiler that floods 250 mm cubes of rock with 2
MPa steam, duplicating the Geysers field. Specimens will be fractured to
represent a rock mass rather than a solid cube of rock. We will investigate the
effects of thermal contraction, and injected water flashing to steam, as
proximate causes of fault weakening. Both through-going and growing hydraulic
fractures will be modeled. The dynamic asperity-level displacement "seeds" that
lead to macro-rupture will be studied through nano-seismic imaging. This is made
possible by absolutely-calibrated nanoseismic sensors, which have a noise floor
of 0.2 pm. Over many years, laboratory analysis methodologies have been
developed based on tools used by seismologists, to accurately measure absolute
metrics of rupture kinematics, including the source-time function to mN
sensitivity. Because similar tools are used to study seismicity at the Geysers,
it is possible to reasonably scale our results.