* 1534303
* DMREF: Collaborative Research: Extreme Bandgap Semiconductors
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2019
* Debdeep Jena, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* John Schlueter
* 09/30/2019
* USD 1,007,999.00

DMREF: Collaborative Research: Extreme Bandgap
Semiconductors&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical Description: The last two
decades witnessed revolutionary advances in electronics and photonics by moving
from ~1 electron Volt gap semiconductors (Silicon, Gallium Arsenide) to ~3
electron Volt Gallium Nitride and Silicon Carbide. This enabled energy-efficient
light emitting diodes as replacement of incandescent bulbs, high-voltage
transistors that are cutting down wasted energy in electrical devices and
machinery, and significantly expanded our fundamental knowledge of the materials
science of semiconductors. Similar major advances are expected by aiming at
extreme-bandgap semiconductors with energy gaps almost twice of that of the
wide-bandgap semiconductors. In addition to the new science, such materials
should enable advances in healthcare and monitoring by creating deep-ultraviolet
light-emitting diodes and lasers, and by significantly improving the efficiency
and capability of semiconductors for electrical power conversion.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: Investigation of extreme-bandgap semiconductor
materials with gaps of ~5-6 electron Volts has the potential to seed vast
application arenas, and simultaneously advance the fundamental materials science
and the physics of materials. The goal of this proposal is to develop the
materials science of extreme bandgap semiconductors: Boron Nitride, Aluminum
Nitride, their alloys and their heterostructures, and to investigate their
properties for future applications in power electronics, deep-ultraviolet
emitters, and more. Guided by rigorous mathematical and first-principles theory
and modeling, the 4-investigator team will explore fundamental questions
regarding epitaxial growth, polarization-induced conductivity control, band
anti-crossing in highly mismatched materials, effects of isotope engineering on
electronic and thermal transport. The proposed research project has the
potential to be transformative in the field of materials science and condensed
matter physics under the umbrella of the Materials Genome Initiative because the
research thrusts will develop: first-principles predictive theory of electronic,
optical, and thermal properties of these materials, epitaxy of these new
semiconductors, isotope alloys and heterostructures, novel methods for
controlling conductivity, understanding and control of the interplay of
competing 3-dimensional vs 2-dimensional crystal phases, understanding of ultra
high-field optical, electronic, thermal phenomena, of cation band-anticrossing
physics, novel paradigms of isotope (neutron) engineering of optoelectronic,
solid-state qubit, Cooper pairs, and thermoelectric properties. The proposed
project will result in the training of graduate students in a fascinating
emerging field of extreme bandgap semiconductor material science, with their
many fundamental electronic, optical, and thermoelectric properties. In addition
to expanding existing outreach programs, new activities with a special focus on
high-school students and underrepresented groups via Research Experiences for
Teachers programs and direct visits for in-class demonstrations are proposed.
That the team is distributed between Cornell, Michigan, and Stanford with
complementary expertise will be exploited by regular exchange of graduate
students for experiments, as well as theory and modeling work, to foster a truly
collaborative mindset in the project. The dissemination of research by journal
publications, presentations at conferences, its inclusion in courses taught by
the invsetigators, and online (e.g. nanoHub) will make possible the outreach of
the research results to the widest possible audience.