* 1534326
* DMREF:  Collaborative Research:  Development of Design Rules for High Hydroxide Transport in Polymer Architectures
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Michael Hickner, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Lin He
* 08/31/2019
* USD 410,000.00

In this project funded by the Designing Materials to Revolutionize and Engineer
our Future (DMREF) Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Mark Tuckerman
at New York University, Professor Chulsung Bae at Rensselaer Polytechnic
Institute, Professor Michael Hickner of the Pennsylvania State University, and
Professor Stephen Paddison of the University of Tennessee are designing,
synthesizing, and testing new materials for use in alkaline fuel cells and
discovering a set of rules for best practices in the development of future
materials for fuel cell applications. As the United States seeks to enhance its
energy security through identification and development of clean energy sources a
range of technologies need to be leveraged in order to secure a sustainable
energy supply. Electrochemical devices are an important part of this mix of
technologies, and among these, fuel cells constitute some of the cleanest and
most sustainable technologies. Several key hurdles to harnessing the potential
of fuel cells (as well as various other electrochemical technologies) remain to
be surmounted. The team of investigators are focusing on anion exchange membrane
fuel cells that have advantages over other types of fuel cells in not requiring
precious metals and being operable with a variety of fuels at low temperature.
The project is employing a cohesive strategy involving mathematical and computer
modeling of specific materials components that may, in turn, guide the synthesis
of new materials, the characterization and testing of these materials in actual
fuel cells, and the determination of optimal design principles to govern future
materials engineering in this area. The project is also providing education and
training for graduate and post-graduate researchers in both theoretical and
experimental aspects of materials science and engineering, thus ensuring the
competence and creativity of the next generation of STEM researchers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The understanding and design of cost-effective
and reliable polymer architectures for use as ion-conducting membranes is an
important challenge facing emerging electrochemical device technologies.
Currently available proton exchange membranes are problematic due to high cost,
environmental concerns of fluoroplymers, and often poor performance under
nonideal conditions. Additional challenges in proton exchange membranes fuel
cell applications include difficult water management due to electro-osmosis,
high fuel crossover, and the requirement of expensive platinum catalysts. Fuel
cells based on anion exchange membranes have the potential to alleviate most of
these problems. However, little systematic knowledge of how best to design these
materials exists at present despite the fact that liquid-electrolyte alkaline
fuel cells were among the first fuel cells to be developed. The team of
researchers is applying an integrated, iterative theoretical-experimental
approach towards the targeted syntheses of polymers, the first-principles
computer simulations of specific polymer chemistries, the mathematical and
experimental characterization of structures/morphologies, and the measurement
and computational modeling of long-range hydroxide ion transport. Through this
cohesive effort, the team of investigators is aiming to advance fundamental
science and engineering knowledge in the area of fuel cells membranes and to
deduce a set of fundamental design principles for anion exchange membranes that
accelerate the time between concept and production of practically useful
materials.