* 1534778
* SBIR Phase II:  Commercially Viable Ton-Scale Production of Stereoblock Polypropylene Thermoplastic Elastomers and XPURE? Oils
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2017
* Jonathan Reeds, Precision Polyolefins, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 08/31/2017
* USD 750,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research Phase II project is to use the transformational "living coordinative
chain transfer polymerization" (LCCTP) technology of Precision Polyolefins, LLC
(PPL) to produce new classes of polyolefins from readily available, inexpensive,
and renewable chemical feedstocks and that can be used in the manufacturing of
consumer products with superior performance to the benefit of society. More
specifically, the commercial production of structurally-well-defined (precise)
polyolefins, including stereoblock polypropylene (sbPP) thermoplastic
elastomers, as replacements for technologically inferior polyolefins in adhesive
and additives markets will serve to capitalize on the increasingly advantaged
position of inexpensive propylene in the North America. The development of new
technologies, such as LCCTP, will help the U.S. to regain its position as a
world-leader in the discovery and commercialization of new polyolefin-based
materials, and thereby, contribute to the future health and growth of the U.S.
economy.

The objectives of the proposed Phase II research project are to address the
needs for new commercial polymers against a back-drop of ever increasing
consumer demand, a sluggish industrial response, and a limited pool of chemical
feedstocks possessing high price and supply volatility from which they can be
manufactured. The current project will seek to develop commercially-viable
processes based on a living coordinative chain transfer polymerization (LCCTP)
technology to provide a broad range of structurally-well-defined polyolefins
that possess with superior properties relative to existing products. By
conducting an in-depth investigation of polymerization catalyst structure /
property relationships, the project will seek to optimize catalyst activity and
thermal stability. In concert with scale-up process development, this catalyst
optimization will lead to reduced material and processing costs, and a product
portfolio of competitively-priced polyolefins with superior performance
characteristics. Validation of an optimized scale-up process will be achieved
through the ton-scale production of stereoblock polypropylene (sbPP)
thermoplastic elastomers, for adhesive and additive markets, and low molecular
weight proprietary oils, for cosmetics, lubricants, and adhesives markets. The
anticipated result is that commercially relevant (> 1 kiloton) volumes of sbPP
thermoplastic elastomers and proprietary oils can be manufactured as
technologically and commercially viable products.