* 1534676
* SBIR Phase II:  Dynamically Assessing Network Security Policy Compliance with NP-Live
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2015,01/31/2018
* Robin Berthier, Network Perception, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 01/31/2018
* USD 727,075.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project results from it significantly strengthening the
ability of network operators and security administrators to implement the
correct set of rules to keep critical assets out of reach of cyber adversaries.
The power grid has been said to be the most important engineering achievement of
humankind. Modern civilisation depends on electricity at such an intrinsic level
that we cannot imagine a world without it. In fact, disruptions of power
infrastructures quickly lead to chaotic situations in which human lives are at
risk. Now that power grid control centers are relying on IT infrastructures, it
has become of the utmost importance to ensure the resiliency of systems and
networks through methodical IT security protection, monitoring, and response.
Through automated continuous verification technologies, this project has a
direct impact on the capabilities of our nation to improve its resiliency. The
benefit to the power industry, to computer science security, and for society at
large is a technological advance to improve the security of our most important
resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase II project plans to develop a constructive approach to providing cyber
security. Cyber security tools are often driven by the necessity to respond to
market demand without having the time and resources to develop the proper
formalisms and algorithms to solve long-term issues. The innovation proposed
here is uniquely positioned to change this paradigm thanks to having roots in
both a fundamental academic background and an extensive collaboration with
industry partners. Consequently, this project responds to critical customer
needs while providing innovations in science, technology, and engineering of
critical infrastructure security. The approach taken to compliance assessment
has been evaluated in the field and provides a basis for new research leading to
theoretically sound solutions to network security modeling, and further
development of innovative and provably correct algorithms and tools for accurate
and scalable cyber security assessment under real industry constraints.