* 1534599
* A Long Term Perspective On Middle American Ecology And Political Economy
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Scott Palumbo, College of Lake County
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2018
* USD 73,235.00

Dr. Scott Palumbo, of the College of Lake County, along with colleagues in
Central America and the United States, will collect and analyze archaeological
data from the Bolas region in the mountains of southern Costa Rica. This area
witnessed the incipient development of social complexity and multiple sites in
the region are characterized by conspicuous monumentality (e.g. stone spheres,
large earthen mounds). Previous scholarship concentrated largely upon
interpretations of artwork, and it is not yet clear which economic or political
factors contributed to social changes over time. Such questions are important to
pursue because the various pathways to social hierarchy are not completely
understood. As these social changes lie in the prehistoric past, archaeology is
one of the few avenues capable of studying this topic in detail. By taking a
long term approach it is possible to gain insight into the factors which hold
small scale societies together an allow them to function as effective stable
units. The problem of social stability - or lack thereof - is an important
source of dissention in the world today and thus the research is of practical
contemporary relevance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Several researchers previously
argued that control over the best agricultural land was important to political
authorities; others argued that social factors were the primary determinant of
settlement distribution. The Bolas region represents an ideal location to
investigate these possibilities because it is environmentally heterogeneous and
because previous research documented variations in the intensity of craft
production between settlements. Dr. Palumbo and his research team will
investigate these possibilities through regional survey of Bolas and its
immediate hinterland. The survey will involve digging thousands of small
excavation units and collecting artifacts (e.g. stone chips, broken pottery)
from domestic trash contexts from dozens of sites. This trash will be compared
and contrasted to examine differences in social status and variation in past
production activities. This study may demonstrate that the evidence for high
social rank was closely associated with the best agricultural land over time,
thus suggesting this one environmental variable assumed an important role in
development of hierarchy. Another possible result is that high ranking
households were weakly associated with the best soils, but instead practiced
other activities (e.g. hosting feasts, producing crafts), suggesting a political
economy based on different principles. Ultimately, this research will be used to
compare the Bolas region to other regions in the world to better understand how
social complexity developed and persisted in the past. The team will generate
important data and strengthen scholarly collaborations between colleagues in the
United States and Costa Rica, as well as create and enhance educational
opportunities for students and local communities.