* 1534269
* DMREF: Collaborative Research: Design and Discovery of Multimetallic Hetergeneous Catalysts for a Future Biorefining Industry
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2020
* Jesse Bond, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 08/31/2020
* USD 400,000.00

#1534260 / #1534269&lt;br/&gt;Heyden, Andreas / Bond, Jesse
Q.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal utilizes statistical analysis to estimate
uncertainties in both experimental data and theoretical calculations relating to
catalytic hydrodeoxygenation of succinic acid (SUCC HDO) - an important reaction
in the refining of biomass-derived chemicals to commercially valuable products.
The experimental and computational methods employed - combined with statistical
error analysis - provide a more accurate and powerful approach for identifying
improved catalytic materials than possible by either experiments or theory
alone. The approach is applicable to a broad range of catalytic applications,
and could provide a blueprint for a new approach to the discovery and design of
catalytic materials. The results of the study will be made available to the
catalysis community via a website and software
tool.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the project involves preparation of
well-defined and well-dispersed bimetallic clusters of tin (Sn) adsorbed on
ruthenium (Ru), platinum (Pt) or rhodium (Rh) deposited on amorphous silica or
carbon supports. The catalysts will be characterized in detail with respect to
structure, composition, and surface acidity, and then evaluated in the SUCC HDO
reaction. A multiscale strategy will be used for the computations based on DFT
methods and techniques developed in the investigators' laboratory aimed at
reducing uncertainties in the estimation of free energies. Uncertainties in both
the experimental and computational analyses will be subjected to Bayesian
statistical analysis. Refinements to both the experimental and computational
methods will be made to minimize the uncertainties and obtain meaningful
comparisons between theory and experiment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The methodology
employed in the study can potentially guide materials selection and catalyst
design for many applications beyond the specific catalysts and reaction
demonstrated here. Rigorous standards are set for both the experimental and
computational work, that when combined with statistical analysis, provide
confidence heretofore lacking in the certainty with which new catalytic
materials can be predicted. The selected reaction is in biomass processing and
not only demonstrates application of the methods to complicated systems, but
suggests potential use of the methods in both aqueous and gas-phase reactions
important to renewable resources and energy sustainability.