* 1534645
* STTR Phase II:  Development of Bio-compatible and Bio-safe Cell Sorters
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2015,02/28/2018
* Tony Jun Huang, Ascent Bio-Nano Technologies, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 02/28/2018
* USD 899,999.00

The broader/commercial impact of the Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR)
Phase II project will be a cell sorter, a new research tool for life science
research, animal reproduction, and cell-based therapy. In the past decade, cell
sorters have become vital in many fields, such as molecular and cellular
biology, immunology, plant biology, animal reproduction, and medical diagnostics
and therapeutics. Despite their significant impact, current cell sorters have
the following drawbacks: high equipment and maintenance costs, significant bio-
safety concerns, and reduced cell viability and function. These drawbacks reduce
the effectiveness of cell sorters in many important research studies and
clinical applications. Enabled by this innovation, researchers will be able to
better understand the causes of diseases, identify new therapies, and test new
drugs and vaccines. It also has the potential to improve dairy production
efficiency, and aid medical doctors in making better decisions about diagnosis
and treatment. In Phase II, the goal is to improve performance of the
instrument, and validate the performance with end
users.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This STTR Phase II project will demonstrate the
feasibility of a microfluidic-based, bio-compatible, bio-safe, fluorescence-
activated cell sorter. Cell sorters are powerful, high-throughput, single-cell
characterization and purification tools that are vital for labs in fields such
as molecular biology, pathology, plant biology, stem cell biology, and medical
diagnostics. The technology is based on acoustofluidic (i.e., the fusion of
acoustics and microfluidics) cell sorting chips that preserve the integrity and
functionality of sorted cells. Current cell sorting systems reduce cell
viability, integrity, and cell function due to high shear stress, high impact
force, and high driving voltage, which reduces their effectiveness as a research
tool, and in clinical applications. Unlike current cell sorters that use
electrostatic force to sort cells, which require 12,000 V of driving voltage,
the proposed technology uses acoustic tweezers to sort cells, and requires only
10 V, which significantly reduces cell damage. Compared with existing cell
sorters, the proposed microfluidic cell sorter will have the following
advantages: 1) high bio-compatibility; 2) high bio-safety; and 3) lower costs
and lower maintenance. In addition, the cell sorter will be more accessible to
researchers and address existing unmet needs in the market (e.g., sorting
fragile or sensitive cells while preserving high viability and function). This
will accelerate research findings and improve diagnostics and therapeutics.