* 1534055
* Belmont Forum Bioeconomic Analysis for Arctic Marine Resource Governance and Policy
* GEO,OPP
* 05/15/2015,04/30/2022
* Linda Fernandez, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Standard Grant
* Erica Hill
* 04/30/2022
* USD 402,256.00

This award provides support to U.S. researchers participating in a project
competitively selected by a 14-country initiative on global change research
through the Belmont Forum. The Belmont Forum is a high level group of the
world?s major and emerging funders of global environmental change research and
international science councils. It aims to accelerate delivery of the
international environmental research most urgently needed to remove critical
barriers to sustainability by aligning and mobilizing international resources.
Each partner country provides funding for their researchers within a consortium
to alleviate the need for funds to cross international borders. This approach
facilitates effective leveraging of national resources to support excellent
research on topics of global relevance best tackled through a multinational
approach, recognizing that global challenges need global
solutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Working together in this Collaborative Research
Action, the partner agencies have provided support for research projects that
utilize existing Arctic observing systems, datasets and models to evaluate key
sustainability challenges and opportunities in the Arctic region, to innovate
new sustainability science theory and approaches to these challenges and
opportunities, and support decision-making towards a sustainable Arctic
environment. This award provides support for the U.S. researchers to cooperate
in consortia that consist of partners from at least three of the participating
countries and that bring together natural scientists, social scientists and end
users (e.g., policy makers, regulators, NGOs, communities and industry).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The efforts of the Bioeconomic Analysis for Arctic Marine
Resource Governance and Policy (BAAMRGP) collaborative research team will
address the need for integrated, cross-sectoral ecosystem-based ocean management
in the Arctic through the valuation and optimization of Arctic marine resources
across multiple levels of governance. The approach will consider not only
fisheries and subsistence species, but species with indirect or non-use
implications, overall biodiversity and productivity, as well as the relationship
between the marine ecosystem and humans, including health, commerce, and
management. The researchers from the US, Iceland, Russia, Greenland, Canada,
Denmark, Norway, and New Zealand will leverage existing data sets and expertise
in game theory, bioeconomic valuation and modeling, and fisheries assessment to
develop game models in cooperation with a variety of stakeholders, including
indigenous peoples of the north. The effort will also consider different
scenarios introduced by amendments to existing conventions under the Polar Code.
A PhD student will receive training in interdisciplinary science and gain
international research experience during the course of this project.