* 1534461
* DMREF: Rapid Design and Engineering of Materials Systems for Nanomanufacturing via Directed Self-Assembly
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Clifford Henderson, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Alexis Lewis
* 08/31/2020
* USD 1,065,168.00

Block copolymers are a special form of polymer made by simply joining two
different types of polymer chains together. These interesting materials
naturally exhibit complex nanostructured morphologies and have potential uses in
a wide range of applications including organic solar cells, water purification
filters, fuel cells for power production, and semiconductor device fabrication.
This nanostructured morphology is the result of the different types of polymer
chains in the copolymer trying to separate from one another much like oil and
water do not like to mix, a process referred to as phase separation. To be
useful in many applications, these block copolymers must be used as thin films
and the location and orientation of the different polymer phases must be
carefully controlled. Current understanding of such materials and processes is
limited, which makes designing and using these fascinating nanostructured
materials difficult. The goal of this project is to develop a set of design
tools and methodologies that will allow for the rapid design of block copolymers
and interfacial coatings that can enable production of highly ordered
nanostructured organic materials. The general approach to be used will combine
detailed molecular modeling tools with carefully selected experimental studies
to form a material and process design loop that can result in significantly
faster material design cycles than are currently possible.

Directed self-assembly (DSA) methods offer the possibility to use the
interaction of a block copolymer thin film with heterogeneous patterned
interfaces to guide assembly of the block copolymer microphases into desired
orientations with long range order. Current efforts in the field rely on time
consuming and expensive experimental studies to identify materials and
processing conditions that can achieve ordered nanometer scale structures.
Furthermore, most work thus far has focused on poly(styrene)-b-poly(methyl
methacrylate) block copolymers in which both polymer blocks exhibit very similar
properties. In general, there is interest in block copolymers that possess
blocks with very different properties, contain useful functional properties, and
which can achieve smaller phase separated domain sizes. In this project, new
block copolymers that can achieve much smaller feature sizes and which possess
useful functional properties will be developed. In addition, a new meso-scale
molecular dynamics model that can accurately reproduce the properties and
behavior of realistic block copolymers will be coupled to detailed experimental
studies to develop well parameterized models for these new block copolymer
systems. This modeling capability will form the core of a new rapid methodology
for designing the interfacial guiding layers required to produce ordered films
using DSA with these new polymers. These models will be used to explore and map
the behavior and process windows for such systems so that DSA manufacturing
processes can be rapidly developed.