* 1534315
* Collaborative Research: GEOTRACES Arctic Section: Mercury Speciation and Cycling in the Arctic Ocean
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2018
* Carl Lamborg, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 12/31/2018
* USD 457,698.00

In this project, investigators from Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution and
Wright State University participating in the 2015 U.S. GEOTRACES Arctic
expedition will measure total mercury and mercury species in seawater,
particles, sediments, snow and sea-ice samples to better understand its cycling
in the Arctic Ocean. In common with other multinational initiatives in the
International GEOTRACES Program, the goals of the U.S. Arctic expedition are to
identify processes and quantify fluxes that control the distributions of key
trace elements and isotopes in the ocean, and to establish the sensitivity of
these distributions to changing environmental conditions. Some trace elements
are essential to life, others are known biological toxins, and still others are
important because they can be used as tracers of a variety of physical,
chemical, and biological processes in the sea. In its methylated form, mercury
poses a serious human and ecosystem health threat, and this research will
provide important information on the extent and rate of change of mercury in the
sensitive Arctic ecosystem. Results from this study will be shared through
outreach efforts to middle schools students in the Dayton, Ohio area, and the
research will involve training for graduate and undergraduate students.

Mercury is a toxic trace metal that originates from natural and anthropogenic
sources, and can enter the oceans through many processes, most importantly
atmospheric deposition, riverine discharge, and coastal erosion in the Arctic
Ocean. Mercury in the ocean can be transformed into varying species by a variety
of abiotic and biotic processes. Its transformation to methylmercury is of
primary concern as it can biomagnify in food webs. Wildlife in the Arctic has
experienced unprecedented increases of methylmercury in their tissues during the
past 200 years. While there has been a great deal of research related to mercury
cycling in the Arctic in recent years, there remain large gaps in fundamental
understanding, particularly with respect to mercury distributions and
speciation. The researchers will 1) measure the concentration of four mercury
species in the water column, particles, sediments, snow and sea-ice samples, 2)
determine the concentration of other related chemical species (thiols and
snow/ice bromine), and 3) explore the mercury-related genomics of bacteria in
various samples. Results from this work will yield new insights into the extent
and rate of change of mercury loadings in the Arctic Ocean.