* 1534169
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Rights Mobilization in Comparative Perspective
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2015,12/31/2016
*  Vasanthi Venkatesh, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* scott barclay
* 12/31/2016
* USD 25,026.00

Under what conditions does collective legal mobilization occur and how do
litigation strategies vary? Efforts to answer these questions focus mainly on
positive mobilization, cases in which constitutional litigation is used. The
proposed study, by contrast, offers a framework for examining sites "ripe" for
constitutional action but where it did not occur. Conducting a comparative study
of litigation and rights mobilization, this research examines how three factors
impact legal strategies: the citizenship environment, resource landscape, and
past history of mobilization. The project will train a graduate student in
rigorous and empirically-grounded qualitative methods, and the findings will
contribute to policy debates in the United States and abroad around issues of
rights mobilization and constitutionalism.

The project examines the conditions for collective legal mobilization by
focusing on a particular group of non-citizens: temporary foreign workers (TFW).
Legal mobilization by documented TFWs, also called guest workers, is rare,
though guest workers have pursued constitutional challenges in Hong Kong and
Israel, but not in countries like Canada and the United States with a longer
history of fostering impact litigation strategies to claim rights. What
compelled guest workers in Hong Kong to bring a legal challenge? How and why do
guest workers in Canada and the US differ in their legal strategies? Drawing on
citizenship and immigration studies, law and social change theory, and social
movement scholarship, the project compares three national contexts, Canada,
United States, and Hong Kong, using two pairwise comparisons, domestic workers
in Toronto and Hong Kong and agricultural workers in the US and Canada. The
research takes a qualitative case-study approach, analyzing court decisions,
laws, and policies, and conducting in-depth interviews of advocacy
organizations, activist lawyers, and TFWs.