* 1534548
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Multilevel Modeling Analysis of Cross-Cultural Data
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2015,01/31/2018
* Jeremy Koster, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 01/31/2018
* USD 50,867.00

This award will allow two anthropologists to develop statistical tools for the
analysis of cross-cultural data. Social and behavioral scientists recognize that
conclusions drawn from research in western societies may not accurately
represent people in other settings around the globe. Therefore, scientists use
cross-cultural samples to assess, contextualize, and explain the range of human
variability. For example, if they find that individuals in some societies have
different norms of fairness in economic transactions than do members of western
societies, they can analyze comparative data from many societies to see if there
are common factors, such as ecology or group size, that might explain the
difference in norms. But working with such cross-cultural samples can present
new challenges because they typically result in complex hierarchical data
structures rather than averages and therefore require advanced statistical
methods. Therefore, in addition to a substantive analysis of a uniquely
expansive dataset, this research will also result in the introduction of methods
that can be adapted to similar analyses of unaggregated cross-cultural data.
Given the renewed emphasis on cross-cultural research by social scientists, such
methods are increasingly needed for the large, structured datasets that result
from compilations and collaborations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The data to be used
in this project will be compiled from studies of wildlife harvests by hunters in
21 subsistence-oriented societies. The analysis will focus on how hunting
proficiency varies across the lifespan. The immediate research goal is to test
the hypothesis that the extension of the human juvenile period relative to non-
human primates is an adaptation that promotes the gradual mastery of the complex
foraging strategies that distinguish humans. More broadly, this research informs
evolution and expectations about senescence and the role of experience in the
maintenance of skills-based performance among aging adults. The compilation of
data includes the outcomes of approximately 20,000 hunting trips by more than
1,000 hunters. Whereas previous analyses of cross-cultural data have often
relied on aggregations and averages, this award will engage multilevel modeling
approaches that account for the complex data structure and the challenging
nature of the outcome variable, a mixture of zeroes and continuous positive
values that is difficult to analyze via conventional statistical methods. The
statistical models in this project will demonstrate the range of variation in
age-related patterns across study sites, which has implications for the extent
to which individual societies can serve as models or analogues for prehistoric
contexts. Both the new data set and the improved methodology will be made
available to other scientists.