* 1534682
* A Bio-Cultural Study of Preferences, Behaviors, and Outcomes in Family Dynamics
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2021
* Brooke Scelza, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 08/31/2021
* USD 415,838.00

Non-marital births are an increasingly common occurrence around the world. In
2013, they accounted for two-fifths of births in the United States and an even
higher proportion in much of the rest of the world. Marital dissolution also
occurs at high rates and across cultures, infidelity is one of the most commonly
cited reasons for divorce. Traditionally, marital dissolution has been
associated with negative consequences for both mothers and children, including
poorer health, lower socio-economic status, and lower educational attainment.
This raises the question about why women choose to switch or maintain partners
and whether there are circumstances under which doing one or the other might be
beneficial. University of California-Los Angeles anthropologist, Dr. Brooke
Scelza, will lead a team to conduct a bio-cultural investigation of the causes
and consequences of female partnership selectivity to understand the
significance of these worldwide shifts in 21st century family dynamics.

A scientific study requires that the factors behind these behaviors be
disaggregated from potentially confounding variables. This requires that the
research be conducted in a smaller-scale and more isolated group than can be
found in the United States. Therefore, the researchers will travel to northwest
Namibia where they can study the Himba, a semi-nomadic pastoralist group. The
Himba provide an appropriate research site because they have high rates of
divorce, self-reported infidelity, and non-marital births. If these behaviors
benefit women over their lifespans, these benefits should show up in Himba data.
The research team will first document Himba cultural models of family and
relationship dynamics. They will then compare these models to actual behaviors,
using data from marital and reproductive histories. This will allow them to
assess how often women's behaviors match preferences, which women are most
likely to have partners that meet their ideals, and when alternative strategies
of non-marital reproduction are most likely to occur. Finally, the consequences
of having multiple partners will be assessed by tracking resource transfers and
health outcomes. Findings from this research will help social scientists
understand the significance of changing marital patterns and alternative
reproductive strategies wherever they occur. The research will also provide
insight into why women seek non-traditional partnerships, which is essential for
developing practical and effective outreach and social services.