* 1534818
* DMREF: Collaborative Research:  Discovering Insulating Topological Insulators
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Theo Siegrist, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 08/31/2019
* USD 359,999.00

Non-technical abstract:&lt;br/&gt;At the heart of electronic devices lies
silicon, a semiconductor material that can be made&lt;br/&gt;pure enough for
high performance and is amenable to mass production. While
such&lt;br/&gt;circuitry is continually improving, silicon is unable to exhibit
quantum phenomena&lt;br/&gt;required for complete solutions in weather
prediction, genomics, and secure encryption.&lt;br/&gt;A new class of materials,
the so-called topological insulators, holds the promise to&lt;br/&gt;realize
such phenomena and revolutionize computing. Topological insulators are,
in&lt;br/&gt;theory, non-metallic in the interior of the material but behave
like a metal at the surface.&lt;br/&gt;In addition, the quantum character of
these metallic electrons can be switched, which is&lt;br/&gt;the basic
information processing function. While known topological
insulators&lt;br/&gt;demonstrate the metallic surface state, these materials
have not been made pure enough&lt;br/&gt;for incorporating into electronic
devices. Specifically, they are not yet insulating in the&lt;br/&gt;interior.
This project will seek to find new topological insulators and to engineer them
to&lt;br/&gt;levels of purity needed for an insulating interior and satisfy the
performance demands of&lt;br/&gt;electronic circuits. The project will impact
the electronics industry as well as train&lt;br/&gt;graduates skilled in the
computational and experimental techniques of this new class
of&lt;br/&gt;materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical abstract:&lt;br/&gt;The
goal of the project is to create topological insulator materials that are pure
enough in&lt;br/&gt;the bulk to exhibit true insulating behavior. Topological
insulators are found among&lt;br/&gt;high-Z atom containing semiconductors with
band gaps small enough that the spin-orbit&lt;br/&gt;coupling related to the
large Z-number can invert the conduction and valence band.&lt;br/&gt;These
materials must also possess spatial inversion symmetry for the relevant
orbitals.&lt;br/&gt;The project will explore candidate materials classes among
pseudo-binary and&lt;br/&gt;pyrochlore-related structures containing heavy
metals such as Ir, Re, and Os. Materials&lt;br/&gt;synthesis by solid state
chemistry techniques will be guided by simulations based on&lt;br/&gt;density
functional theory. Promising candidate materials will be synthesized in
single&lt;br/&gt;crystal form by appropriate methods including vapor transport,
zone refinement, and&lt;br/&gt;growth from flux. Crystalline specimens will be
studied with angle resolved&lt;br/&gt;photoemission spectroscopy and
conventional charge transport techniques. Prototype&lt;br/&gt;transistor devices
will be fabricated on a smaller subset of these systems. The results
at&lt;br/&gt;each measurement stage will be fed back to the theory and synthesis
efforts.