* 1534411
* Collaborative Research: Measuring Preference Stability and Change: A Panel Study
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2024
* Catherine Eckel, Texas A&M University
* Continuing Grant
* Lee Walker
* 07/31/2024
* USD 272,073.00

General Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Social scientists and policy makers rely on
assumptions about people?s preferences to explain human behavior. Preferences
are thought to be stable, measureable and predictive of economic and social
success. For example when a policy is designed to get people to save for the
future we make assumptions about citizens' preferences for discounting the
future. We have measures that approximate how much people value the future and
we rely on those measures to inform policy. The problem is that we do not know
whether those measures are either valid or reliable. Do they predict the
significant life choices that individuals make? The same problem holds for many
measures of preference that are used when making public policy. The aim of this
project is to develop measures of preference that will be accurate and simple to
use, and that will predict behavior.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Technical
Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Human preferences are assumed to be stable,
measurable and predictive of economic, social and political success. Preferences
related to risk, time discounting (or patience), altruism, trust, reciprocity,
and competition provide the underpinnings for models of decision-making in
arenas as diverse as investment, savings, charitable giving and volunteering,
collective decision making, voting and civic engagement, or the choice of a
profession. While preferences are key constructs for the social sciences, they
have proven difficult to measure. We make use of a natural experiment, random
assignment of students to four-year residential colleges, to accomplish three
objectives. First, we will calibrate commonly used measures of preference and
test for their reliability and validity. Second, we will measure preference
stability. Our study allows us to measure preferences over time with the same
individuals in an effort to gauge whether they remain stable. Preference
stability is a central claim in the social sciences, yet we know little about
which preferences are stable. Third, we will map preferences to outcomes. By
using a panel of subjects tracked over five years we can identify which measures
of preference predict outcomes like civic engagement, competitive behavior, and
academic and employment success.