* 1534971
* STS Scholars Award: Toxic Shock Syndrome, Tampon Technology and Testing
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2015,12/31/2016
* Sharra Vostral, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 12/31/2016
* USD 133,023.00

General Audience Summary

This project examines the aftermath of Procter & Gamble's voluntarily recall of
Rely tampons, due to the product's deadly association with Toxic Shock Syndrome.
It focuses on the ways in which policy developed to warn women about the dangers
of tampons in general and super-absorbent tampons in particular. The project has
three core research questions. How were standards concerning materials testing
for tampon absorbency established; how did various stakeholders, including
corporations, federal agencies, and health advocacy groups, work to shape policy
about tampon use; and how were warnings about risk conceptualized in light of
absorbency standards? To answer these questions, the PI will engage in archival
research at the Arthur and Elizabeth Schlesinger Library on the History of
Women, Harvard University; specifically, she will focus on the library's
collection of the papers of Esther Rome, a women's health advocate for tampon
safety and founder of the Boston Women's Health Book Collective. The results of
this research will be of interest STS scholars, particularly those engaged in
research on feminist science and women-centered technology, and more broadly.
They will also be of interest to health care professionals and experts in health
care policy. In addition, they will have wide appeal to women, who are deeply
interested in narratives of personal health and the impact of techno-science on
their bodies.

Technical Summary

This project will advance knowledge in a number of overlapping fields including
gender and women's studies, science and technology studies, history of medicine,
history of science, and history of technology. It contributes the new framework
of "biocatalytic technology" defined as technologies that are not primarily
dangerous to humans, but have the potential to catalyze microbial activity that
may result in harm through their use. The framing of biocatalytic technology
helps to interpret, analyze and understand micro-biotechnological interfaces.
This research conceptualizes the body as an ecological space and historicizes
relationships of emergent technology, gender, and microbial constituents. It
exemplifies the need for different voices in the lab, and not only women
scientists but also invested publics. It calls upon medical practitioners to
understand the effects of material objects, and the unexpected influence they
may have not only on bodies but also upon microbial ecosystems as well.