* 1534621
* Collaborative Research: Social Mobility, Poverty Reduction, and Democracy in an Emerging Middle Class
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2015,12/31/2019
* Charles Klein, Portland State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 12/31/2019
* USD 156,647.00

Recent economic research has uncovered major changes in patterns of social
mobility throughout the world. In the United States and Western Europe, middle
classes that consolidated during the 20th. century are now observed to be in
decline. Conversely, in countries such as Brazil, India, and China, where middle
classes did not previously comprise a significant segment of the population,
middle classes have increased significantly. These changes are of obvious
economic importance. However, their wider social and political significance has
been the subject of little rigorous research. This comparative anthropological
project will address this gap. Anthropologists Dr. Marvin Benjamin Junge (State
University of New York, New Paltz), Dr. Sean Mitchell (Rutgers University), and
Dr. Charles Klein (Portland State University) will collect wide-ranging
comparative and longitudinal data to illuminate the significance and
consequences of the new middle class's historic rise. Not only will the results
from this study be important for social scientific theory, they also will have
important policy implications, contributing to our understanding of the
relationships between economic growth, poverty reduction, and the consolidation
of democracy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will be carried out in Brazil,
which is one of the key global sites where these transformations have been
occuring. Over the past fifteen years, approximately 40 million Brazilians have
exited official poverty classifications. The investigators will undertake a
three-year study in three cities (Fortaleza, Rio de Janeiro, and SÃ£o Paulo) to
understand the meanings, material transformations, and identities associated
with social, economic, and geographic mobility among Brazil's "previously poor."
In each project city, the researchers will focus intensive data collection on
people living in one home community. These case studies will combine:(1)
participant observation in important spaces where new middle class individuals
experience and express economic mobility (e.g., their neighborhoods, shopping
malls, churches, bus and subway stations, community centers, recreational
venues, health clinics, and public squares); (2) a baseline head of household
survey (660 subjects); and (3) in-depth, annual interviews (130 subjects per
year). These data will support the identification of potential subgroups within
the new middle class and enable the researchers to assess longitudinally how
individuals respond and communities to economic and political change at national
and global levels.