* 1534908
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Emergence and Impact of Law in Oceanic Space
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2015,10/31/2016
* Brenda Chalfin, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* scott barclay
* 10/31/2016
* USD 23,946.00

All social and legal institutions, relations and practices are located and
distributed in space. This research focuses on ocean space as an active social
and spatial field where there are increasing claims and counter claims regarding
user rights and access. In addition, going beyond the common perception that
oceans are flat, empty spaces, this study examines oceanic regions as
environments where cultural practices, identities and struggles unfold and new
legal norms emerge and are enforced. The work highlights contradictions and
inadequacies that exist between international standards for maritime security
and actual practices and capabilities, and examines ocean law and competition
over oceanic space. As such, the research has broader impacts for maritime
governance, social regulation of maritime space, and understanding sources of
conflict in regions where the U.S. has strategic interests.

Doctoral student Donald Underwood, supervised by Dr. Brenda Chalfin, will
conduct this research focusing on West African ocean space off the coast of
Ghana. The African Union has declared the years 2015-2025 to be the Decade of
African Seas and Oceans, and, since oil and gas production began in Ghana in
2010, the ecology of life offshore has become more active and complex. The
waters off of Ghana?s Western Region are undergoing rapid transformation, and
there have been increasing concerns from fishing communities regarding the
impacts of new oil exploration and extraction activities. Given the rapid
transformation of ocean space and energetic efforts of nations to advance their
offshore interests, this study conducts 12 months of ethnographic fieldwork to
understand how offshore waters are being socially constructed, organized and
legitimated through notions of territorial space, historic entitlement, and
international law. The research includes interviews with migratory fishermen,
offshore drilling platform workers and suppliers, maritime experts, and law
enforcement agents and data analysis that focuses on the practices and
experiences of working at sea and emerging efforts to govern West African ocean
space.