* 1534628
* Postdoctoral Fellow: Understanding scientists' views of good research practice
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Jutta Schickore, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 08/31/2018
* USD 165,937.00

General Audience Summary &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A post-doctoral research fellow
will work under the guidance of the PI to carry out an analysis that will
extract key concepts that scientists use to address questions regarding
scientific integrity and good scientific practice. The fellow will analyze
approximately 2,500 pages of transcribed interviews with scientists who work in
academic and collaborative environments about their conceptions of good research
practice and values such as applicability, risk, and responsibility. It is
important to address these issues since scientists are increasingly compelled to
communicate and publicly defend their standards and values regardless of whether
they work in a more traditional academic environment or whether they are more
strongly committed to commercialized science. The overall goal of this project
is to facilitate these communication practices by bringing to light key
conceptual tools to express, explain, critique, and defend their methodological
standards and their values to different audiences. The results of this project
may serve as a preliminary study for more in-depth analyses of communicating
good research practice at the interface between science and broader publics. In
addition, they will be integrated into undergraduate and graduate course, and
they will be shared with other science educators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Summary &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The post-doctoral fellow will take a bottom-up
approach to examine the methodological, epistemic, and ethical values that
scientists consider crucial for their research, what attitudes they have toward
these values, and what challenges they encounter when they explain their views
of good scientific practice to others. The project is both timely and important.
Very little is known about how scientists themselves conceptualize their views
of good research practice and scientific integrity and about the conceptual
challenges they may face in discussions about those issues. The fellow will draw
on available interviews to provide numerous empirical examples of how scientists
utilize and justify value statements in everyday research. By analyzing their
views about collaborations, their merits and potential downsides, and
particularly by assessing what motivations scientists identify for collaborative
work, it will be possible to refine recent taxonomies of different forms of
collaborative practices. In addition, the project will yield more information
about what counts as replication in different scientific fields. Most
importantly, it will provide deeper insight into the significance that
scientists attach to the replication of experiments and to the communication of
the outcomes of replications and about how they negotiate tensions between the
perceived necessity to replicate findings and the perceived pressure to produce
and publish novel and original results.