* 1534003
* PFI:BIC - Cyber-Physical Service System for 3D-Printing of Adaptive Custom Orthoses
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2021
* Toni Antonucci, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 08/31/2021
* USD 1,111,328.00

This Partnership for Innovation: Building Innovation Capacity (PFI:BIC) project
aims to develop a service system for Internet-based design and rapid
manufacturing of foot orthoses and ankle-foot orthoses with custom fit and
motion sensors. Orthoses are externally applied assistive devices that meet the
personal needs of people with disabilities. They are designed to achieve one or
more of the following goals: control of biomechanical alignment, correction or
accommodation of deformity, and/or protection and support of an injury. Custom-
made orthoses provide a better fit for users. They are more comfortable and
facilitate more effective treatment. However, the traditional plaster molding
fabrication method for custom orthoses requires a long delivery time and
multiple visits to the clinic, which are often physically, mentally, and/or
financially difficult for users of orthoses and their caregivers. The service
system is targeted for the One-Day Visit by facilitating the measurement,
design, fabrication, and evaluation of foot orthoses and ankle-foot orthoses all
within the same day of the patient's visit to the clinic. The current custom
orthoses design also lacks both the adaptability to adjust the stiffness for
individual needs and the sensors to measure and record the motion data for
clinicians and users. This project plans on creating a cyber-physical service
system aimed to fulfill these needs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The projected service
system utilizes cloud-based design and 3D-printing, a rapid manufacturing
technique for custom orthoses, to enable the One-Day Visit. For this system, the
clinician scans the foot and leg of the patient and uploads the geometrical and
clinical prescription data to a cloud-based Cyber Design Center, which has the
biomechanical models, baseline inertia measurement unit (IMU) sensor data, and a
user-in-the-loop framework developed in this project to design the user-
adaptive, sensor-embedded custom orthoses. Advanced lightweight, energy-
efficient motion sensors measure and record the orthosis motion in the living
environment for a week. While recharging the battery of the IMU data logger, the
subject's motion data are uploaded to a cloud database and analyzed for
evaluation of the gait and orthosis functions for the user. This research
connects three key aspects of the fused deposition modeling (FDM) for
fabrication of custom orthoses: the measurement of defects using nano-computed
tomography, prediction of plastic material properties based on the defect
geometry, and FDM process optimization. The ruled-based biomechanical decision-
support model that can automatically design the shape of custom foot and ankle-
foot orthoses based on user information and clinician prescription is studied
for orthosis design practice. The development of a user-based optimization
framework with long-term motion data of a user as the input will advance the
scientific knowledge of user-in-the-loop design and control of assistive
devices. This cyber-physical service system for custom orthoses presents a
vision wherein the cloud-based design and 3D-printing technologies can harmonize
with healthcare by providing a better service for assistive device users and
their caregivers. The efficacy of treatment and the quality-of-life of people
with disabilities can be improved by having comfortable and adaptable orthoses
delivered in a timely fashion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The lead institution,
University of Michigan (Ann Arbor, Michigan), is partnering with Stratasys (Eden
Prairie, Minnesota) and Altair (Troy, Michigan) in this project. The University
of Michigan offers extensive research innovations in optimizing internal
structures for 3D-printed porous structure, novel passive dynamic orthosis
design, using motion sensors for gait analysis, and user-in-the-loop design and
control. Stratasys, a pioneer and leader in FDM machines and materials, will
partner to provide the state-of-the-art FDM technology. Altair has cloud-based
product design center expertise, which includes all the associated software,
hardware, and security infrastructure. Broader Context partners include Becker
Orthopedic (Troy, Michigan); University of Michigan Orthotics and Prosthetics
Center (Ann Arbor, Michigan); and VA Ann Arbor Health System (Ann Arbor,
Michigan).