* 1534631
* SBIR Phase II:A low-cost instrument for rapid sub-micron particle size and concentration measurement
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2015,05/31/2020
* Franklin Monzon, Spectradyne LLC
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 05/31/2020
* USD 1,292,655.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project supports
development of a nanoparticle characterization instrument that will fill the
critical unmet need to rapidly and accurately measure the size and distribution
of nanoparticles from 30 nanometers to 1 micron. Initially the technology will
target two applications: protein aggregation in biopharmaceuticals, and
nanoparticles in medicine (e.g., tumor-targeted drug delivery). The importance
of nanoparticle analysis, however, goes well beyond therapeutics. Currently the
market for nanoparticle analysis instrumentation across the life sciences is
$5.6 billion, and there are increasing concerns about nanoparticles in consumer
products such as food and cosmetics, as well as in drinking water, effluents,
and the environment. A major challenge in understanding the health impacts of
nanoparticles is simply in accurately and easily detecting their presence and
size distribution. Additionally, improved nanoparticle instrumentation will
enable new discoveries in biotechnology and environmental and health
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This challenge can be met by developing a
practical method for counting and sizing submicron particles in polydisperse
mixtures. NSF Phase I/IB funds supported development of a prototype instrument
that detects individual nanoparticles and accurately measures their size, at
very high count rates. This instrument has successfully demonstrated robust
detection of individual particles as small as 60 nm in diameter at rates
approaching 10,000 particles per second, and has already begun to deliver useful
information to particle manufacturers in the pharmaceutical industry, with on-
going measurements of actual customer samples. The Phase II support will
considerably enhance the utility of this instrument by addressing several
outstanding technical challenges; most significantly, by extending the range of
detectable particles to span the full range from 30 nm to 1000 nm, and by
further maximizing the range of measurable particle concentrations. In addition,
the Phase II work will drive significant improvements in functionality and ease
of use, driven by innovations in its control software. Finally, the instrument
will be further validated using a wide variety of particle types relevant beyond
the pharmaceutical space.