* 1534965
* SI2-SSE: Quantum Monte Carlo Software for a Broad Electronic Structure Research Community via Minimal Explicit Dependency (MED) programming
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2018
* Cyrus Umrigar, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 09/30/2018
* USD 420,798.00

This project, jointly supported by the Advanced Cyberinfrastructure (ACI)
Division, Division of Materials Research (DMR), and Division of Chemistry (CHE)
at NSF, will provide a robust, usable software infrastructure for methods for
materials analysis, which, when run on high-performance computers, have the
potential to revolutionize and accelerate the discovery of materials for a
variety of engineering applications ranging from better catalysts, to solar
cells to thermoelectrics used for refrigeration. The big hurdle to doing this is
that these methods for solving the fundamental equation of quantum mechanics,
known as the Schroedinger equation, are either not sufficiently accurate or are
too computationally expensive. The purpose of this proposal is to develop
software for a class of stochastic techniques, called quantum Monte Carlo
methods, that will allow scientists and engineers to solve the equation more
accurately and thereby predict materials properties with greater accuracy. The
software uses a new programming paradigm to make the use as well as the
extension of the software by developers easier. If researchers find this
programming paradigm useful, it may propagate to a much larger research
community and may eventually become an integral part of a new programming
language. Thus this project will contribute to the basic sciences and
potentially contribute to the field of computer science as well.

The goal of this proposal is to develop a software package consisting of a
variety of quantum Monte Carlo (QMC) analysis tools. The software will have the
capability to compute static and dynamic response properties, thereby greatly
enhancing the range of applicability of QMC methods. Past research on optimizing
many-body wave functions will aid in this goal since some of the formalism is
the same. Both real space QMC methods, namely variational Monte Carlo (VMC) and
diffusion Monte Carlo (DMC), and, determinant space QMC methods, namely
semistochastic QMC (SQMC), which is an extension of the full configuration
interaction QMC (FCIQMC) method, will be included, since each of these methods
is the method of choice for some set of applications. The software uses the
Minimal Explicit Dependency (MED) programming paradigm that greatly facilitates
the development of complex programs. In particular, it lowers the barrier for
researchers, who are not familiar with the inner workings of the program to
contribute new functionality, thereby contributing to the long term survival of
the software.