* 1534433
* Collaborative Research: Record Linkage and Privacy-Preserving Methods for Big Data
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2019
* Aleksandra Slavkovic, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 08/31/2019
* USD 334,243.00

This research project will develop sound statistical and machine learning
techniques for preserving privacy with linked data. Social entities and their
patterns of behavior is a crucial topic in the social sciences. Research in this
area has been invigorated by the growth of the modern information
infrastructure, ease of data collection and storage, and the development of
novel computational data analyses techniques. However, in many application areas
relevant and sensitive information is commonly located across multiple
databases. Data analysis is inherently impossible without merging databases, but
at the cost of increasing the risk of a privacy violation. This research will
address the problem of how to perform valid statistical inference in the
presence of multiple data sources, data sharing, and privacy in the age of "big
data." The investigators' new modeling construct for inference and uncertainty
quantification will contribute to both statistics and the many disciplines for
which statistics is a principal tool. The methods will have a wide range of
applications in the social, economic, and behavioral sciences, including
medicine, genetics, official statistics, and human rights violations. The
investigators will collaborate with post-doctoral researcher and with graduate
and undergraduate students. The statistical methods will be encapsulated in
open-source software packages, allowing off-the-shelf use by practitioners while
facilitating more detailed control and extensions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
interdisciplinary research project will improve upon methods in record linkage
and privacy using state-of-the-art techniques from statistics and machine
learning. Record linkage is the process of merging possible noisy databases with
the goal of removing duplicate entries. Privacy-preserving record linkage (PPRL)
tries to identify records that refer to the same entities from multiple
databases without compromising the privacy of the entities represented by these
records. The research will focus on three aims: (1) development of new Bayesian
methods for PPRL, where the error can be propagated exactly across the entire
linkage process and into statistical inference, including new privacy measures
to capture a tradeoff between utility and risk of any individual risk in a
linked database; (2) development of new robust methods for realizing synthetic
data releases post-linkage with differential privacy guarantees and its
relaxations to address additional layers of privacy and support broader data
sharing; and (3) exploration of "big data" methods such as variational inference
to address scalability and latent cluster exchangeability issues existing within
linkage and privacy, such that the new methods can scale to multiple and large
databases. The new methods will be scalable and assess uncertainty throughout
the entire linkage and privacy process and can be evaluated using Bayesian
disclosure risk and Bayesian differential privacy. The project is supported by
the Methodology, Measurement, and Statistics Program and a consortium of federal
statistical agencies as part of a joint activity to support research on survey
and statistical methodology.