* 1534846
* An Examination of Grit in Relation to Diverse High School Students' STEM Motivation, Self-Regulation, and Outcomes: A Longitudinal Validation Study
* EDU,DRL
* 03/01/2016,09/30/2021
* Allan Wigfield, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Jolene Jesse
* 09/30/2021
* USD 1,237,743.00

Concern about students' participation and performance in Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM) courses and choice of STEM occupations has
shifted from a focus on overall lack of participation in STEM careers to the
underrepresentation of women and certain minority groups such as African
Americans in careers in engineering and the sciences. As researchers attempt to
uncover why some students are more likely to pursue STEM careers, they
increasingly have focused on motivational and self-regulatory factors that have
been shown to impact students' educational and occupational choices. One
construct that some researchers have focused on is grit, defined as one's
perseverance and passion in the pursuit of long-term, challenging goals. grit
has become very popular in the scientific community and the national media, and
some have argued that researchers and practitioners need to help students
increase their grit. However, grit's validity, especially in relation to
conceptually similar motivational and self-regulatory constructs, and for
different ethnic and gender groups, has not been systematically explored. It is
essential to establish grit as a valid psychological construct before designing
grit-based interventions intended to enhance students' achievement in STEM and
other areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed study is a longitudinal
validation study of grit and its relations to STEM outcomes. It will be
conducted with an ethnically and economically diverse sample of middle and high
school students. Students will be surveyed twice in 8th grade and once in 9th
grade, and their levels of grit and other motivation, self-regulatory, and
personality variables will be measured. Information about students' choices to
take STEM courses, their grades in STEM courses, and their anticipated major in
college will also be collected. Using sophisticated Item Response Theory (IRT)
and other latent variable modeling procedures, grit's convergent, discriminant,
and predictive validity will be assessed over time, and gender and ethnic
differences will be examined. The project will be transformative in its use of
sophisticated analysis strategies to examine grit's uniqueness from other
theoretically based motivation and self-regulation constructs that have clear
relations to STEM outcomes.