* 1534534
* DMREF: Accelerating the Development of High Temperature Shape Memory Alloys
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Dimitris Lagoudas, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 08/31/2019
* USD 1,667,133.00

High Temperature Shape Memory Alloys (HTSMAs) are alloys that exhibit large
shape changes at high stresses and high temperatures. If the shape change
behavior had be controlled and tailored, HTSMAs can be used as robust and
compact solid-state actuators with performance exceeding any other current
technology. Since the behavior of HTSMAs is highly dependent on chemistry and
processing, tailoring of HTSMAs for specific applications using solely
experimental means is unrealistic. This award supports the development of a
framework that can allow for the design of chemistry and processing steps to
achieve a given performance requirement in these materials. The immediate
technological impact of the work is the accelerated development of high-
temperature solid-state actuators for the aerospace and automotive industries.
Furthermore, the award will expose seven graduate and two to four undergraduate
students to a highly interdisciplinary research project, combining ideas from
materials science, mechanics, computer science, machine learning and design. The
work supports efforts related to the Materials Genome Initiative by integrating
experimental and computational research, making digital data accessible, and
training the future workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The current investigators
and their collaborators have recently discovered that nano-recipitation in
NiTiHf HTSMAs leads to unprecedented cyclic stability with reversible phase
transformation under significant stresses at elevated temperatures. To
accelerate their development, this research team will develop a framework to
prescribe the necessary initial composition and subsequent processing schedule
of a NiTiHf HTSMA based on arbitrary performance requirements: A two-level
physically rigorous modeling approach links chemistry and processing to
performance. The first modeling level connects chemistry and processing through
a precipitation model, while the second level connects microstructure to shape
memory response through a thermodynamics-based micromechanics formulation.
Within a Bayesian framework, models are initially calibrated using prior
knowledge about the likely value of their parameters. Calibrated models are in
turn used to design optimal experiments, that maximize the utility of
experiments in terms of information gain or desired materials response, that
then lead to enhanced model refinement and predictability. Models are in turn
used to optimize shape memory response by prescribing feasible composition plus
processing sets taking into account uncertainty in model parameters and
heterogeneities in microstructure. The overall framework will be disseminated
through conventional channels, while the models, model parameters and data
generated through this research will be made available to the wider scientific
community through an instance of the Materials Data Curation System developed by
the National Institute of Standards and Technology.