* 1534014
* Enhancing Learning of Science Categories Through Guidance of Psychological Models of Classification
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2020
* Robert Nosofsky, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Gregg Solomon
* 08/31/2020
* USD 946,386.00

A ubiquitous component of science education is learning the key categories of
each target domain. This project, a multidisciplinary collaboration of cognitive
scientists, geologists, and science education researchers at Indiana University
and Washington University, will take basic research findings on human learning
and attempt to develop diagnostic tools that can be matched with instructional
technique to facilitate the learning of scientific classifications. Rock
categorization will be used as the example target domain because it provides
challenges that are representative of scientific classification learning more
generally, but the training insights that are generated should be applicable
across multiple scientific domains. A critical practical issue in education
research concerns how to explore the vast space of possible instructional
variations. A key advantage of the project is that the researchers will delimit
that space by testing specific hypotheses, drawn from successful formal models
of human classification learning combined with principles from the training
literature, about how content should be delivered to optimize learning of
scientific classifications. The researchers will derive novice and expert
representations of rock classifications, including the dimensions they attend
to. This work bridges laboratory-based mathematical modeling research with more
applied research: Instruction using real rocks in authentic learning situations
will be contrasted with instruction delivered over computers. Principles that
the researchers discover in comparisons of experts and novices should be useful
in the development of diagnostic tools for future applications in the classroom
and the field. The project fits centrally into the EHR Core Research (ECR)
program goal of conducted funamental research and building enduring research
foundations for STEM learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The studies will entail
fundamental scaling work to derive psychological similarity representations for
the rock stimuli. Derivation of these representations is a prerequisite for
rigorous application of the models of classification that will guide the
subsequent empirical training studies. These representations will also provide
important insights concerning the major psychological dimensions along which the
rock stimuli are organized as well as how the rock category distributions are
configured in the multidimensional similarity space. These student
representations will be contrasted with those derived from expert geologists. It
is highly likely that the experts will have learned to focus attention on
dimensions that are far mor ediagnostic than those used by the students.
Empirical investigations of these different multidimensional solutions should
yield important information regarding fundamental parameters for how most
efficiently to support students' learning of the rock categories. These include
identifying: i) the optimal training instances to support learning and
generalization, ii) the optimal sequencing of these training instances, and iii)
the preferred training density for particular subtypes of hierarchically
organized category distributions.