* 1534388
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Medicaid Undercount and the Role of Program Design
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2017
* Marc Meredith, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 06/30/2017
* USD 16,000.00

This doctoral dissertation research project will test whether state-level
Medicaid program design and utilization explains variation in the Medicaid
undercount. Medicaid is the largest source of public health insurance in the
United States. Census surveys significantly underreport Medicaid use compared to
administrative records. The underreporting of Medicaid use in census surveys is
problematic, particularly because governmental bodies and researchers rely on
this data to make administrative decisions and to determine the budgetary
impacts of legislation. Inaccurate Medicaid measurement can lead to inefficient
program implementation and incorrect budgetary projections. In previous studies,
the undercount has been attributed largely to question wording and survey
design. However, there is a lack of research into whether Medicaid program
design generates response error in survey self-reports. This research will use
linked census survey and administrate data to generate corrective predicted
probabilities of Medicaid use for census surveys. These predicted probabilities
have the potential to help policy makers better understand and account for the
needs of the Medicaid population. Although focused on Medicaid in particular,
this study may provide insights into the factors that affect rates of
misreporting in other contexts. As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement
award, the project will enable a promising student to establish a strong,
independent research career.

This project will link census data to Medicaid administrative records to test
the theory that the misreporting of Medicaid usage in census surveys is a
function of variation in Medicaid program design. The investigators will run a
series of logistic and fixed effects logistic regressions on this linked data to
isolate which program features are related to the misreporting of Medicaid
usage. The project also will use a difference-in-differences design to better
isolate whether policy shifts play a causal role in the Medicaid undercount.
Coefficients will be generated that can be used to predict the probability of
Medicaid enrollment. These corrective measures will be made available to the
Census Bureau, government agencies, and the general public.