* 1534736
* SBIR Phase II:  Ultra Low Defect Gallium Nitride Mediated by Metal Alloys
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2017
* Francisco Machuca, Tivra Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 07/31/2017
* USD 892,231.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project addresses a path to achieve the metric of less
than $1 per kilolumen in Gallium Nitride (GaN) based light emitting diodes
(LEDs). This is expected to spur widespread adoption of solid state lighting
which, according to the US Department of Energy, could result in electricity
savings equal to the output of 44 gigawatt power plants by 2027. The price for
LEDs is slowing adoption. LEDs don't typically need to be better; they need to
be cheaper. This project could directly address this adoption problem by
lowering the cost of making LEDs by eliminating one of the most expensive steps
in the LED production process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business
Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will address the technical problems
in Gallium Nitride (GaN) based light emitting diodes (LEDs), namely using
traditional buffer layers to grow GaN on non-GaN substrates. Traditional
approaches are typically expensive and result in crystalline defects because the
buffer materials used are non-ductile crystalline structures which very
effectively propagate, rather than annihilate, defects. This project develops a
new substrate made with a patented crystalline metal and process that will let
the manufacturers spend less time and effort to get the same or even better LED
crystalline quality than they can achieve today. Low cost growth techniques are
used and to reduce defects in GaN LEDs and to improve the dollar per kilolumen
cost to performance metric.