* 1534755
* SBIR Phase II:  Reactive Silver Inks for High Performance Printed Electronics
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Steven Walker, Electroninks Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Rick Schwerdtfeger
* 08/31/2018
* USD 1,210,832.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research Phase II project will be to greatly enhance the capabilities of printed
electronics via high performance conductive materials. This will be accomplished
by the development and commercialization of novel silver and copper ink
chemistries that are used in a number of device applications ranging from
display bezels and interconnects, to high performance OLED electrodes, to ink
specifically developed for high speed printing and smart packaging applications.
The commercial impact of such developments will be the significant adoption and
use of printed electronics material palettes across multiple consumer electronic
device platforms. This will ultimately lead to more efficient device manufacture
with a simultaneous improvement in performance. The printed electronics market
is rapidly growing with progress hinging on fundamental material
improvements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of this Phase II research
project are to demonstrate scalability of reactive silver ink chemistries,
formulations for productization standards, and development of reactive copper
ink chemistries. The reactive silver ink chemistry has begun to receive
significant traction with customers. This program plans to achieve scalability
of this high performance ink by novel purification of silver salts to achieve a
high conductivity at large scales with industrially relevant processes. Next the
inks will need to adhere to specific productization standards. This includes
modifications of the chemistry for various printing processes ranging from low
viscosity (10 cPs) up to high viscosities for high-volume printing techniques
(1000 cPs and higher). Also, modifications to the chemistry for various testing
criteria such as adhesion, abrasion, and environmental tests such as humidity
and heat cycling will be made. Finally, reactive copper chemistries will be
further developed. Copper inks that can be processed thermally in the ambient
environment represent both a significant challenge as well as a vast opportunity
in the printed electronics market. We have developed novel chemistries based on
various low molecular weight reducing agents and short-chain surfactants that
both reduce the copper quickly under thermal cycling while protecting the
surface from oxidation.