* 1534830
* Tell Me About Math: A Longitudinal Training Study on the Effects of Parent-child Interactions and Parental Cognition on Children's Math Abilities
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Melissa Libertus, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Gregg Solomon
* 08/31/2019
* USD 625,875.00

Current research suggests a relationship between the development of approximate
number system (ANS) cognition in children and later mathematics achievement on
standardized tests. However, little is known about the role parent-child
interactions play with respect to the ANS. This study allows the field to better
understand the transmission of cognitive skills like the ANS across generations.
It also allows for the exploration of the potential for training for both
parents and children to impact ANS to support math achievement in children prior
to formal classroom instruction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study will examine the
causal influence and social and cognitive factors on the development of the ANS
and math abilities by assessing the relationship between parents' ANS and math
abilities, number-related parent-child interactions, and children's cognitive
abilities. Using a longitudinal training study combining laboratory assessments
of 200 parent-child dyads, and naturalistic in-home observations, the study will
allow for examining social and cognitive factors simultaneously in parents and
their children. The dyads will be randomly assigned to number-related and
literacy-related training allow for causal estimates of the effect of parents'
ANS and math abilities and children's outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is supported by NSF's EHR Core Research (ECR) program. The ECR program
emphasizes fundamental STEM education research that generates foundational
knowledge in the field. Investments are made in critical areas that are
essential, broad and enduring: STEM learning and STEM learning environments,
broadening participation in STEM, and STEM workforce development. The program
supports the accumulation of robust evidence to inform efforts to understand,
build theory to explain, and suggest intervention and innovations to address
persistent challenges in STEM interest, education, learning and participation.