* 1534626
* Collaborative Research:  Investigating How English Language Learners Use Dynamic Representational Technology to Participate in Middle School Mathematical Practices
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2019
* Philip Vahey, SRI International
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steele
* 09/30/2019
* USD 1,124,073.00

The goal of the project is to bring together research about English-language
learners with the use of dynamic representational technology for middle school
quantitative reasoning. Dynamic representation technology allows learners to
work with multiple representations of a problem simultaneously. These
representations include, for example, graphs of an equation, a table of values
and a simulation of the real-world phenomenon to understand concepts such as
linear functions and rates of change that support algebra. This project will
focus on English-language learners who will benefit from multiple
representations in order to increase their participation in mathematics
practices. English-language learners are a quickly growing segment of the
student population in the United States. The EHR Core Research program
emphasizes fundamental STEM education research that generates foundational
knowledge in the field. Investments are made in critical areas that are
essential, broad and enduring: STEM learning and STEM learning environments,
broadening participation in STEM, and STEM workforce
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The design-based research study
includes seventh grade students in two linguistically diverse regions. The
project will investigate how 7th-grade students with different levels of
English-language proficiency "reason abstractly and quantitatively," as they
engage with dynamic representation technology-based and paper-based activities
that address the content area of linear functions. In phase II, they will
conduct a design-based research study to develop adaptations of materials using
the dynamic representation technology. The project uses a comparison study of
the technology-based activities and comparable paper-based activities to analyze
participation of English-language learners in mathematics practices. The
research plan includes three phases. In phase one, the project will analyze the
participation and discussion of small groups as they work with the tasks to
understand participation mathematical reasoning. In phase two, design-based
research will be used to develop and refine the dynamic representation
technology software and activities using data from activity sessions with
students of varying English proficiency. In phase three, the project will
compare the effect of the dynamic representation technology activities compared
with paper-based activities on students with or without English-language
proficiency.