* 1534740
* SBIR Phase II:  An Analogous Search Engine to Accelerate Innovation
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2015,02/28/2018
* Anthony McCaffrey, Innovation Accelerator, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 02/28/2018
* USD 713,804.00

This SBIR Phase II project is developing a novel software platform for
conducting analogous search that moves beyond keyword search to support
innovation in the fields of science, engineering, and legal. Our patent pending
technology is based on the observation that as high as 90% of new innovations
are really adaptations of existing solutions. The challenge addressed by this
research is how to find these adaptable, existing solutions that are spread
across many different fields of study and are described using vastly different
jargon. These efforts will greatly increase the discovery of new, innovative
solutions to a myriad of engineering problems. The end result will be many new
inventions that could greatly improve Americans? lives in unforeseen ways, the
potential to produce new jobs and tax revenues. These efforts also will benefit
Intellectual Property attorneys to help protect these new inventions in all
fields of science and engineering. This project supports the National Science
Foundation's mission to support all fundamental fields of science and
engineering. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will further develop
Analogy Finder, a novel software platform for conducting analogous search to
enhance innovation. The technology is based on the observation that as much as
90% of new innovations are really adaptations of existing solutions. The
technology enables engineers and scientists to move beyond keyword (literal)
search to analogous (semantic) search to find relevant, adaptable solutions from
other disciplines. Analogous search relies on the grammatical verb noun-phrase
form, which describes the essential function needed to solve the problem (e.g.,
reduce concussions). This grammatical form is then transformed into a set of
related search phrases using synonyms, key semantic connections, and a
proprietary taxonomy. The resulting search output contains more relevant,
adaptable solutions to the problem at hand when compared to keyword search. The
objectives and methods to be used include: incorporate a unique problem
visualization process; add more data sources to Analogy Finder's search
capabilities; enable Analogy Finder to search based on multiple verb noun-phrase
combinations; develop new ways to organize and prioritize results; and begin
identifying metrics to compare Analogy Finder's results with other search
engines.