* 1534179
* DMREF: Accelerating the Discovery and Development of Nanoporous 2D Materials (N2DMs) and Membranes for Advanced Separations
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2019
* Surya Kalidindi, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 08/31/2019
* USD 998,543.00

Nanoporous oxides are three-dimensional crystalline materials that are
frequently used in a variety of important chemical processes, such as
adsorption, catalysis, ion exchange, and chemical separations. However, their
chemical structure and the way in which they are processed often limit their
chemical functionalities. This project will investigate a broad class of
materials called nanoporous two-dimensional materials (N2DMs) in an effort to
identify, synthesize, and characterize nanoporous oxides that have new chemical
functionalities and can be fabricated as thin, two-dimensional sheet-like
structures. Forming nanoporous oxides in thin layers overcomes limitations
associated with slow diffusion of molecules through the material, provides a
structure with high surface area, and is amenable to coating the material for
use in membrane separations. The project will involve a combination of
experiments to synthesize and characterize N2DMs, computer modeling of N2DMs to
correlate their chemical structure with performance, and the development of new
data analytics methodologies for N2DMs. The project team will use results of the
project to develop a new course titled "Nanoporous Materials Design for
Sustainability". The team will also engage local K-12 students and teachers in
the research and curriculum development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current N2DMs show
promise as adsorbents, catalysts, and membranes. The vast range of possible new
N2DM structures, and their complex dopant and cation distributions, represent
new opportunities and challenges to discover and exploit their fundamental
characteristics. This project involves synthesis and characterization of N2DMs,
multiscale modeling of N2DMs, and development of new methodologies for N2DM
analytics. The key elements of the work are: (1) generate a N2DM structure
database, (2) develop hierarchical models and data-driven structure-property
analytics of N2DMs for two selected applications, (3) predict in-silico N2DM
synthesis-structure relations, (4) synthesis N2DMs and membranes and
experimentally determine their structure-property relations, and (5) create a
collaboration and informatics platform for N2DMs. The project will help acquaint
students with the goals of the Materials Genome Initiative and train them in
materials development and characterization.