* 1534766
* UAF participation in: C budget of ecosystems and cities and villages on permafrost in eastern Russian Arctic (COPERA)
* GEO,OPP
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2021
* Kenji Yoshikawa, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Gregory Anderson
* 06/30/2021
* USD 337,473.00

This award provides support to U.S. researchers participating in a project
competitively selected by a 14-country initiative on global change research
through the Belmont Forum. The Belmont Forum is a high level group of the
world?s major and emerging funders of global environmental change research and
international science councils. It aims to accelerate delivery of the
international environmental research most urgently needed to remove critical
barriers to sustainability by aligning and mobilizing international resources.
Each partner country provides funding for their researchers within a consortium
to alleviate the need for funds to cross international borders. This approach
facilitates effective leveraging of national resources to support excellent
research on topics of global relevance best tackled through a multinational
approach, recognizing that global challenges need global
solutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Working together in this Collaborative Research
Action, the partner agencies have provided support for research projects that
utilize existing Arctic observing systems, datasets and models to evaluate key
sustainability challenges and opportunities in the Arctic region, to innovate
new sustainability science theory and approaches to these challenges and
opportunities, and support decision-making towards a sustainable Arctic
environment. This award provides support for the U.S. researchers to cooperate
in consortia that consist of partners from at least three of the participating
countries and that bring together natural scientists, social scientists and end
users (e.g., policy makers, regulators, NGOs, communities and
industry).&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The eastern Siberian ecosystem is established
on the largest and deepest permafrost region in the world, where much of the
earth?s carbon dioxide is sequestrated. This unique permafrost-based ecosystem
is currently threatened by global warming. In addition to the direct effects of
this warming, permafrost degradation may cause further change in vegetation and
carbon budget and greenhouse gas emission that may then feedback to the climate
system. In this vulnerable region, considerable economic and demographic change
is taking place as populations within the cities of the Republic of Sakha
(Yakutia) expand and increase their carbon emissions, while smaller settlements
decline and struggle to afford heating fuel due to rising costs associated with
the urban demands for energy. The environmental impacts of population and
emission growth in this environmentally vulnerable region and the need for
viable low carbon energy solutions for Arctic residents drive the COPERA
project. The collaborative research team from the US, Russia, and Japan will
establish a permafrost, hydrological, and meteorological observing network in
cooperation with local communities to estimate CO2 sequestration by the
permafrost ecosystem (tundra and taiga) and CO2 emission form cities and
villages. In this study, the carbon budget (CO2 sequestration by ecosystem and
CO2 emission through human activity) is estimated as a measure of two different
points of view. One is a measure of impact on climate and environment, and the
other is that of living cost because more fuel combustion means higher cost for
energy. Both of these measures have impacts well beyond the local effects in the
Sakha region. Data gathered during this project will be translated into publicly
accessible materials and shared with local residents and government to inform
municipal, regional, or Republic governmental committees and/or council
meetings.