* 1534860
* A History of Large-Scale Environmental-Engineering Projects in Russia
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2015,12/31/2017
* Paul Josephson, Colby College
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 12/31/2017
* USD 86,342.00

General Audience Summary &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project uses historical
methods to evaluate the extent and relative costs of Russian nature
transformation activities from 1900 to the present. It is situated at the
intersection of history of science and technology on the one hand, and
environmental history on the other. It will study various projects embraced by
Russian leaders to transform nature in the effort to improve economic
performance, military preparedness, agricultural production, and industrial
growth. Such projects include the building of huge hydroelectric-power stations,
irrigation systems, transport and water transfer canals, and the draining
wetlands. Many of the projects had significant social and environmental costs,
such as the loss of hundreds of thousands of prisoners who were forced into the
Stalinist gulag laborers in large-scale public works projects; and many
ecosystems in Russia continue to suffer degradation from the projects to this
day. The project is relevant to contemporary issues; under Vladimir Putin,
Russia has again embraced many large scale, and potentially environmentally
unsound projects. By considering the way in which Russian officials responded to
the public in areas of critical technological choices, the project will shed
light on the keys to reaching proper decisions about whether and where to pursue
major pubic works projects, and how to balance environmental risks with the
public good.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
study will contribute to understandings of human-nature interactions in
comparative perspective, and of the influence of political, ideological,
cultural, financial, and other factors on these interactions. Due to the closed
nature of Soviet and Russian society, little is known of the motivations for
Russian nature transformation projects, nor the extent of their short- and long-
term costs. Nor have specialists considered at length the evolution of
scientific ideas and concepts used in these projects. In addition, they have
been little compared with other such efforts, for example, massive
hydroelectricity projects in Brazil, China and India, or water basin transfer
projects in the US, South Africa, and Australia. The study will enable more
complete comprehension how the sciences and engineering connected with the
projects developed over time. It will enable better comprehension of the way in
which governments and citizens come together to carry out massive public works
projects, how funding evolves, and the nature of the scientific and engineering
organizations who undertake them. It will also reveal something of the
interaction between scientists and the public, and not only in the former Soviet
Union, but in such transitional regimes like Russia. Finally, it will provide
awareness of the costs and benefits of various projects advanced to ensure
material comfort, safety, and productivity of citizens.