* 1534945
* WORKSHOP: 2015 CSST Summer Research Institute
* CSE,IIS
* 03/15/2015,02/29/2016
* Diane Bailey, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 02/29/2016
* USD 25,000.00

This is funding to cover airfare, ground travel and certain other expenses for
approximately 40 attendees (30 promising junior investigators plus 10
accomplished senior scholars as mentors, eight from academic and two from
industry) at the 8th Summer Research Institute (workshop) being organized by the
PI under the auspices of the Consortium for the Science of Socio-Technical
Systems (CSST), which will be held July 20-24, 2015, at The Nature Place, a
National Environmental Study Center of the National Park Service located outside
of Colorado Springs, CO. The CSST resulted from recognition of the growing
importance of research on the interplay of humans and technology. The science of
socio-technical systems (SST) is fundamental to the rapidly growing "virtual
organizations" thematic area, among others; thus, the urgent national need for
research that is firmly grounded in the SST tradition. Yet this community of
scholars, which includes faculty in diverse fields such as social informatics,
social computing, CSCW, computational social science, HCI, and information
science, remains fractured and largely invisible. The CSST series of Summer
Research Institutes is a critical step toward unifying this diverse community
and enhancing its visibility, by providing an immersive experience for the next
generation of SST leaders (both advanced doctoral students and pre-tenure
faculty) so that they will be well prepared to engage in distributed scientific
inquiry. The Summer Research Institutes build critical intellectual and social
capital by fostering creation of a cohort group of new researchers whose work is
shaped by hearing experts in socio-technical systems research provide
encouragement and give advice on how to advance the field's intellectual basis,
methodological approaches, and potential for sustained, meaningful and even
transformative impact. Increasingly, the iConference has become a showcase for
Summer Research Institute alumni; for example, in 2011 more than one third of
all events involved a sociotechnical scholar and Summer Research Institute
alumni.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The 2015 workshop will adhere to the successful
format that has evolved and been refined over the course of the prior Summer
Research Institutes. The workshop will bring together early career researchers
selected through a competitive review process with a set of more senior
researchers for an intensive five-day research exchange. The event will be
residential and located in a semi-isolated locale to encourage the maximum
amount of social interaction among participants. Senior faculty, junior faculty,
and advanced doctoral students will collectively strive to articulate in more
coherent and contemporary forms the basic principles, goals and approaches to
doing socio-technical science across a range of relevant intellectual
communities. They will explore topics and methods for advancing the science of
socio-technical systems, while focusing on intellectual development of
individual research that is aligned with core aspects of the socio-technical
perspective. More than 55 accomplished senior scholars and 210 promising junior
investigators have participated in the previous seven CSST Summer Research
Institutes The diversity of participants across a number of dimensions (e.g.,
institutional, disciplinary, geographic, gender, minority group status), serves
to broaden participants' perspectives at a critical stage in their careers. The
immersive intellectual experience during the workshop will facilitate creation
of a social network among the participants and the senior researchers who serve
as Institute instructors. This network will play a major role both in the
professional development of the participants and in the evolution of the field
of socio-technical systems research.