* 1534890
* DMREF: Programmable Chemomechanical Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Bing Xu, Brandeis University
* Standard Grant
* John Schlueter
* 08/31/2020
* USD 1,159,386.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This project draws inspiration from the sinuous
motion of a lamprey, in which neurons running down the spinal column are excited
in sequence causing the musculature to contract, thereby propelling the lamprey.
The fundamental principles underlying this behavior are understood, and this
team seeks to engineer nonliving materials that possess these properties of
living matter. They will develop purely synthetic materials that will operate
autonomously, driven solely by chemistry without electricity, computers, or
motors. These materials will execute multiple functions and be externally
triggered to modify their behavior. Thus, this work will establish a new
paradigm of precise and programmable chemical control for the fledgling field of
soft robotics, in which soft, tissue-like materials replace the rigid, hard
materials now found in robots on factory floors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;The objective of the project is to develop purely synthetic,
chemomechanical materials that emulate biological processes, such as the beating
of a heart, at programmable rates and rhythms. The long-term goal is to
elucidate the fundamental physical principles of active soft matter based on
reaction-diffusion chemistry, enabling engineering of materials capable of
chemical control and chemomechanical transduction. This research will address
two fundamental challenges in the design of chemomechanical materials. The first
is to understand and develop mechanisms of volume transitions in redox-sensitive
gels, by which forces can be actuated. Materials engineered from a selection of
promising building blocks will be probed over length scales ranging from
nanometers to millimeters in order to fully elucidate gel structure and
dynamics. These findings will be fed into atomistic and mesoscopic computer
models, which will in turn inform the chemical synthesis of next-generation
materials with desirable properties. The second challenge is to engineer a
control mechanism comprised of an array of micron-scale compartmentalized
reactors that contain an oscillating chemical reaction, and are physically
networked via diffusion. Coupling the control and actuation sub-systems will
yield chemically responsive gels that can change volume in concert with
predictable and tunable chemical activity. Such materials will have attributes
heretofore found only in living matter, such as flexibility in mammalian
tongues, pulsatile contractions in human intestines, and heliotropism in plants.
Thus, this work will establish a new paradigm of precise and programmable
chemomechanical control for the fledgling field of soft robotics.