* 1535563
* Adolescent and Adult Lives of Children of Parents Returning From Prison
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2019
* John Hagan, American Bar Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Reginald Sheehan
* 08/31/2019
* USD 375,081.00

This research will investigate the impact of parents returning from prison on
their children. Parents are incarcerated today at a rate more than four times
higher than in the 1970s. However, since 2009 releases from prisons have become
more numerous than admissions, marking the beginning of a new era of the return
of imprisoned parents to their families and communities. This research will add
survey questions about this process of parental return to the fifth wave of a
unique nationally representative study that has tracked children of non-
incarcerated and incarcerated parents since the rise of incarceration in the
last quarter of the last century. The sample will allow analysis across all
population groups, and for mothers and daughters as well as fathers and sons,
and also for step-parents. The research will focus on the readjustment of
children during adolescence and early adulthood to the return of their
previously imprisoned parents, assessing whether and under what conditions this
return is associated with positive and negative outcomes, for example, in
educational attainment and successful transitions to work and adulthood more
broadly. The research will capture at a crucial historical moment the
consequences for children of an unprecedented return of parents from prison to
their families and society. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The National Longitudinal
Study of Adolescent Health [Add Health] that is the foundation of this research
is based on a sample in which 14 percent of the children have a father and four
percent have a mother who has been in jail or prison. These children will have
been surveyed at five points in their lives, from their early teens to their
early 30s. This detailed, repeated measurement will make it possible to closely
study the age of onset, accumulation, and simultaneity in the effects of
parental imprisonment in relation to, for example, the timing and sequences of
school tracking and dropout decisions and work, marriage and parenting outcomes.
This information on the adolescent and early adult child outcomes can then be
considered more broadly in relation to the timing of parallel processes of
change in family structures and justice system contacts. The research will use
propensity scoring and fixed effects techniques to thoroughly assess causal
inferences and threats posed by logically prior possibilities of parental
selection into imprisonment and reentry. By adding parental incarceration
histories to the nationally representative and historically unique Add Health
data, this research will markedly expand opportunities to understand wide
ranging processes and outcomes in child development from adolescence through
early adulthood and in relation to two unique generations of American parents
and children. There is no other data set that offers such extensive cross
generational measurement possibilities for capturing this crucial moment in the
unfolding life course consequences of an unprecedented American experiment with
high levels of imprisonment and prisoner reentry.