* 1535641
* An Innovative GPU-Optimized Multiscale Code for High-Fidelity Simulation of Collective Effects in Electron Beams
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Mohammad Zubair, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 08/31/2020
* USD 488,942.00

This award will lead to development of an innovative computer code for high-
fidelity simulation of electron beams, drawing on recent advances in parallel
computer architectures and applied mathematics. When electron bunches traveling
at nearly the speed of light are forced by accelerator magnets to traverse a
curved path, they emit bright ultraviolet or x-ray radiation. This radiation
traveling a straight path catches up with the electron beam and can severely
degrade its experimental usefulness. The first step in mitigating these damaging
effects is to develop a trustworthy computer code capable of simulating the
physics of this beam self-interaction. This project will enable the development
of such a code. For the society in general, this research is a step in
developing ultra-bright light sources which are essential tools for discoveries
and innovations in physical, biological, energy and medical sciences. For
example, they allow scientists to analyze chemical reactions, molecular
structures and provide ways to develop new drugs. By training young researchers,
this project will increase the number of much-needed accelerator scientists in
the nation and make considerable effort in recruiting qualified female and
under-represented minority candidates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Direct simulation of
coherent synchrotron radiation (CSR) in two and three dimensions is
prohibitively costly in terms of efficiency and memory requirements.
Consequently, the present CSR codes employ various approximations that are
inadequate for resolving essential physics in many realistic situations. These
situations where existing CSR codes fail will become commonplace as the design
of next-generation light sources commences. This project will design, benchmark
and disseminate to the community a fundamentally new, multiscale, particle-in-
cell code for modeling CSR, optimized to run on a parallel computational
platform consisting of graphical processing units (GPUs). The code will exploit
advantages of casting the problem in wavelet basis: (i) ability to retain
information about the dynamics over the hierarchy of scales; (ii) removal of
numerical noise by thresholding of the wavelet coefficients; and (iii) compact
representation of data and operators, resulting in significant reduction of the
computational load. Using NVIDIA's CUDA framework, a number of new code's vital
numerical algorithms will be designed to run on a parallel GPU platform, and the
successful matching of the algorithms and architecture will lead to code's
scalability. The new code will be freely available to the community to enable
modeling of a number of different machines.