* 1535826
* CAREER:  Exploring Novel Organic Thermoelectric Composites with Hierarchical Architecture and High Figure of Merit
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/15/2015,01/31/2017
* Shiren Wang, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Tom Kuech
* 01/31/2017
* USD 93,258.00

The research objective of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Program
project is to synthesize and characterize novel organic thermoelectric
composites with hierarchical architecture and high figure of merit for efficient
thermoelectric conversion. Thermoelectric conversion involves the conversion
between thermal energy and electrical energy. This process can be used for power
generation by harvesting various heat sources and it is renewable, reliable, and
scalable. The efficiency of thermoelectric conversion is significantly
determined by the material's figure of merit. Organic materials hold promise for
thermoelectric application due to their attractive features, such as
lightweight, abundance, easy processing and environmentally-benign
characteristics. However, their current figure of merit is very low, and
significantly hindered their potential applications. In this work, original
chemical and physical processing methods will be developed to synthesize novel
hierarchical organic composites. The process-structure-property relationship
will be investigated to tailor the hierarchical architecture for high figure of
merit. The interfacial structure and thermoelectric behavior will be
theoretically and experimentally investigated to understand carrier transport in
the hierarchical composites, and then expand the limits of phonon and electronic
transport for exceptional thermoelectric properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If
successful, the results of this research will enable a new method to design and
synthesize nanostructures for desired bulk properties. The expected results will
also result in a new class of organic thermoelectric materials for efficient
thermoelectric conversion, and lay a foundation for harvesting renewable energy.
The educational plan, which will be closely integrated with research efforts,
will: (1) launch a new program for training engineering students with
interdisciplinary knowledge and skills; 2) stimulate young students to pursue
careers in science and engineering; 3) recruit and mentor minority students on
cutting-edge nanotechnology research.