* 1535812
* Early Career: acquisition of a superconducting rock magnetometer with automated sample handling and rock magnetic characterization for paleomagnetism research
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2018
* Sonia Tikoo-Schantz, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* David Lambert
* 03/31/2018
* USD 530,225.00

This award will provide funding to acquire a sensitive instrument to measure
magnet properties of rocks in the paleomagnetism laboratory at Rutgers
University. The instrumentation will be used to promote progress in the earth
sciences. This new instrumentation will support the laboratory development and
research program of a female, early-career researcher. Access to the
instrumentation will also support the training of graduate students and
postdoctoral researchers. This system will be the only one of its kind in
operation in the entire Mid-Atlantic region of the United
States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Paleomagnetic studies provide a powerful window
into the histories of Earth and other planetary bodies. As rocks form, they
record magnetizations which can be measured in the laboratory to infer both the
orientation and, in many cases, the intensity of the ambient field at the time
of formation. The new system will be used to address a diversity of problems in
the earth and planetary sciences including (1) paleolatitude studies to test
different tectonic models for India-Eurasia convergence during the Cretaceous
and Paleogene periods, (2) determining the magnetic effects of hypervelocity
impact events on target rocks to guide the interpretation of the magnetizations
of cratered planetary surfaces, and (3) constraining the physical processes that
generated ancient dynamo magnetic fields on other planetary bodies.