* 1535232
* SI2-SSE: EASE: Improving Research Accountability through Artifact Evaluation
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Daniel Mosse', University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 08/31/2019
* USD 499,515.00

Research in computer systems, particularly in the first stages of creating a new
innovation, relies almost exclusively on software prototypes, simulators,
benchmarks, and data sets to understand the benefits and costs of new ideas in
computers, ranging from consumer devices to exascale systems. These artifacts
are used to evaluate new capabilities, algorithms, bottlenecks and trade-offs.
Empirical study is behind the rapid pace of innovation in creating faster, lower
energy and more reliable systems. This experimental approach lies at the core of
development that fuels the nation's information economy. Given the critical
importance of experimental study to developing new computer systems, several
efforts are underway to curate experimental results through accountable
research. One effort, Artifact Evaluation (AE), is being adopted to promote high
quality artifacts and experimentation, including making public the experimental
information necessary for reproducibility. However, the rapid adoption of AE is
hampered by technical challenges that create a high barrier to the process:
there is no consistent or simple environment, or mechanism, to package and
reproduce experiments for AE. Authors rely on their own approaches, leading to
much time consumed, as well as considerable variability in the ways materials
are prepared and evaluated, unnecessarily obstructing the AE process.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To overcome the technical challenges with AE, and to more
broadly encourage adoption of AE in computer science and engineering research,
this project is developing a software infrastructure, Experiment and Artifact
System for Evaluation (EASE), to create and run experiments specifically for AE,
in which authors create, conduct and share artifacts and experiments. It allows
for repeating, modifying, and extending experiments. Authors may also use EASE
to package and upload their experiments for archival storage in a digital
library. EASE is being developed and deployed for two use cases, namely
compilers and real-time systems, keeping the project tractable to address
specific needs. These communities have overlapping but also distinct
requirements, helping to ensure EASE can also be extended and&lt;br/&gt;used by
other computer systems research communities as well.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;EASE
will be release as open source software, based on an Experiment Management
System (EMS) previously developed by the project investigator in a project call
Open Curation for Computer Architecture Modeling (OCCAM), used to define and
conduct experiments using computer architecture simulators. Using EMS as a
starting point, EASE will provide AE support, by: 1) separating EMS from OCCAM's
repository and hardware services, transforming the EMS infrastructure into EASE,
a fully standalone, sustainable, and extensible platform for AE; 2) supporting
record and replay (for repeating and reproducing results, as well as provenance)
of artifacts and experiments as part of normal development and experimental
practice to ease participation in AE by authors and evaluators; 3) supporting
artifacts,workflows of artifacts and experiments that run directly on a machine,
including specialized hardware and software, and run indirectly on a simulator
or emulator; 4) allowing both user-level (artifacts and experiments as user
processes) and system-level (artifacts and experiments involving kernel changes)
innovations; 5) providing consistent/uniform access, whether locally or
remotely, to artifacts and experiments; 6) simplifying viewing, running,
modifying, and comparing experiments by innovators (i.e., during innovation
development), artifact evaluators (during AE), and archive users (after
publication); 7) enabling indexing (object locators and search tags) and
packaging of artifacts and experiments for AE and for archival deployment (e.g.,
to ACM?s or IEEE?s Digital Library); and 8) refining, expanding, generalizing,
and documenting EASE to ensure it is robust, maintainable and extensible, and
that it can be used and sustained by different CSR communities (starting with
real-time and compilers, given their different artifacts, data and methods).