* 1535460
* Investigating Team Knowledge Building in Complex Science and Statistics Problem Solving when the Teams Include Deaf/Hard of Hearing and Hearing College Students
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2021
* Michael Stinson, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Mark Leddy
* 08/31/2021
* USD 499,830.00

This award is supported by the EHR Core Research (ECR) program, specifically the
ECR Research in Disabilities Education (RDE) area of special interest. ECR
emphasizes fundamental STEM education research that generates foundational
knowledge in the field. Investments are made in critical areas that are
essential, broad and enduring: STEM learning and STEM learning environments,
broadening participation in STEM, and STEM workforce development. This research
in disabilities education project will contribute to foundational knowledge
about how deaf and hard-of-hearing undergraduate students, and their hearing
peers, work together within science teams to solve problems. This research will
contribute to the need to determine how to better educate students studying
science in our country and about how they use their knowledge about statistics
to solve problems. There are approximately 80,000 school-age children with
hearing impairments in our nation's schools. There is a pressing need to ensure
that when these students pursue college education, and advance in STEM careers,
they have equal access to team work in science and mathematics education.
Gaining a better understanding of how undergraduate students who are deaf and
hard-of-hearing learn in team settings, and when they apply statistical
knowledge to the science learning activities, has the potential to lead to
further basic and applied research which may ultimately improve how these
students learn science and how college faculty can improve their instructional
practices to help students better learn science content, apply statistical
knowledge to learning, and work together in STEM
teams.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project leaders at Rochester Institute of
Technology's National Institute for the Deaf will investigate the effects of
collaboration situation parameters (information, knowledge uncertainty, team
member characteristics and technology) and schema enriched communication
(training about communication and use of information boards for knowledge
products) on the knowledge building processes (knowledge transfer, objects and
interoperability, and cognitive congruence) evident in small groups of
undergraduate students who apply statistics concepts to science problem solving.
At the completion of the exploratory study, it is anticipated that results will
inform future basic and applied educational research about how undergraduate
teams, with deaf and hard-of-hearing members, solve science problems when they
apply statistical knowledge. The results of this work are expected to be shared
with education researchers and the public in professional publications.