* 1535790
* BRAIN EAGER:  Novel Thermo-genetic Tools for Extrinsic Control of Neuronal Circuits
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Lorin Milescu, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Evan Balaban
* 08/31/2018
* USD 300,000.00

Brains can be thought of as networks of circuits. The neurons that make up these
circuits interact to control behavior, but how the neurons do this is currently
an open question. New tools are needed to learn how neuron networks produce
behavior. One promising strategy would be to construct molecular switches that
could flip neurons between active and inactive states. This project will
investigate the potential to engineer a special group of proteins to make them
serve as molecular switches that respond to changes in temperature. The proteins
will be put into specific brain neurons of flies, and the fly's behaviors will
be monitored in response to temperature changes that activate and deactivate the
neurons. The fly is an accessible experimental model for these studies, and,
additionally, what is learned in the fly brain will have broad relevance to
other animal brains. The project will involve undergraduate and graduate
students in the research and will provide them with interdisciplinary training
in biophysics, neurophysiology, and behavior. Tools developed in the project
have the potential to be used to understand other organ systems and will be
shared with the wider scientific community.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Individual Gustatory Receptor (GR) gene family
members will be examined for temperature-dependent effects on nerve cell
function. In one set of experiments, these GRs will be expressed in both sensory
and non-sensory neurons in Drosophila melanogaster and tested for temperature
responsiveness in heat-box behavioral assays. In a second set of experiments,
natural- and chimeric-GRs will be expressed in Xenopus oocytes and COS cells and
tested for temperature- and voltage-dependent kinetics of ionic current.
Finally, natural- and chimeric-GRs will be expressed in sensory neurons in
Drosophila and cultured cells and examined for physiological effects using live
calcium imaging analysis.