* 1535175
* The Effects of Education and Professional Development on Beginning STEM Teacher Persistence: a Longitudinal Study
* EDU,DGE
* 08/01/2015,05/31/2019
* Richard Ingersoll, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Karen King
* 05/31/2019
* USD 886,617.00

The attrition of teachers from teaching is a major public policy issue. Science,
Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (STEM) teachers, in particular, leave
the profession even when they are making progress toward becoming excellent
teachers. The project will identify both causes of teacher attrition and
practices that support new teachers and contribute to persistence in the
profession. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will analyze data from the newly
released nationally representative large-scale, longitudinal survey - The
Beginning Teacher Longitudinal Study(BTLS) - conducted by NCES. This data base
follows a national cohort of beginning public school teachers through their
first five years of teaching. The project will focus on the 388 STEM teachers in
the sample. The project's three research questions focus on the impact of
preservice teacher education and inservice professional development on the job
persistence and job transitions of teachers through their first five years of
teaching: 1) What are the levels of job persistence and job transition among
beginning STEM school teachers over their first 5 years after entering teaching;
2) What are the types and amounts of preserve education and preparation that
beginning STEM school teachers receive and what impact do these have on their
job persistence and transitions? 3) What are the types and amounts of inservice
induction and professional development that beginning STEM school teachers
receive in their first 5 years and what impact do these have on their job
persistence and transitions? The project will use Event History Analysis and
other advanced statistical methods.