* 1535032
* SI2-SSE: Scalable Multifaceted Graphical Processing Unit (GPU) Program Debugging
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2015,03/31/2019
* Ganesh Gopalakrishnan, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 03/31/2019
* USD 435,482.00

Modern scientific research crucially depends on software simulations that help
model scientific phenomena, and accelerate the process of discoveries, and
communal result sharing. With the availability of affordable computational
accelerators known as GPUs, the scientific community has begun migrating their
existing CPU codes as well as creating new codes targeting GPUs. Unfortunately,
this has resulted in a situation where the generated scientific results do not
often agree across CPUs and GPUs. This exacerbates the danger of drawing wrong
conclusions in crucial areas such as physics, weather simulations, drug
discovery, and engineering computations. This project offers a combination of
existing and new techniques in dissecting scientific experiments conducted
through simulations, obtaining believable results, finding the root causes of
varying results, and developing best practices to ensure higher result fidelity.
Its techniques have special emphasis on GPUs, given their often poorly specified
and evolving nature.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Result variability has many causes,
including evolving, incorrect, or ambiguous specifications of computer hardware
and software, racing data accesses, varying floating point precision standards,
and incorrect result association within compound computational steps. This
project develops methods that help a scientist systematically search through and
eliminate these causes, thus accelerating the process of debugging result
variability. The produced tools and exemplars of known erroneous behaviors allow
a scientist to avoid the use of incorrect specifications, isolate and eliminate
data races, and isolate and eliminate unreliable numerical steps. It also
develops methods that help a scientist maintain focus on their basic scientific
pursuits while still keeping up with technology evolution. It trains students in
critical software engineering techniques that help the nation build the talent
pool necessary for the extreme scale computing era.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will combine six research thrusts (GPU concurrency; challenge problems
and develop user interfaces; pedagogy for domain scientists; improved GPU
concurrency debugging tool support; more reproducible simulation results; and
evolving and scaling tools with standards) to build and deliver open source
software that incorporates proven stress-testing methods into tools; builds
challenge problems, supports formalization support, and designs the user
interface; delivers demos, books, and tutorials that help illustrate concurrency
nuances; exploits symbolic analysis for input generation in mixed formal and GPU
runs; develops stress testing inputs for round-off errors and separable
verification to root-cause roundoff; and componentizes the symbolic verifier to
enable parallelism, targeting from new APIs.