* 1535818
* I-Corps:  Storycoding I-Corps Team
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2015,07/31/2016
* Thomas Martin, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* lydia mcclure
* 07/31/2016
* USD 50,000.00

A successful product requires synthesizing explicit and tacit knowledge from
domain experts to create a solution that is easily produced, meets customer
needs, and is financially viable in the marketplace. Ambiguity in product
specifications and miscommunications among stakeholders during the early design
phases create downstream changes that incur significant financial and
engineering costs to re-work. Achieving a common vision across disciplines and
employing agile development and prototyping is essential to ensuring delivery of
a timely and cost-effective product. Software-based solutions for product design
collaboration and prototyping have been explored for traditional product design
processes; however the unique characteristics of emerging wearable, pervasive,
and internet-of-things products require new solutions. These products tightly
couple physical and computation elements to create novel human-computer
interactions that constantly sense and adapt to user needs. To create these
systems, design teams must simultaneously balance the computational and physical
constraints of the design, and understand how users will interact with the
product over its life time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed tool, called
?Storycoding? addresses these challenges by providing design teams an accessible
sketch-based interface to collaborate and express product ideas for novel
pervasive computing products. Storycoding actively interprets a design team's
storyboards to ensure relevant computational and user interaction requirements
have been specified. Storycoding can automatically generate source code for a
product, allowing more rapid prototype generation during the ideation and design
phases of product development.