* 1535023
* Assessing Evidence-Based Psychotherapy
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2017
* Steven Epstein, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 07/31/2017
* USD 176,572.00

General Audience Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This postdoctoral fellowship will
support a two-year study that investigates the rise of evidence-based, talk-
therapeutic interventions. The study will include institutional and historical
analyses of documents from training organizations, accreditation requirements,
insurance reimbursement guidelines, and journal publications. These data will
complement the author's extensive ethnographic observations and interviews with
clinicians to facilitate the publication of articles and a monograph. The author
will engage in a concerted effort to disseminate the study's findings to
practitioners. Moreover, this project will include opportunities for training
undergraduate students in research practices and developing their interests in
science and technology studies and the sociology of medicine. Lastly, this study
will result in a teaching module focused on contestations around "evidence" in
the psychological sciences. The module will incorporate both analytical
perspectives and primary materials, and will be freely available on the
web.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study will
make four contributions to existing scholarship. First, it will illuminate the
processes by which novel conceptual tools and practices travel between domains
of knowledge; specifically, it will provide an account of how notions of
"efficacy" and "evidence" originally associated with pharmaceutical drug testing
came to be the standards in talk therapeutic research. Second, this study will
shed light on contestations within the human sciences by demonstrating that the
construction of credible knowledge that can travel between the research trial
and the clinic depends on the mediation of insurance companies. Third, it will
contribute to current debates about the status of the medical profession by
suggesting that standards can solidify rather than undermine experts'
jurisdictional and authority claims. Fourth, it will fill an empirical gap in
existing literature by tracing the development and rise to dominance of a set of
approaches that has been largely overlooked, namely cognitive behavioral
therapies. The overarching goal is to show how the science of talk challenges
the standard interpretation of the ascendancy of cognitive behavior therapies.
Another explanatory mechanism advanced in this study is economic viability; it
is used to focus attention on the co-constitution of particular notions of "good
science" and an economic regime that favors standardizable conceptions of mental
illness. These results will be relevant to policy-makers, clinicians, and
patients. They will also contribute to ongoing debates in the psychotherapy
field regarding the empirical validation of psychoanalytic interventions and the
continued relevance of such practices in clinical work.