* 1535835
* International Workshop on Structural Health Monitoring; Stanford, California; September 1-3, 2015
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2015,01/31/2016
* Fu-Kuo Chang, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Massimo Ruzzene
* 01/31/2016
* USD 15,000.00

Structural health monitoring (SHM) is an emerging technology that may provide
real-time information about the "health" state of the structures anywhere and
anytime in order to maximize their performance and prolong the lifespan during
the operation. This technology increases significantly the "awareness" of the
operators in real time on the integrity of the structures that may encounter
various harsh environments in actual operation conditions, and hence, could lead
to the development of advanced mitigation techniques to avoid structural
catastrophes. The state awareness is the key element for safety, reliability and
security of national aerospace, civil, mechanical and power infrastructure
platforms. Structural health monitoring would not only allow users to access the
condition of their assets remotely and instantly, particularly after unexpected
events such as earthquakes, but also make the users to maintain their assets
more efficiently and economically. The fundamental building blocks in the
development of SHM capability are data collection and interpretation. Structural
health monitoring techniques use built-in sensors to collect data and create
diagnostic methods to interpret the relationship between the data and the change
in the structure. Recent advances in networked sensor technology and "big data"
science provides significant opportunities to further advance the science and
technology in diagnostics and prognostics for detection and monitoring of the
health of structures. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The 10th International Workshop on
Structural Health Monitoring 2015 will identify research needs and seek a
consensus among experts from industry, government, and academia to develop an
SHM roadmap spanning across various industry platforms. The general impact of
SHM technologies is essential in sustaining the health functions and in
maintaining the structural integrity of national transportation systems,
defense, civil infrastructures, and other industrial sectors. The workshop will
assess the state-of-the-art in the field of SHM; identify and discuss key and
emerging issues that are critical; promote exchanges and cross-fertilization
from researchers, students, engineers and practitioners among many disciplines;
and establish a panel consisting of thought leaders from government, academe,
and industry to develop a document for guiding the directions of R&amp;D in SHM
for both the near and long term.