* 1535389
* Investigating Relationships Between Mathematical Knowledge for Teaching and High-Leverage Teaching Practices
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2020
* Meghan Shaughnessy, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Finbarr Sloane
* 09/30/2020
* USD 1,499,331.00

This proposal was submitted in response to EHR Core Research (ECR) program
announcement NSF 15-509. The ECR program of fundamental research in STEM
education provides funding in critical research areas that are essential, broad
and enduring. EHR seeks proposals that will help synthesize, build and/or expand
research foundations in the following focal areas: STEM learning, STEM learning
environments, STEM workforce development, and broadening participation in STEM.
The ECR program is distinguished by its emphasis on the accumulation of robust
evidence to inform efforts to (a) understand, (b) build theory to explain, and
(c) suggest interventions (and innovations) to address persistent challenges in
STEM interest, education, learning, and participation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed research will examine STEM learning environments and STEM workforce
development. The proposed project will use simulations with student teachers to
explore the relationship between preservice teachers' mathematics knowledge for
teaching (MKT) and their ability to promote student learning in a sample of the
content areas covered in K-6 mathematics curriculum (e.g., number operations,
and area).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will accomplish three aims. It
will contribute to foundational knowledge and theory about the relationships
between mathematical knowledge for teaching and student teachers skill with
eliciting and interpreting student thinking. It will provide the field with
initial findings about the impact of design choices on the utility of a
simulation for assessing MKT and HLPs, as well as critical insights on the
utility of the simulation for nurturing the development of mathematical
knowledge. Finally, it will contribute to the training of preservice teachers by
developing actual simulations, including materials for implementing, which can
be used to assess and enhance the MKT of preservice teachers.