* 1535076
* DMREF: Designing Microstructure for Engineering Toughness
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Blaise Bourdin, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 07/31/2019
* USD 240,000.00

This project brings together an interdisciplinary team with the vision of
exploiting digital manufacturing methods, including 3D printing and ink-jet
printing, to synthesize structural materials with exceptional mechanical
properties. It has long been understood that the fine-scale structure of
materials -- the microstructure -- can affect mechanical properties, and this
has been exploited in both materials processing and in creating composite
materials. However, such effort has historically been limited in the range of
microstructures that could be explored. The vision here is to overcome this
limitation by adapting methods of digital and additive manufacturing -- which
emerged and have largely been used as tools for prototyping -- to make
structural materials with superior mechanical performance. The investigators
specifically focus on fracture because of its existential engineering importance
and because it raises deep scientific questions. This project will provide for
the training through research involvement of doctoral students as well as
undergraduate researchers in an interdisciplinary setting, and a new opportunity
for engaging K-12 students and for promoting STEM education amongst
underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fracture is a free discontinuity
problem, and homogenization and optimal design of such problems is a long-
standing intellectual challenge. In this project, new theoretical and
computational approaches addressing this challenge will be pursued. The free
boundary problem will be regularized using a variational fracture field
approach, and crack propagation will be studied subject to a new surfing
boundary condition. Optimal design of the microstructure will be pursued through
parametric optimization and topology optimization applied to trajectories.
Innovative approaches will be explored to adapt prototyping methods to the
synthesis of structural materials with designed microstructures. While 3D
printing and related methods for plastics have gained considerable attention,
these strategies will be pursued here to synthesize structural ceramics at the
appropriate size scales. Finally, emerging experimental methods, including
digital image correlation, X-ray computed tomography, and confocal microscopy,
will be employed to provide both insight into and validation of the theoretical
studies of the complex process of fracture in heterogeneous materials.