* 1535674
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Geographic Dimensions of Local Policy Change Across Different Urban Settings
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2015,01/31/2017
* Kim England, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 01/31/2017
* USD 15,579.00

This doctoral dissertation research project will investigate the factors that
influence the geographic spread of campaigns for an increased minimum wage
across the U.S. The doctoral student will examine the spatial strategies
employed by labor organizations, the variation of these strategies across
locations, and the generalized patterns of movement of minimum wage increases as
they proliferate throughout the country. Although focused on the topic of
minimum-wage increases, the project will provide new insights and information
regarding a broader range of topics by examining the importance of networks,
policy context, and the material and discursive power of institutions for the
spatial-temporal mobility of policies. The project will yield new theoretical
insights about the strategies of labor organizations as well as an empirical
investigation into the practical mechanisms that enable and constrain policy
mobility, thereby benefitting both scholars and policy practitioners. As a
Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award also will provide
support to enable a promising student to establish a strong independent research
career.

This project will focus three core questions: (1) How do policy initiatives to
increase the minimum wage spread spatially? (2) What are the spatial strategies
employed by labor unions and other labor organizations as they design and
implement campaigns to promote increased minimum wage? (3) How do these
campaigns and the wage-related policies vary by location? The doctoral student
will perform a comparative case study of three campaigns for an increase in the
minimum-wage rate in the cities of Seattle, Washington; Milwaukee, Wisconsin;
and Charlotte, North Carolina. She will employ participant observation and
qualitative interviews to gather relevant data, and she will analyze these data
using a grounded theory approach to identify the mechanisms through which policy
translation occurs and to trace the spread of recent minimum wage increase
efforts throughout the nation.