* 1535811
* I-Corps:  Commercialization of a City Scale Weather Radar
* TIP,TI
* 04/15/2015,12/31/2015
* Michael Zink, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* lydia mcclure
* 12/31/2015
* USD 50,000.00

The public's appetite for detailed weather information is on the rise, but
current weather forecasting accuracy is not satisfactory, especially when it
comes to predictions for small-scale areas (e.g., neighborhood-, or block-
level). Current national radar systems provide weather information updated once
every 5 minutes and the quality of the data degrades considerably with increased
distance from the radar. Therefore, in case of severe weather, some events might
remain unnoticed or the information about them might not be delivered on time. A
next generation, short-range weather radar developed at UMass Amherst promises
higher temporal and spatial resolution as well as a reliable, low-cost
operation.

The new class of compact weather radar developed by this team promises much
higher data resolution and can be deployed on rooftops, communications towers,
and other infrastructure elements, without expensive structure modifications.
The low-weight of the system allows for a 2 person installation without the
usage of a crane or helicopter further reducing the overall cost. The radar
radiates a peak power on the order of 100W, rather than in the range of
250-500kW - a standard for current operational weather radars. Therefore the
proposed sensing system does not pose any radiation hazard. Due to its short-
range nature of operation, observation of the weather close to the ground, which
directly affects local communities, is possible. With the proposed technology,
up-to-the-second radar information will be transmitted to individuals and
organizations that make critical decisions about the weather.