* 1535169
* RUI: The Green Bargain: The Environmental Politics of Rare Earth Mining
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Roopali Phadke, Macalester College
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 07/31/2019
* USD 155,186.00

General Audience Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project is a
comparative analysis of three case studies that aims to better understand how
experts and civil society are defining, modeling, and measuring responsible
mining. The objective of the project is to assess the green bargain required to
fast track rare earth mining in order to fuel the American clean energy
revolution. The project will be conducted over three phases. First, the PI will
review the responsible mining literature, drawing together scholarship from the
fields of geography, anthropology, and STS work on responsible innovation. She
will also interview rare earth industry analysts to understand how they are
shaping and communicating corporate social responsibility. Second, the PI will
develop case studies of three rare earth mining sites in California, Wyoming,
and Minnesota. The three cases represent varied landscape types, project scales,
and developers. This phase will document how responsible mining is negotiated
and deliberated in project development. She will focus on the kinds of demands
and concessions developers, regulators, and environmentalists are making to gain
a social license to operate. In the final phase, the PI will compare the cases
to understand the socioeconomic, political, and institutional configurations
that present the greatest potential for a green bargain to emerge. In addition
to research articles, this final stage will result in a Citizen's Guide on rare
earth mining. Given the importance of rare earths to the clean energy economy,
this project has the potential to broadly impact new mining policy. The research
aims to move the current political impasse toward a more robust, civically
engaged, discussion about how we value and protect nature, people and place in
the face of critical materials supply challenges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will synergize two emerging areas of
social theory: the geologic turn in geography and anthropology, and the STS
interest in responsible innovation. The project aims to answer a range of micro
and macro questions about the role of the green bargain in rare earths debates.
At the local level, the project aims to reveal how new vulnerabilities and
opportunities are being co-produced with the new energy economy. These include
asking local residents: What are your concerns about rare earth mining's
landscape and livelihood impacts? What does it mean for a mine to operate
responsibly? The research also addresses broader STS concerns about energy
policy, and the balancing of deliberative processes and outcomes. Toward
furthering the responsible innovation scholarship, the research will ask: What
are the appropriate upstream moments to engage communities in articulating their
hopes and fears with emerging technologies? Whose responsibility is it to
negotiate the green bargain and when? What kinds of local and federal regulatory
mechanisms are necessary to shape and watchdog responsible mining?