* 1535524
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Influence of Blame Mitigation and Guilt Induction on True Versus False Confessions
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2016
* Christian Meissner, University of Texas at El Paso
* Standard Grant
* scott barclay
* 07/31/2016
* USD 20,865.00

False confessions account for approximately 30% of the more than 325 wrongful
convictions identified by The Innocence Project. Interrogation themes, which
attempt to rationalize and minimize the seriousness of the crime or project
blame away from the suspect, have been shown to increase the likelihood of false
confessions. It is possible that these blame mitigation strategies may also
inhibit confessions from guilty suspects, given that true confessions are
related to feelings of guilt and blame mitigation approaches are designed to
reduce feelings of guilt. This project will examine blame mitigation in an
interrogation as well as a novel interrogation technique (guilt induction) in
which an interrogator emphasizes a suspect's responsibility for the crime, the
impact his or her actions had on the victim, and how the suspect's behavior
failed to meet an ideal standard.

Experiments conducted here will (1) test practitioners' beliefs that blame
mitigation techniques do not produce false confessions, and (2) assess whether
guilt induction leads guilty, but not innocent, suspects to confess. The
experiments will also assess how these techniques affect suspects' perceptions
of responsibility and future punishment. This project will use experimental
methods. Participants will imagine themselves in an interrogation (Experiment 1)
or experience an interrogation in a laboratory paradigm (Experiment 2) that
includes blame mitigation, guilt induction, or direct questioning interrogation
techniques.

This project has the potential to benefit society by developing an empirically-
based perspective on what works in the interrogation room. Given the prevalence
of false confessions in our criminal justice system and current debates over the
use of coercive interrogation methods, it is critical that we develop more
diagnostic, evidence-based interrogation approaches. This project will also
provide an important test of contrasting theories of confession proposed by
practitioners and researchers.