* 1535351
* Understanding Gender, Racial, and Ethnic Differences in the Relationship between Prison Visitation and Recidivism
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2017
* Kevin Wright, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Mark Hurwitz
* 08/31/2017
* USD 168,946.00

This project will examine the impact of prison visitation on recidivism with a
focus on how this relationship may vary by gender and across racial and ethnic
groups. The mass incarceration movement has done little to reduce the likelihood
of continued criminal behavior by released offenders. Given that imprisonment
rates have grown rapidly among women and racial and ethnic minorities, the
harmful effects of incarceration are increasingly felt among these groups. Males
and females, and prisoners from different racial and ethnic backgrounds, may
have access to different levels and types of social support during imprisonment,
and can face unique social and structural disadvantages upon their release from
prison. As such, the quality of visitation encounters and the function that
visits serve may differ across groups. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The current project
examines these possibilities by combining quantitative and qualitative data on
prisoners in Arizona. Quantitative data on over 15,000 prisoners released from
2011-2013 will be used to establish broad patterns between visitation and
recidivism among a racially and ethnically diverse population. Qualitative data
from interviews on 231 prisoners currently incarcerated will provide more
detailed information on inmates? experience with visitation. In combination, the
analyses will help determine who benefits from prison visitation and why.