* 1535139
* Standard Research: Social Dynamics and Diversity in Epistemic Communities
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Cailin O'Connor, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 07/31/2019
* USD 305,986.00

General Audience Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aim of this project is to use
formal methods, game theory and evolutionary game theory, to gain insight into
whether and how diversity does and does not improve knowledge creation. It will
investigate whether the dynamics of social interaction can help explain why some
academic disciplines (such as the STEM fields and philosophy) have failed to
diversify. The results of this study will be used to propose concrete
suggestions for how to improve participation of underrepresented groups, and
women in particular, in academia and other epistemic communities. Analyzing the
claim that diversity in epistemic communities improves knowledge creation, and
assessing how to improve diversity in epistemic communities has the potential to
significantly impact scientific outcomes and scientific inquiry. Furthermore, an
exploration of why epistemic communities fail to diversify and how to change
this has clear impacts for women in academia and their professional success.
This project will include an integrated teaching component which will involve
the development of a new undergraduate course, a new unit to be added to a
second course, and two graduate seminars focusing on the outcomes of the
proposed research. These courses will include results obtained from this
project. Throughout the project the PI will collaborate with graduate students,
providing further integration of research and graduate education/advising. This
project will also incorporate broader impacts activities including ongoing
support for the UC Irvine Hypatia society for female graduate students in
philosophy, a meeting for women entering graduate school in philosophy of
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Game theory
and evolutionary game theory are methods primarily employed by social scientists
and biologists. In recent years, however, these methods have increasingly been
adopted by philosophers to address a number of traditional philosophical
problems, including epistemological ones. This project proposes extending this
methodology into an area of philosophy, feminist philosophy of science, where it
has not been used previously, but where it has transformative potential. The
problems of interest to feminist philosophers of science (such as how diversity
influences knowledge creation, how to increase diversity in epistemic
communities, the role of values in science) are well informed by the dynamics of
social interaction and these dynamics can be fruitfully understood through game
theoretic models. The results of the proposed project will be of interest to
philosophers and philosophers of science, but also to game theorists and
evolutionary game theorists in the social sciences, especially in economics
which has an existing literature on women in the work force.