* 1535869
* Collaborative Research-HIARC: Anthropogenic Heat Islands in the Arctic. Windows to the Future of the Regional Climates, Ecosystems, and Societies
* GEO,OPP
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2019
* Marlene Laruelle, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Gregory Anderson
* 05/31/2019
* USD 166,379.00

This award provides support to U.S. researchers participating in a project
competitively selected by a 14-country initiative on global change research
through the Belmont Forum. The Belmont Forum is a high level group of the
world?s major and emerging funders of global environmental change research and
international science councils. It aims to accelerate delivery of the
international environmental research most urgently needed to remove critical
barriers to sustainability by aligning and mobilizing international resources.
Each partner country provides funding for their researchers within a consortium
to alleviate the need for funds to cross international borders. This approach
facilitates effective leveraging of national resources to support excellent
research on topics of global relevance best tackled through a multinational
approach, recognizing that global challenges need global
solutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Working together in this Collaborative Research
Action, the partner agencies have provided support for research projects that
utilize existing Arctic observing systems, datasets and models to evaluate key
sustainability challenges and opportunities in the Arctic region, to innovate
new sustainability science theory and approaches to these challenges and
opportunities, and support decision-making towards a sustainable Arctic
environment. This award provides support for the U.S. researchers to cooperate
in consortia that consist of partners from at least three of the participating
countries and that bring together natural scientists, social scientists and end
users (e.g., policy makers, regulators, NGOs, communities and industry).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Anthropogenic Heat Islands in the Arctic ? Windows to the
Future of the Regional Climates, Ecosystems and Societies (HIARC) brings
together an international team from Norway, Russia, and the United States. The
team represents expertise in the climate, societal, political, biomedical, and
communication sciences. This diverse group will investigate urban heat islands
in the arctic, specifically evaluating how ecosystems and societies adapt to the
warmer micro-climates in urban areas. HIARC will use high-resolution in-situ
data, satellite imagery, climate data with biological productivity indices, and
other sources in order to document and predict environmental changes due to
urban heat islands. The investigators will work with and report to a select
group of end-users, in addition to disseminating their results through
traditional and web-based platforms.