* 1535273
* Hispanics in the Pipeline: Foundations of Persistence from Middle School to STEM Careers
* EDU,EES
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2020
* Nayssan Safavian, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Gregg Solomon
* 08/31/2020
* USD 1,499,989.00

The study, conducted by researchers at the University of California-Irvine, and
the University of Michigan, will examine the underrepresentation of Hispanics in
STEM fields. Hispanic youth, the largest minority and fastest growing
demographic group, are the most likely to drop out of the STEM pipeline before
college and are the least likely to complete college STEM training.
Understanding the psychosocial non-cognitive influences on Hispanic youth's
educational and occupational decisions is critical for designing effective
strategies to confront this issue. The researchers will document the association
of these non-cognitive constructs with Hispanic youth's STEM-related educational
and occupational choices and persistence. The project will be funded by the EHR
Core Research (ECR) program, which supports fundamental research on STEM
learning and education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study builds on an existing
longitudinal study of 14,000 mostly Hispanic and low-income middle and high
school students to create a 15-year database. It also follows up on 1500
Hispanic youths with a more targeted survey. This study will contribute to the
further refinement of two major social-cognitive/motivational theories of
educational success and educational and occupational choices: Achievement Goal
Theory (AGT) and Expectancy-Value Theory (EVT), documenting their association
with Hispanic youth's STEM-related educational and occupational persistence. The
longitudinal dataset will include measures of such essential constructs as: (a)
self-efficacy, mindsets, subjective task values, and affective experiences, (b)
educational and career aspirations and attainment, (c) high school course
choices, and (d) academic achievement. The researchers will examine the links
between these constructs assessed in secondary school and post high school
educational and occupational choices and persistence. Finally, the researchers
will assess the links between students' experiences in math classrooms,
immediate over-the-year changes (motivational beliefs, college and career
aspirations) and long-term outcomes (college and occupational choices).