* 1535428
* Collaborative Research: The Downside of Perseverance--Investigating and Moving Students Beyond Unproductive Persistence
* EDU,DGE
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2020
* Neil Heffernan, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Robert Russell
* 08/31/2020
* USD 516,892.00

The project researches persistence in mathematics learning in a computer-based
learning environment (CBLE). The research investigates how a CBLE can provide
the supportive help and promote the self-regulatory strategies necessary for
students to be not just persistent, but productively persistent math learners.
The project will focus on the middle school years, an important and vulnerable
point in the school trajectory, as mathematical concepts become increasingly
difficult and abstract in the transition from arithmetic to algebra. Persistence
is critical in CBLEs. Research shows has shown that changing student academic
mindsets can have strong benefits for their persistence and achievement.
Sustained effort is important but not always sufficient for learning and less
attention has been paid to the downside of perseverance, called wheel-spinning,
the time that struggling learners spend without making progress. The project
will build instrumentation, theory, and intervention strategies to address the
needs of struggling math students. For technology designers, the project will
distill findings to develop research-based design principles for CBLEs. For
educators, the project will translate findings into pedagogical approaches that
can be used to enhance teacher practice. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research is
designed to address three goals: (1) Develop automated detectors that can
differentiate between wheel-spinning and productive persistence in real time;
(2) Investigate student, teacher, and system factors that predict wheel-spinning
and productive persistence; and (3) To design and test interventions to reduce
wheel-spinning and promote productive persistence. The project will use detailed
log data from thousands students who use an existing computer-based mathematics
program. Learning analytic methods now provide the means to identify and study
micro-level student behavioral engagement patterns. The project will use
complementary data analytic, correlational, think-aloud, and experimental
methods to examine productive persistence and its understudied yet common
counterpart, unproductive persistence. The research will advance the state of
the art in data mining-based measurement to provide instrumentation that can be
used to enhance learning; extend empirical findings about the cognitive and
self-regulatory processes that enable productive persistence in math learning;
and extend the empirical base informing what supports in CBLEs or teacher
practice are necessary for productive persistence. The project, supported
through the EHR Core Research (ECR) program of fundamental research in STEM,
will contribute important research findings regarding STEM learning and learning
environments, which are important priorities of the ECR program.