* 1535931
* Synthetic Biology: Engineering, Evolution and Design (SEED) Conference 2015; Boston Park Plaza, Boston, MA; June 10-13, 2015
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2015,11/30/2015
* Pamela Silver, American Institute of Chemical Engineers
* Standard Grant
* Friedrich Srienc
* 11/30/2015
* USD 25,000.00

1535931&lt;br/&gt;Silver, Pamela &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Support from the National
Science Foundation is requested for the 'Synthetic Biology: Engineering,
Evolution and Design (SEED) Conference 2015' to be held at the Boston Park Plaza
in Boston, MA from June 10-13, 2015. The SEED Conference is being organized
under the auspices of the Society of Biological Engineering of the Americal
Institute of Chemical Engineers. The conference provides leadership in the
development of Synthetic Biology and serves to broaden participation by
appealing to broad sectors in industry and academia focusing specifically to
include young investigators and those outside of the
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SEED2015 is the second in an annual series of
meetings held to address researchers from industry and academia in the area of
Synthetic Biology. The field of Synthetic Biology is highly interdisciplinary
with faculty and students spread across departments that focus on engineering
(biological, chemical, electrical, mechanical, civil, computer science) and
basic science (biology and systems biology, chemistry, physics. The conference
provides a forum for discussions on Synthetic Biology across these
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The conference is co-sponsered by the
Biotechnology and Biochemical Engineering Program of the CBET Division and by
the Synthetic and Systems Biology Program of the Division of Molecular and
Cellular Biology.