* 1535796
* CI-New: Collaborative Research: An Open Observatory for the Internet's Last Mile
* CSE,CNS
* 01/16/2015,06/30/2018
* Nicholas Feamster, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Thyagarajan Nandagopal
* 06/30/2018
* USD 372,393.00

Decision makers ranging from operators to policymakers need accurate,
representative, intuitive, and repeatable measurements of Internet connectivity.
Policymakers rely on data about Internet speeds to inform regulation and
investment decisions. Human rights activists monitor the state of Internet
reachability from a wide range of countries and Internet service providers and
report broadly on those findings. Application providers, Internet service
providers, and network operators all need to know the performance that a user is
experiencing to allow them to better tune their services. These decision makers
require an infrastructure that can measure Internet connectivity from the
perspectives of typical users. Towards this goal, this project will develop an
infrastructure to gather reliable, repeatable measurements from vantage points
that reflect the connectivity experienced by home Internet users. In addition to
yielding valuable data about characteristics of Internet connectivity, the
infrastructure will also serve as a platform for researchers to perform
repeatable experiments and gather data on the Internet as seen from the home.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By developing software that will run on commercially
available home gateway routers and which will allow researchers to securely
dynamicly load sandboxed applications, this project will develop an open network
measurement observatory for researchers, operators, and policymakers. The
project will combine elements of the BISMark and Wireless@Home measurement
projects with the Seattle testbed in order to provide researchers with the
ability to install sandboxed measurement applications on the home gateway.