* 1535511
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:   Understanding Local Legal Compliance in a Potential Era of Prison Downsizing
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2016
* Mona Lynch, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* scott barclay
* 08/31/2016
* USD 19,994.00

Despite vast expenditures on prison construction in the late 20th century,
infrastructure has not kept pace with the dramatic growth of incarceration in
the U.S. As a result, extreme prison overcrowding has led to humanitarian, legal
and fiscal emergencies nationwide. These emergencies are especially pronounced
at the state level, where the Great Recession most directly affected and
severely curtailed public spending; today, more than a third of state prison
systems exceed institutional capacity. In the present policy environment, rather
than investing scarce capital on building more prisons, state-level legal
reforms aimed at downsizing the prison population are widely seen as the more
prudent solutions. Little is known, however, about the diffusion and
implementation of these laws among local criminal justice actors and their
effects at the county level of practice, where the incarceration process begins
for most inmates. Without a more sophisticated understanding of the complexities
of local compliance, laws designed to downsize prisons risk unintended
consequences and, ultimately, failure. This project examines how differences in
local organizational culture shape the meaning of law on the ground in ways that
bolster or undermine the reform goal of decarceration. The research focuses on
two questions: (1) how do local criminal justice actors comply with, shape, and
resist prison downsizing laws; and (2) what effect do these responses have on
decarceration as a key metric of institutional change? The purpose is to
identify the processes and conditions under which such reforms result in either
decarceration or the mere relocation of incarceration in local jurisdictions.
This knowledge will practically enhance state governments' heretofore largely
frustrated attempts to systemically address overincarceration by sensitizing the
architects as well as the implementers of legal reform to the predictors of and
barriers to local compliance. It will also stress the need for organizational
change programs in successful prison downsizing innovations that avoid trans-
institutionalization. Ultimately, this project will leverage the lessons learned
to national reform strategies by generating a typology of local receptivity to
decarceration, which will inform targeted rather than one-size-fits-all
interventions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project uses the recent "realignment"
of California's prison system -- one of the nation's and western world's largest
-- as an empirical window to examine the above questions. A combination of
group-based trajectory modeling and institutional ethnographic methods are used
to assess the proposition that local organizational culture mediates the
implementation of prison downsizing laws and that variation in county
organizational culture explains differences in the outcome of decarceration.
These multiple methods enable to the study to: (1) specify the measures of local
variation most salient in predicting decarceration; (2) identify the processes
by which local organizational culture mediates law, as well as variations in
these processes across counties; and (3) relate these variations to the outcome
of decarceration. The overarching goal of this research is to help solve the
problem of prison overcrowding by identifying its local variants, each with a
distinct etiology and progression, to inform carefully tailored, evidence-based
interventions.