* 1535573
* I/UCRC FRP: Exploiting Self-interference Suppression and Full-duplex Capabilities in Opportunistic Wireless Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Tamal Bose, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Dmitri Perkins
* 08/31/2018
* USD 200,000.00

The ability of a wireless device to achieve simultaneous transmission and
reception (STAR) over the same channel has generally been deemed impossible,
until recently, where several researchers have demonstrated the possibility of
full-duplex (FD) communications using a combination of self-interference
suppression (SIS) techniques, in classical static-spectrum settings. In this
project, the PIs will explore a completely different application scenario for
SIS, in the context of opportunistic dynamic spectrum access (DSA) systems. The
project is expected to have big impacts on opportunistic wireless systems,
boosting their capacity and enabling them to support real-time traffic. This
will ultimately lead to the proliferation of a new generation of FD-capable
wireless devices. Proposed techniques can be applied in many contexts, including
opportunistic super-WiFi access points (e.g., White-Fi systems, standardized by
IEEE in its 802.11af standard), femto cells that utilize cellular bands on a
secondary basis, military radios that operate in contested- or shared-spectrum
environments, satellite radios with anti-jamming capabilities, etc. PIs will
integrate their findings in relevant graduate courses. In addition to results
dissemination and curriculum development, PIs will carry out a number of
educational and outreach activities, including giving tutorials and invited
sessions at conferences, guest-editing special issues on FD for DSA systems,
etc. PIs will also collaborate with BWAC I/UCRC industry partners to demonstrate
a sample of the proposed solutions on their spectrum-agile radio platforms.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Key outcomes of the proposed project might include: (1)
novel integration of SIS techniques into opportunistic DSA systems; (ii)
optimized mode-selection strategies that enable a pair of DSA devices to
dynamically alternate between various communication modes, depending on observed
channel occupancy profile, traffic conditions, and SIS capabilities; (iii)
theoretical analysis and validation of key performance metrics for an FD-capable
DSA link under energy- and signature-based sensing, considering various non-
idealities; (iv) a channel access and information exchange protocol for a multi-
channel FD-enabled DSA network with heterogeneous SIS levels; (v) a cooperative
sensing mechanism for an FD-enabled DSA network with diverse sensing and SIS
levels; and (vi) an adaptive spectrum handoff mechanism for an FD-capable
opportunistic network.