* 1535846
* Causality Across Languages
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2015,01/31/2023
* Juergen Bohnemeyer, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Mary Paster
* 01/31/2023
* USD 403,455.00

Causality is a key aspect of cognition. Our minds bring order to the flux of
experience by relating observed events to one another as causes and effects.
This is an indispensible prerequisite to explaining past events and predicting
future one. Philosophers and cognitive scientists have long puzzled over the
cognitive basis of our ability to attribute cause-effect relations. A question
of fundamental concern is which aspects of causal cognition are invariant across
human populations and thus may have an innate basis, and which are learned and
subject to cross-cultural variation. This project aims to contribute to
answering this question, using primarily language as a window into causal
cognition. The principal objective is the first large-scale comparison of how
speakers of different languages categorize causal chains for the purposes of
describing them. The project will help discern the criteria by which speakers
choose from among the expressive options available to them when representing
causal chains. These options have been shown to vary enormously across
languages. Furthermore, the encoding of causal relations is a key aspect of the
grammatical structure of human language, and the project will make important
empirical contributions to the theory of the "syntax-semantics interface", the
mapping between form and meaning in language. It also includes the largest-scale
investigation to date of how language interfaces with nonlinguistic cognition in
the representation of causality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An international team of
28 experienced field researchers will investigate the representation of
causality across 29 languages belonging to 26 language families and spoken on
six continents. A large set of video clips depicting event sequences that may or
may not be causally related will be created. Descriptions of these clips under
various controlled conditions will be collected from at least 12 speakers per
language. The researchers will probe the meaning and structure of the
descriptions, testing crosslinguistic predictions in the process. A nonverbal
categorization experiment will test how participants conceptualize causal
relations when they do not talk about them, with the objective of studying to
what degree internal thought and verbal representations of causality align.