* 1535854
* Collaborative Research: GEOTRACES Arctic Section: The Geochemistry Size-fractionated Suspended Particles Collected by in-situ Filtration
* GEO,OCE
* 02/01/2015,06/30/2019
* Phoebe Lam, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 06/30/2019
* USD 520,605.00

An investigator from Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution participating in the
2015 U.S. GEOTRACES Arctic expedition will collect and analyze suspended
particulate matter in the Western Arctic Ocean to better understand cycling of
trace elements in the region. In common with other multinational initiatives in
the International GEOTRACES Program, the goals of the U.S. Arctic expedition are
to identify processes and quantify fluxes that control the distributions of key
trace elements and isotopes in the ocean, and to establish the sensitivity of
these distributions to changing environmental conditions. Some trace elements
are essential to life, others are known biological toxins, and still others are
important because they can be used as tracers of a variety of physical,
chemical, and biological processes in the sea. Particles are a key parameter for
the GEOTRACES program because of their role as sources, sinks, and in the
cycling of trace elements. Results from this study will be shared through
outreach to native groups in Alaska. The project will involve training of
graduate and undergraduate students.

Particle cycling in the Arctic Ocean is profoundly different from other ocean
basins. Extremely low primary production in the perennially ice-covered central
Arctic leads to a very weak biological pump. With little particle flux coming
from above, the dominant source of particles to the Arctic Basin appears to be
lateral transport from the margins, and these laterally transported particles
have much higher lithogenic content than is typically found in particles in
other ocean basins. The different source and composition of particles in the
Arctic potentially sets up a completely different dynamic for the removal of
particle-reactive trace elements and their isotopes from the water column than
is currently understood. There has yet to be a comprehensive survey of the
concentration and composition of suspended particles in the Arctic. In this
study, the size-fractionated suspended particles will be analyzed for major
phases and trace element composition, measurements needed to determine
scavenging removal of particle reactive elements and provide insight into the
mechanisms controlling the biological pump.