* 1535279
* Theory-Driven Experimental Studies of Planar Photocathodes
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2019
* W. Andreas Schroeder, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 07/31/2019
* USD 398,128.00

The generation of well-collimated (i.e., bright) pulsed electron beams is a key
component in many of todays (and proposed future) cutting edge research
instruments aimed at improving our understanding of materials, nanoscale
systems, and molecular dynamics on fast timescales and with high spatial
resolution. This research project will build on and verify our recently
developed theoretical formalism describing how the characteristics of these
electron pulses are fundamentally dependent upon the electronic properties of
the electron-emitting (photocathode) material, with the goal of significantly
increasing their brightness. The consequent expected enhancement in the
performance of the related research instrumentation (such as the Linac Coherent
Light Source and electron microscopes incorporating fast time resolution) should
result in tangible scientific advances, particularly in the strategically
important fields of sustainable energy research, molecular biochemistry, and
materials engineering. In addition to educating the next generation of leaders
in accelerator science, condensed matter physics, and photonics, this project
will also expose STEM undergraduate students to highly interdisciplinary modern
research work. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this three-year research
project is to improve substantially the beam quality of laser-driven electron
sources using a band structure based photoemission theory to identify robust
planar photocathode materials that generate electron beams with ultra-low
divergence. Prior combined experimental and theoretical work has provided the
framework for a deeper understanding of the physics of planar photocathodes that
will now allow for a predictive approach to photocathode selection. After
experimental verification of the density functional theory (DFT) approach to the
simulation of photoemission using single-crystal metals, further studies will be
conducted on photocathode materials selected for their substantially reduced
electron beam divergence associated with expected low values of the rms
transverse momentum, pT, of the emitted electrons. Assessment of the theoretical
predictions will employ the solenoid scan technique to measure pT of electron
beams generated using a laser-driven DC electron gun. All experiments will be
performed using a custom-built, 230-300nm tunable ultraviolet laser radiation
source to allow in situ verification of the work function and the predicted
spectral dependence of quantitative photocathode properties, including quantum
emission efficiency. This will also require an extension to the DFT-based
photoemission theory to include finite temperature effects and matrix elements
describing the photoexcitation in the photocathode material. In addition, an
investigation into the important effect of surface roughness on the emission
properties of planar metal and semiconductor photocathodes with and without
direct one-step photoexcited bulk state emission will be initiated.