* 1535496
* Investigating the influence of informal understandings about biology on formal learning of biological concepts
* EDU,DGE
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2020
* John Coley, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Gregg Solomon
* 07/31/2020
* USD 1,409,144.00

The ECR program emphasizes fundamental STEM education research that will
generate foundational knowledge in the field. Investments are made in critical
areas that are essential, broad and enduring: STEM learning and STEM learning
environments, broadening participation in STEM, and STEM workforce development.
This project will integrate research on STEM learning in developmental cognitive
science and science education to investigate how cognitive aspects of informal
biology facilitate or impede the attainment of formal biological concepts. The
study will focus on misconceptions common among biology students that may stem
not from the complexity of the concepts themselves, but from deeply held
informal ways of understanding the scientific world. It will also test
hypotheses about the role of language used by college faculty in reinforcing
such ways of knowing, and investigate changes in informal biological thought
with the acquisition of formal biological knowledge. The project will target
college students and faculty members at multiple levels. The study sample will
include 100 entering biology majors and non-majors, 100 graduating biology
majors and non-majors, 40 faculty members and a comparable sample of non-science
faculty members at Northeastern University and San Francisco State
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This interdisciplinary project will bring
together cognitive scientists and science education researchers to study four
specific aims to: (1) examine the use of cognitive construals in formal
biological explanations; (2) investigate the nature of instructional language
used in university biology; (3) experimentally manipulate the use of cognitive
construals in instructional language; and (2) examine changes on traditional
cognitive science measures of informal construal based biological reasoning.
Data will be collected from study participants at various points of the study
through audio recordings of classroom teaching sessions, pre/post surveys,
challenge statement assessments, concept inventories, and laboratory
experiments. Results emerging from analysis of data from these sources will
advance knowledge at the intersection of cognitive psychology and disciplined-
based science education research. If findings from this work clarify there is a
relationship between informal biological thought and formal biological science
learning, it will help establish a new theoretical framework for understanding
the acquisition of knowledge in the life sciences. As such, the research will
have direct implications for life science teaching at the undergraduate level
and fundamentally change the way instructors teach biological concepts that are
particularly difficult for students to learn.