* 1535615
* WORKSHOP:  Prisoner Reentry and Reintegration: Improving Data Collection and Methodology to Advance Theory and Knowledge
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Elsa Chen, Rutgers University Newark
* Standard Grant
* Reginald Sheehan
* 08/31/2020
* USD 48,753.00

This workshop about prisoner reentry will bring together invited participants
from academic institutions, policy organizations, and government to present
original research and share knowledge about relevant theoretical perspectives,
best practices for the generation of high quality data, and innovative
methodologies. The United States experienced a lengthy period of unprecedented
prison population growth, and as a consequence substantial numbers of formerly
incarcerated individuals are reentering society. These individuals have a broad
range of needs such as finding employment, securing housing and reuniting with
family members. In order to foster successful reintegration and enhance public
safety, the workshop will document cutting edge research findings and highlight
mechanisms for bridging research and policy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific
objectives of the workshop are to advance research, policy and practice by
convening leading and emerging scholars and practitioners at the Rutgers
University School of Criminal Justice. The workshop will help researchers make
the best use of their resources, avoid methodological and practical pitfalls,
and produce the highest-quality and most rigorous empirical research on the
topic of prisoner reentry. Advancing research on reentry will have extensive
impacts beyond academic circles. A more thorough understanding of the components
of successful desistance, rehabilitation and reentry can inform public policy,
which could assist millions of formerly-incarcerated individuals, enhance public
safety, and enable criminal justice practitioners and policy makers to make
effective and efficient use of scarce resources.