* 1535680
* EAGER: Exploring Resilience in SmartCity Water Infrastructure
* CSE,CNS
* 06/15/2015,05/31/2018
* Ronald Eguchi, ImageCat, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 05/31/2018
* USD 49,999.00

Water is a critical resource and a lifeline service to communities worldwide;
the generation, treatment, distribution and maintenance of water workflows is
typically managed by local governments and water districts. Recent events such
as water supply disruptions caused by Hurricane Sandy in 2012 and the looming
California drought crisis clearly indicate society's dependence on critical
lifeline services such as water and the far-reaching impacts that its disruption
can cause. Over the years, these critical infrastructures have become more
complex and often more vulnerable to failures. The ability to view water
workflows as a community wide cyber-physical system (CPS) with multiple levels
of observation/control and diverse players (suppliers, distributors, consumers)
presents new possibilities. Designing robust water systems involves a clear
understanding of the structure, components and operation of this CPS system and
how community infrastructure dynamics (e.g. varying demands, small/large
disruptions) impact lifeline service availabilities and how service level
decisions impact infrastructure control. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal
emphasizes a new approach to exploring engineering systems that will result in
substantial advances in the understanding of lifeline systems and approaches to
make them adaptive and resilient. Building resilience into urban lifelines
raises a number of monumental challenges including identifying the aspects of
systems that can be observed/sensed and adapted and to developing general
principles that can guide adaptation. The key idea is to develop methodologies
to understand operational performance and resilience issues for real-world
community water infrastructures and explore solutions to problems in cyberspace
before instantiating them into a physical infrastructure. The effort includes:
1) Developing a flexible modeling framework that captures system needs at
multiple levels of temporal and spatial abstraction; 2) Developing real-time
algorithms supporting resilience; 3) Designing adaptations for water systems
using a data-driven approach; and 4) Demonstrating the important broader impact
of the research on critical water system infrastructure at the Global City
Technology Challenge and the longer term impact on infrastructure for a
resilient control framework.