* 1535376
* CCF: AF: Student Travel Support for the 2015 Computational Complexity Conference
* CSE,CCF
* 03/15/2015,02/28/2017
* Venkatesan Guruswami, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 02/28/2017
* USD 10,000.00

This award will help support student attendance at the 2015 Computational
Complexity Conference (CCC) that will take place June 17th to June 19th, 2015 in
Portland, Oregon, USA, as part of the Federated Computing Research Conference
(FCRC 2015). CCC is the premier annual conference devoted to research in
computational complexity theory. The conference aims to foster research in all
areas of computational complexity theory, studying the absolute and relative
power of computational models under resource constraints, and the mathematical
aspects with close connections to such a study. The conference will have
approximately thirty high quality presentations in a single-track session over 3
days. The field of computational complexity is a vibrant one, with high
participation rates from young researchers, and many papers with student
authors. For these student authors and student attendees, the conference serves
as a valuable educational experience, both for the technical content of the
talks and for the opportunities for networking that it
provides.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award will provide partial support to
approximately ten students, partly defraying the cost of registration, travel,
and lodging.  In selecting students for a travel allowance, efforts will be made
to support students from under-represented groups and geographically diverse
areas.