* 1535414
* Stereotype-based contagion in Problem Based Learning Contexts and STEM Identification
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2021
* Tessa West, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Jolene Jesse
* 08/31/2021
* USD 1,816,333.00

This proposal was submitted in response to EHR Core Research (ECR) program
announcement NSF 15-509. As part of ECR, this project is funded by the Research
on Gender in Science and Engineering (GSE) program. GSE seeks to understand and
address gender-based differences in science, technology, engineering and
mathematics (STEM) education and workforce participation through education and
implementation research that will lead to a larger and more diverse domestic
STEM workforce. This project will focus on understanding why girls and women who
are initially the most invested and motivated to succeed in Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Mathematic (STEM) domains, are ironically the most likely to
leave these domains. The research specifically will examine a social context
that has received little research to date: Problem Based Learning (PBL). With
the PBL approach individuals work on problems together in dyads or groups.
Although this approach is gaining rapid popularity at all levels of education,
the role that it may play in affecting girls' and women's performance and
ultimately their identification with STEM fields remains unexplored. This
research proposes that PBL settings may be threatening to at least one
individual target in a task group. This threat may in turn spread to other women
in the group--a phenomenon referred to as stereotype-based stress contagion--
affecting all female group members' performance and memories of the situation
accordingly. Using a multi-method approach that includes psychophysiological,
neurological, and behavioral measures, the studies will explore how PBL settings
may unintentionally create stereotype or social identity threatening contexts,
i.e., stressful, physiologically arousing situations where negative stereotypes
about women's math ability are salient. The studies also will investigate a
series of downstream consequences of this process within individuals. For
example, stress contagion may facilitate encoding of negative memories specific
to the PBL context, even if group members were otherwise more resilient to
threats. Importantly, negative emotional memories forged in PBL contexts may lay
the foundation for learned aversions towards STEM domains that undermine STEM
identification over time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research has five primary
objectives: 1) Investigate whether stereotype-based stress experienced by one
woman will spread to otherwise non-threatened male and female partners in
interpersonal interactions, as reflected in synchronous neural, physiological
and behavioral responses between two partners; 2) Assess whether stereotype-
based stress contagion will engender worse dyadic performance and partner
perceptions; 3) Determine whether stereotype-based stress contagion facilitates
encoding of negative, stereotype confirming information among the partner placed
under threat and her female interaction partner; 4) Examine whether stereotype-
based stress contagion engenders learned STEM aversions that undermine feelings
of competency among two or more stigmatized individuals in a group; and 5)
Assess these processes in a highly unique but optimal real-world setting: High
school freshman boys and girls who have chosen a STEM track and work regularly
in Problem Based Learning contexts to solve STEM related problems. These studies
will employ a variety of longitudinal, social and cognitive neuroscience
methodologies, including EEG, psychophysiological and dyadic methodologies. This
approach stands to provide a mechanistic understanding of how neural and
psychophysiological biomarkers interact both within and between individuals to
alter overt perceptions, behaviors and thus interactions between two individuals
in PBL contexts; mechanisms that might otherwise be impossible to identify
relying on behavioral or self-report measures alone.