* 1535167
* A Big Data-Theoretic Approach to Quantify Organizational Failure Mechanisms in Probabilistic Risk Assessment
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2022
* Catherine Blake, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Songqi Liu
* 08/31/2022
* USD 899,996.00

Nontechnical Description&lt;br/&gt;Catastrophic events such as Fukushima and
Katrina have made it clear that integrating physical and social causes of
failure into a cohesive modeling framework is critical in order to prevent
complex technological accidents and to maintain public safety and health. In
this research, experts in Probabilistic Risk Assessment (PRA), Organizational
Behavior and Information Science and Data Analytics disciplines will collaborate
to provide answers to the following key questions: (a) what social and
organizational factors affect technical system risk? (b) how and why do these
factors influence risk? and (c) how much do they contribute to risk? Existing
PRA models do not include a complete range of organizational factors. This
research investigates organizational root causes of failure and models their
paths of influence on technical system performance, resulting in more
comprehensive incorporation of underlying organizational failure mechanisms into
PRA. The field of PRA has progressed the quantification of equipment failure and
human error for modeling risk of complex systems; however, the current
organizational risk contributors lack reliable data analytics that go beyond
safety climate and safety culture surveys. This research fills that gap by
developing predictive causal modeling and big-data theoretic technologies for
PRA, expanding the classic approach of data management for risk analysis by
utilizing techniques such as text mining, data mining and data analytics. In
addition to scientific contributions to organizational science, PRA, and data
analytics, this research provides regulatory and industry decision-makers with
important organizational factors that contribute to risk and leads to optimized
decision making. Other applications include real-time monitoring of
organizational safety indicators, efficient safety auditing, in-depth root cause
analysis, and risk-informed emergency preparedness, planning and response. The
multidisciplinary approach of this project can serve as an educational model,
empowering students to pursue research across disciplinary boundaries. Finally,
the proposed research represents a successful model of industry-academia
collaboration. A nuclear power plant has committed to this project and provides
unique access to data and information necessary to complete the research. The
proposed methodology is generic and applicable for any high-risk industry (e.g.,
aviation, healthcare, oil and gas), and will be used for the improvement of
organizational safety performance in order to protect workers, the public and
the environment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Description&lt;br/&gt;Organizations produce, process and store a large volume of
wide-ranging, unstructured data as a result of business activities and
compliance requirements (i.e., corrective action programs, root cause analysis
reports, oversight and inspection data, etc.). This research leverages those
data resources for the quantification of organizational failure mechanisms and
their integration with the technical system risk scenarios generated by PRA. The
research is based on a socio-technical risk theory to prevent misleading results
from solely data-informed approaches. Combining socio-technical risk theory,
systematic modeling and semantic data analytics strategies will greatly enhance
risk analysis of complex systems. We will conduct our research based on
following steps: (1) Expand factors, sub-factors, and causal relationships in
the Socio-Technical Risk Analysis (SoTeRiA) framework, (2) Develop measurement
techniques for factors, sub-factors and their causal relationships in SoTeRiA
(e.g., integrating text mining with the Bayesian Belief Network; conducting
scientific reduction to identify important factors; measuring of important
factors), (3) Establish a dynamic, predictive socio-technical causal modeling
technique, (4) Perform uncertainty analysis, (5) Conduct verification and
validation, (6) Integrate the quantitative socio-technical causal model with
PRA, and (7) Conduct sensitivity and importance measure analyses. As the pioneer
study on the integration of big data with PRA, this research addresses and
quantifies risk emerging from the interface of social and technical systems.