* 1535716
* I-Corps Teams: Development and Commercialization of Bridge Inspection Robotic Systems
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2015,09/30/2015
* Hung La, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Rathindra DasGupta
* 09/30/2015
* USD 50,000.00

There are over 600,000 aging bridges in the United States which have been
subjected to extreme deterioration due to various mechanical and weather
conditions, inadequate maintenance, and deficiencies in inspection and
evaluation. Currently, manual Non-destructive evaluation (NDE) is a way to
identify and predict early-stage bridge deterioration to enable proactive
interventions for repair for bridges. However, the delivery of the current NDE
technologies cannot meet the increasing demands for highly-efficient, cost-
effective and safety-guaranteed inspection and evaluation. Hence the threat to
safety of aging bridges has been recognized as a growing problem of national
concern to the general public. The objective of this I-Corps project is to
finalize and commercialize automated robotics systems for safety, efficient and
cost effective of bridge inspection and evaluation. The typical customers of the
proposed innovation are the Departments of Transportation and bridge management
contractors seeking for a creative, efficient, low cost and safe bridge
inspection tool.

This team has developed autonomous NDE robotic systems for bridge inspections.
The proposed robotic system integrates NDE sensing technologies with recent
advances in robotics and automation sciences that can inspect and evaluate the
bridge efficiently and accurately in real time manner. The proposed project will
generate knowledge and enabling tools for designing new robotic technologies for
sustainable national bridge infrastructure. The development of two robotic
prototypes, bridge deck inspection robot and steel bridge structure inspection
robot, that combines NDE sensors with robotic sensing will provide new
methodologies to fuse heterogeneous sensing technologies for accurately
detecting hidden defects inside bridge structure and deck. The development of
the non-destructive robotic inspections will provide new designs for safe,
efficient and less costly bridge inspection. The proposed work will draw from
current robotics advancements to provide a new and unique approach to bridge
maintenance. This will represent a major advancement within civil engineering
and the on-going bridge maintenance challenges within our highway
infrastructure.