* 1535108
* SI2-SSE: Analyze Visual Data from Worldwide Network Cameras
* CSE,OAC
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2020
* Yung-Hsiang Lu, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Stefan Robila
* 07/31/2020
* USD 599,987.00

Many network cameras have been deployed for a wide range of purposes, such as
monitoring traffic, evaluating air pollution, observing wildlife, and watching
landmarks. The data from these cameras can provide rich information about the
natural environment and human activities. To extract valuable information from
this network of cameras, complex computer programs are needed to retrieve data
from the geographically distributed cameras and to analyze the data. This
project creates a open source software infrastructure by solving many problems
common to different types of analysis programs. By using this infrastructure,
researchers can focus on scientific discovery, not writing computer programs.
This project can improve efficiency and thus reduce the cost for running
programs analyzing large amounts of data. This infrastructure promotes education
because students can obtain an instantaneous view of the network cameras and use
the visual information to understand the world. Better understanding of the
world may encourage innovative solutions for many pressing issues, such as
better urban planning and lower air pollution. This project can enhance
diversity through multiple established programs that encourage underrepresented
minorities to pursue careers in science and engineering.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will combine: (1) the ability to retrieve
data from many heterogeneous and distributed cameras, (2) the management of
computational and storage resources using cloud computing, and (3) improved
performance by reducing data movement, balancing loads among multiple cloud
instances, and enhancing data-level parallelism. The project provides an
application programming interface (API) that hides the underlying sophisticated
infrastructure. This infrastructure will handle both real-time streaming data
and archival data in a uniform way, so that the same analysis programs can be
reused. This project has four major components: (1) a web-based user interface,
(2) a database that stores the details about the network cameras, (3) a resource
manager that allocates cloud instances, and (4) a computational engine that
execute the programs written by users. The service-oriented architecture will
allow new functions to be integrated more easily by the research community.