* 1535218
* Scholars Award: A Study of Rural and Prison Sourcing of Information and Communication Technology Labor
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2018
* Winifred Poster, Poster                  Winifred       R
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 08/31/2018
* USD 108,753.00

General Audience Summary

This project engages in on-site field work in India to examine the shift in the
labor force for information and communication technology (ICT) from urban
centers to rural villages, poor communities, and prisons. The PI will conduct
100 interviews with workers at a rural unit, RuralShores, in four states, and
she will engage in ethnographic observations at a prison, Cherlapalli Jail in
Andhra Pradesh, which is the home to India's first global outsourcing center of
this kind. The goal of this project is to shed light on the societal
implications of this shift, which are far from clear. On the one hand, Indian
firms are able to offer job opportunities to groups that have been traditionally
excluded from technologically-based employment. On the other, these jobs pay
wages far less than ICT outsourcing jobs in urban areas, and are less likely to
be protected by state labor regulations or represented by unions. Three factors
will be the focus for determining the viability of this shift: transferring
technical skills to marginal workers, providing supports for social mobility,
and upholding data security in the process. Results will have broader impacts on
policy discussions of poverty alleviation, representations of rural and female
workers in STEM occupations, and international regulation of data crimes and
cyber security.

Technical Summary

At the theoretical level, this project will serve to adjudicate between
competing notions within Science and Technology Studies of what ICT means for
marginalized workers in the global south. Affirmation of propositions from
modernization theory would indicate that sub-sourcing of ICT labor to places
like villages in India has indeed provided mobility avenues out of poverty for
the rural poor through technical training. Alternatively, positive results for a
post-colonial computing framework would suggest that sub-sourcing of ICT labor
does not in fact represent a viable platform for long-term employment, but
instead a re-segregation of the poor in villages; hence, solidifying the digital
divide along geographic lines. In addition, findings on data security will
indicate what kinds of threats these rural and prison business outsource
processors pose to information systems, and whether the stereotypes surrounding
these workers as unsafe are upheld by the evidence.