* 1535004
* Analyzing the Role of Social Networks in Local Government Decision-Making about High-Volume Hydraulic Fracturing
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2015,09/30/2018
* Gwen Arnold, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 09/30/2018
* USD 525,000.00

This project investigates how social networks shape policy decision-making about
high-volume hydraulic fracturing (HVHF), a technique for hydrocarbon extraction
that is transforming the U.S. energy landscape. The research explores how the
structure of local government networks affects the efficacy of policy
entrepreneurs (sometimes known as "leaders" or "issue advocates") in convincing
local officials in California and New York to adopt HVHF policies. The project
also evaluates how the social networks of policy entrepreneurs affect the
innovativeness of local HVHF policies. Finally, it analyzes the social
mechanisms driving decision-makers? (non)participation in the diffusion of HVHF
policies among sub-state jurisdictions. This research advances scholarship by
drawing insights from network science that allow quantitative analysis of how
human agents' policy entrepreneurs and local government officials' engage with
social networks and influence policy diffusion. In addition to its scientific
contributions, this research and associated outreach will help local government
officials learn how to leverage their information networks most effectively when
seeking information about HVHF or other issues of salience to local governance.
Such learning is particularly important given the sharp capacity constraints
these officials often face. Another important output of this project is an
online decision-support tool that will help local officials learn about HVHF
policy options. This free, searchable web interface will house hundreds of
digitized, archived, and categorized pro- and anti-HVHF policy measures passed
by sub-state jurisdictions in California and New York.

This project uses social network analysis to illuminate blind spots in policy
scholarship. Policy diffusion is clearly a network-reliant process, yet policy
scholars all but ignore how learning, imitative, or competitive inter-
jurisdictional pressures experienced by local officials may shape diffusion
patterns. They also rarely examine the content of policies subject to diffusion.
Research on policy entrepreneurs, individuals who push a policy onto the public
agenda and help secure its passage, acknowledges the importance of networks in
facilitating entrepreneurial advocacy yet devotes little attention to the
mechanisms that drive this influence. Scholars who do tackle these questions
rarely use quantitative methods. The project addresses these gaps. It
quantitatively tests hypotheses about how aspects of policy entrepreneurs?
social networks affect their success in convincing decision makers to adopt
policy innovations, how ties among municipal decision makers can reveal the
social mechanisms underlying policy diffusion, and how policy entrepreneurship
can shape the innovativeness of policies and their rate of uptake.