* 1535300
* Investigating Virtual Learning Environments
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2021
* Padhraic Smyth, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Robert Russell
* 08/31/2021
* USD 2,500,000.00

The multi-year project will study 50 flipped, hybrid, and online courses offered
in the three major STEM Schools at the University of California, Irvine (UCI).
Higher education institutions are increasing the number of courses they offer
that use elements of virtual instruction in the belief that these courses will
lead to better learning, lower costs, greater access, and higher graduation
rates. However, recent meta-analyses of virtual learning in higher education all
conclude that there is a dearth of rigorous research on the topic. The study
will assist higher education administrators, instructors, and course designers
to make effective decisions in planning the kinds of virtual learning
environments that can best meet the needs of undergraduate STEM students,
especially in the vital first two years of college. A major focus of the study
will be the impact of virtual learning environments on underrepresented
minorities, first-generation college students, students of low-socioeconomic
status backgrounds, and women. The research will provide some of the best
evidence to date about the impact of higher education virtual environments on
learning outcomes, attitudes toward STEM, and persistence in STEM
majors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will include 50 separate
studies of STEM instruction at UCI. The majority will employ random assignment
of students to investigate the comparative impacts of virtual vs. traditional
learning with the same instructor. Experimental and quasi-experimental
techniques will be used to compare the impact of virtual courses compared to
traditional courses taught by the same instructor on students? attitudes toward
STEM study, learning outcomes, and success and persistence in future STEM
courses. Quantitative and qualitative indicators of instructional practices and
student performance and engagement will be collected to compare and describe
practices across course formats and then distilled into recommended best
practices. Statistical data mining techniques, including sequence modeling,
clustering, text mining, matrix factorization, and high-dimensional predictive
modeling will be used on a rich set of institutional data, self-reported survey
data, engagement data (logins, video watching, participation in online forums),
and outcome data to extract and analyze information about student learning
behaviors and their relationship to learning outcomes. The instruments and
designs used in the study, including observation protocols, surveys, interview
protocols, and cutting-edge methodological approaches, will allow future
researchers to replicate and build on these analyses, thereby contributing to
the broader understanding of virtual learning environments. The project,
supported through the EHR Core Research (ECR) program of fundamental research in
STEM, will contribute important research findings regarding STEM learning,
learning environments, and broadening participation in STEM, which are important
priorities of the ECR program.