* 1535462
* Collaborative research: Variation in the awarding and effectiveness of STEM graduate student funding across teaching and research assistantships, fellowships, and traineeships
* EDU,DGE
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2021
* Maura Borrego, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Earnestine Psalmonds
* 09/30/2021
* USD 749,358.00

Researchers at the University of Texas at Austin and Virginia Polytechnic
Institute and State University will conduct a mixed methods research project to
better understand how various mechanisms of funding - fellowships, research
assistantships, teaching assistantships, etc. - influence students' pursuit of
doctorates in STEM and subsequent employment. The project will produce empirical
evidence and a conceptual framework to inform the improvement of graduate
student funding policies and interventions by addressing the differences in the
types of funding that are offered to diverse student populations. The
researchers will investigate the qualitative questions using national data from
the Survey of Earned Doctorates (SED) and then use that data to inform questions
for further investigation within the study sites for data collection via
interviews with graduate students, administrators and faculty members across
eight STEM disciplines and seven NSF-funded centers at eight institutions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers will use socialization theory to guide the
research. Hypothesizing that funding mechanisms are important drivers of
socialization, the researchers will investigate the following research
questions:(1) How do graduate students? funding mechanisms vary across their
incoming characteristics (i.e. demographics and bachelor's or master's
institutional type, location, or affiliation) and STEM discipline? (2) What is
the relationship between graduate students' funding mechanisms and their post-
doctoral outcomes? (3) How does the relationship between graduate students'
funding mechanisms and their post-doctoral outcomes vary across their incoming
characteristic and STEM discipline? (4) What do STEM graduate students, faculty
members, and administrators perceive to be the benefits and drawbacks of various
graduate student funding mechanisms? How does each group make decisions about
offering or accepting offers of different funding mechanisms?(5) How does
funding mechanism impact STEM graduate students? experiences, socialization,
identity formation, and other factors previously shown to contribute to overall
success? The analysis will provide insight about the difference socialization
opportunities may have for certain groups of students but not others. In
addition, the research results will inform interventions for broadening
participation in STEM. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is supported by the ECR
program that emphasizes fundamental STEM education research that generates
foundational knowledge in the field. Investments are made in critical areas that
are essential, broad and enduring: STEM learning and STEM learning environments,
broadening participation in STEM, and STEM workforce development. ECR supports
the accumulation of robust evidence to inform efforts to understand, build
theory to explain, and suggest intervention and innovations to address
persistent challenges in STEM interest, education, learning and participation.