* 1535098
* Society for Risk Analysis World Congress on Risk IV; July 19-23, 2015; Singapore
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2016
* Ortwin Renn, Society For Risk Analysis
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 06/30/2016
* USD 50,000.00

The international Society for Risk Analysis (SRA) launched a series of World
Congresses on Risk in partnership with other scientific, governmental and
professional organizations and foundations interested in risk. SRA will hold the
Fourth World Congress on Risk on 19-23 July 2015 in Singapore. The theme for the
2015 World Congress on Risk is: "Risk Analysis for Sustainable Innovation." By
selecting this theme, SRA hopes to focus attention on risks of importance to
developing and developed countries in a rapidly changing world of organizational
and technological options. Technological evolution, growing interconnectedness
between technology, science, economics, and society, and the need for a global
balance between resource conservation, economic prosperity, and social equity
have elevated the importance of sustainable innovation. Evidence-based risk
assessment and risk management are central to the process of sustainable
innovation as rapid development-driven social and environmental changes often
exacerbate the physical and social burdens placed on the world?s most vulnerable
nations and peoples. SRA expects that approximately 350 participants will attend
the events of the Fourth World Congress on Risk. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specific
objectives of the World Congress are to (1) stimulate dialogue and learning on
risk issues of worldwide interest, (2) share insights about analytic methods and
decision processes used in different regions of the world, (3) demonstrate and
disseminate advances in risk assessment and management, (4) improve regulatory
practices and risk governance based on interdisciplinary risk research and
evaluation of practical experiences, and (5) build bridges between professional
organizations and individuals worldwide to facilitate education and to transfer
science-based risk management practices across key user networks. Funding from
the National Science Foundation will support the broad participation by faculty
or researchers and risk scholars and practitioners from American institutions.
Many of these participants face significant difficulties in attending the
Congress without financial assistance.