* 1535840
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: The Emergence Of Social Complexity In Small Scale Societies
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Laura Swantek, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2019
* USD 11,674.00

The development of social and economic control that leads to inequalities in the
distribution of wealth within human societies has been a central theme in
understanding how people live. Because archaeology provides a long-term view of
past societies, and how they become more or less socially complex through time,
it is well suited to provide insight into this phenomenon that occurs within
human groups. Using innovative research techniques, Laura Swantek along with
colleagues at Arizona State University will undertake research on this process,
specifically focusing on understanding how some societies become more complex
over time, others do not change, and still others cycle between high and low
levels of complexity. Changes in complexity, such as those described here, can
be seen today in parts of the world where social and economic changes occur
within generations. Understanding what people did in their everyday lives that
cause changes in social complexity in the past, will provide insight into how
this process occurs today across our changing world. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This
research examines how people form socio-economic relationships through time and
across space and through these connections are able to exert control of labor,
maintain long-distance trade contacts, and differentially access material and
ideological resources and as a result become wealthy members of society while
others cannot. As a result of these kinds of actions, social networks, or the
arrangements of people into complex social structures, change over time can be
seen in the archaeological record. This research will be conducted on the
Mediterranean island of Cyprus during a 700 year period during which small
village level societies exhibited unique characteristics of changes in social
complexity. Using data from past excavations of settlements and cemeteries and
archaeological surveys, this research will combine methods developed in modern
economics, and complex systems and network science, to examine how different
social arrangements or network configurations are created by people striving for
wealth and control within societies. This interdisciplinary research will foster
international scientific collaboration, as well as develop and test new methods
for understanding how people exert social and economic control, shaping and
reshaping the societies in which they live.