* 1535700
* Ultra-Low Emittance Electron Beams from Laser-Plasma Photo-Cathodes
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Donald Umstadter, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Continuing Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 08/31/2019
* USD 374,844.00

The progress of basic research into physics, biomedicine, materials science, and
chemistry depends critically on the qualities of high-energy electrons. An
important current application of electrons is x-ray radiology, used for medical
diagnostics, homeland security, non-destructive analysis, and computer
manufacturing. By developing novel methods to accelerate electrons with laser
light, this project aims to demonstrate new techniques to greatly improve the
quality of electron beams. In the process, a new generation of students in
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics will receive training in
disciplines deemed essential for national scientific and economic
competitiveness. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The development of compact high-field-
gradient laser-plasma accelerators has advanced rapidly in recent years. Several
recent theoretical studies predict the possibility of ultra-low emittance beams
(substantially lower than the current state of the art). However, these
predictions have yet to be tested experimentally. Such experiments will be
conducted during this project with the cutting-edge laser technology, including
the petawatt peak-power-level DIOCLES laser, available at the University of
Nebraska's Extreme Light laboratory. Laser light will be used to both inject and
accelerate electrons, producing beams with record low emittance. Novel methods
will be developed and implemented to measure ultra-low beam emittance. The
experimental results will be compared with predictions of modeling and
simulation?to either validate existing physical models, or develop new ones that
agree with observations. It is anticipated that this research will significantly
improve our understanding of the fundamental physics of laser-wakefield electron
accelerators, as well as further advance their development.