* 1535885
* Doctoral Dissertation Research  Better Use of Science: A Study of Boundary Spanning Environmental Processes in Georgia
* SBE,SMA
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2016
* Laura German, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Maryann Feldman
* 07/31/2016
* USD 10,923.00

This project investigates how to better bridge science and environmental policy
by investigating boundary spanning processes, through which scientific
information can be incorporated into policymaking. These processes are mainly
conducted through organizations which bring together scientists and policymakers
in a range of ways to enhance the integration of science and policy. This
research systematically investigates the processes of boundary organizations and
factors which may enable or constrain successful incorporation of science into
environmental policy and will provide an understanding of how to effectively
bridge science and policy. In a world where persistent environmental problems
exist, this work will ultimately provide the necessary tools for a better
understanding of the complexities associated with integrating science into
environmental policy. This project provides an in-depth look into the factors
which support boundary organizations in incorporating science into environmental
policy. During this in-depth research, ineffective boundary spanning processes
will also likely be found. Therefore, to uncover both the factors which support
and limit the incorporation of science into environmental policy, this study
will closely examine three water policy case studies in the state of Georgia:
(1) the 2008 Georgia Comprehensive Statewide Water Policy, (2) the 2012 Georgia
Moratorium on Groundwater Withdrawals, and (3) policy debates related to stream
buffers or riparian zones. Each of these case studies involved the participation
of scientists, boundary organizations, and policymakers during creation and
implementation of water policy. Individual and group interviews will be
conducted to analyze whether and how science was integrated into each water
policy and what boundary spanning processes affected the outcome. An analysis of
media accounts and secondary documents will more fully explain the factors which
may have influenced whether and how science was integrated in each case study.