* 1535586
* I-Corps:  Commercialization Evaluation of a Antibiotic Delivery System for Tb
* TIP,TI
* 05/15/2015,04/30/2016
* Thomas Manning, Valdosta State University
* Standard Grant
* lydia mcclure
* 04/30/2016
* USD 50,000.00

Tuberculosis is an infectious disease that has infected approximately one third
of the planet's human population. The current pharmaceutical regiment used to
treat the disease is a series of front line antibiotics. The microbe responsible
for this malady, Mycobacterium tuberculosis, is building up a resistance to
these drugs. These drug resistance strains of bacterium are emerging around the
world. The pharmaceutical industry can produce the front line drugs economically
on a large scale, so having to develop new drugs and new production methods
would prove costly and likely result in an immunity situation again. Rather than
attempting to discover new antibiotics, the proposed technology is focused on
not only delivering known antibiotics to the bacterium more efficiently, but
also hiding the drug from being recognized by the body's immune
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed technology is focused on drug delivery
associated with antibiotics for tuberculosis. Over the past forty years little
work has been done in terms of developing new antibiotics. This team?s approach
uses between one and three components that accelerates some biological action,
such as the cells metabolism or a proteins task. As the activity of the cell
increases, the team's theorem is that the antibiotic can go undetected by the
body's immune system and have a more efficient uptake once its normal
physiological processes are accelerated. Most drugs, such as antibiotics or
cancer drugs have a mechanism of action that serve a singular mission, to stop
some part of the cell from functioning. This research team has developed a
delivery system for first and second line antibiotics used in the treatment of
tuberculosis. It has been demonstrated to improve the efficacy of antibiotics
such as capreomycin, amikacin, isoniazid and rifampici1-4.