* 1535080
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Food Production, Ritual, and Community Organization at Ancient Hualcayan (Ancash, Peru)
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Tom Dillehay, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 05/31/2016
* USD 24,910.00

Rebecca Bria of Vanderbilt University will collaborate with Peruvian colleagues
to study how people constitute new communities following the decline of
interregional religious and political networks. Previous scholarship has shown
how, during periods of political decline and regeneration, people use ritual
performance to establish new community affiliations. Economic studies have also
shown how new food production regimes transform community interaction. Building
on and expanding these studies, this research focuses attention on the poorly
understood links between these ritual and economic practices in order to broaden
our understanding of the complex conditions, materials, and processes through
which communities are established and organized. In particular, it studies how
ritual and food production changed during a pivotal process of social
transformation in Andean prehistory, characterized by the demise of the
widespread Chavín religion and political network during the Early Horizon (900-1
B.C.E.) and the rise of localized Recuay agro-pastoral communities in the Early
Intermediate Period (1-600 C.E.). Archaeology, a discipline that examines the
long-term changes in materials and practices of past human societies, is
particularly well suited to study this process of community regeneration.
Broadly, the study contributes new perspectives on food production and community
formation by focusing less on economic adaptation and more on the religious
values and political motivations through which people shaped their environment
and built a community. The project will also contribute insights to an important
topic in anthropological research and contemporary politics: how people
undergoing extensive political and religious change establish new social
identities and define new kinds of community. The research has the potential to
uncrease understanding of political changes which are occurring in many regions
of the world today.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Rebecca Bria and her collaborators will
investigate how ancient communities gained political and economic autonomy and
reorganized local social affiliations during periods of regional political
decline, particularly by establishing new food production regimes and new types
of ritual performances. The study will analyze food remains excavated from
ritual contexts at Hualcayán, an archaeological site that was continuously
occupied during the period of Chavín decline and Recuay emergence in Ancash,
Peru. The project hypothesizes that a transfor¬mation in community organization
was predicated upon changes in ritual and food production, which had previously
supported elites engaged in ritual activities at Hualcayán's Chavín temple and
then provided the foundation for a new Recuay community rooted in corporate
group rituals and agricultural management. To test the hypothesis, the project
will analyze and compare macrobotanical, phytolith and starch, and faunal
remains from the Chavín temple and from Recuay ritual compounds and tombs that
are spatially embedded into a system of agricultural terraces, as well as date
these contexts by 14C means. This analysis will document the degree to which
people at Hualcayán transformed their Chavín temple site into a Recuay community
by intensifying, diversifying, and ritualizing food production and will examine
whether and how newly formed Recuay corporate groups were distinguished by
ritual food preparation and consumption practices. The research will strengthen
intellectual and cultural ties between Peru and the United States through an
international scientific collaboration, and the results will be presented to the
public in peer-reviewed publications and museum installations.