* 1535150
* SI2-SSE: Development of a Software Framework for Formalizing Forcefield Atom-Typing for Molecular Simulation
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Peter Volgyesi, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 08/31/2019
* USD 501,836.00

Molecular simulation plays a key role in understanding the atomistic and
molecular level interactions that underlie many natural and man-made materials
and processes. Classical molecular simulations rely upon forcefields to describe
the various interactions that exist between atoms and/or groups of atoms. The
availability of forcefields for molecular simulation has reduced the effort
researchers must devote to the difficult and costly task of determining the
interactions between species, allowing them to instead focus on the motivating
scientific questions. However, determining which parameters in a forcefield to
use is still often a tedious and error prone task. This difficulty is related to
the strong dependence of the parameters on the chemical context of the atoms;
the chemical context may depend on the local bonded environment of an atom in a
molecule, the local environment of neighboring atoms, the type of molecule(s)
being considered, the phase of the molecule(s), etc. Forcefields can contain
tens or hundreds of different types of the same element, where each type
represents the element in a different chemical context. Atom typing can be
challenging, often requiring the user to consult textual comments scattered in
parameter files or the scientific literature where the parameters were
published. Unfortunately, as of today, the documentation of a typical forcefield
tends to be scarce and unstructured, commonly expressed in plain English or in
an ad-hoc shorthand notation, leading to ambiguities and increasing the
likelihood of incorrect usage. While there are freely available tools to aid in
atom-typing, these are typically specific to a particular forcefield or
simulator and capture the atom-typing and parameterization rules in ways that
are hard to maintain, debug, and evolve. The central tenet of this project is
that there is an imminent need in the research community for a forcefield
agnostic formalism to express atom-typing and parameterization rules in a way
that is expressive enough for human consumption, while being machine readable to
enable automation in complex scientific workflows.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This
work proposes to establish a formalism to express the chemical context for which
a particular forcefield parameter is applicable (i.e., forcefield usage
semantics) and an atom-typing tool that interprets this formalism to generate
forcefield parameterizations that are provably correct. Annotating forcefields
with this formalism will serve as clear, unambiguous documentation of the atom-
types and parameter usage, and also allows ambiguities or inconsistencies in
forcefield specifications to be programmatically pinpointed during development.
Successfully developing this framework will simplify the rules needed for atom-
typing, which is crucial as forcefields continue to grow, specialize, and become
more complex. The machine-readable annotations of forcefield usage semantics
will enable automating tedious and error prone tasks and have the potential to
enable new application areas, ranging from automated forcefield comparison and
cross-validation, to complex simulation workflows integrating multiple
forcefields and simulator tools.   An open online forcefield repository
containing the annotated forcefields, associated open source software, and
documentation on how to use, annotate, and develop forcefields within the
proposed framework will be developed to disseminate results and foster community
involvement.