* 1535501
* Executive Relief and the Roles of Mediating Institutions in Immigration Law and Policy
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2015,06/30/2019
* Jennifer Chacon, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Reginald Sheehan
* 06/30/2019
* USD 229,894.00

In November 2014, President Obama announced the "Deferred Action for Parental
Accountability" program (now known as the Deferred Action for Parents of
Americans and Lawful Permanent Residents program) (DAPA) and a significant
expansion of the "Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals" (DACA) program, which
was first announced in June 2012 (together, "Executive Relief"). With these
programs, the administration proposed to expand considerably a class of
ambiguous legal subjects: Deferred Action recipients who are deemed lawfully
present but who are not granted permanent lawful status by the state. The
deferred action programs could affect up to 4.4 million undocumented immigrants.
This study aims to address three sets of questions that are raised by this
large-scale program. First, how do prospective applicants and recipients of
deferred action experience the uncertainty, first of litigation-induced delays
in implementation of the program, and second, of possessing a form of temporary
and contingent status in the United States? Second, which civil society
organizations and third parties are working in immigrant communities to
interpret legal developments and facilitate applications for deferred action?
What constraints and incentives do they face in educating immigrant communities
and mediating implementation of these programs? Finally, how have these
unconventional legal benefits changed the meaning and terms of membership? To
what extent does this new category of ambiguous legal status enable individuals
to assert rights and hold state actors accountable? Answering these questions
will shed light on how the proliferation of types of legal status potentially
alters our collective understanding of membership in the American
polity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To answer these questions, we plan to use a mixed
methods approach combining interviews, participant observation, and legal
analysis of materials produced by both state and non-state actors. Our research
will be carried out over a two-year period beginning in the Fall of 2015 and
will build on a small pilot study that we began in June 2014, before expanded
Executive Relief was announced, and which continued through the early stages of
the litigation over Executive Relief. With NSF support, we will continue to
follow the legal developments surrounding Executive Relief. We will interview
100 potential DAPA and DACA applicants at two points over a two-year period.
Likewise, we will interview members of, and observe the ways that, immigrant-
serving organizations in Orange County and Los Angeles County, California
respond to legal roadblocks to Executive Relief and, ultimately, how they
interpret and implement Executive Relief in their communities. In order to
understand a range of advocacy models, we have identified a set of organizations
located in the two counties that vary as to the communities they serve (Spanish-
speaking, Asian and Asian American, immigrant communities more generally), their
structure (pro bono work, legal advocacy, grassroots organizing, fee-for-
service), and their histories (newly established, long-standing).