* 1535536
* RUI: Next Generation RF Systems: Models and Simulations
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2020
* Themis Mastoridis, California Polytechnic State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 08/31/2020
* USD 225,000.00

There is a wide range of beneficial and practical applications of accelerators
and particle physics including medical diagnostic instrumentation, cancer
therapy, monitoring of nuclear waste proliferation, computing, and many more.
Optimizing an accelerator's operational parameters is a complex problem, yet
critical to achieve robust performance and to increase the number of circulating
particles. Computer models will be developed in this project to investigate the
possible configurations, set specifications, and estimate the system
performance. Algorithms will also be created to operate the accelerator as
efficiently as possible, thus increasing the discovery potential in accelerator
experiments. Student participation is an integral part of this project. The
students will benefit from participating in cutting-edge research and having
access to SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory and the European Organization for
Nuclear Research (CERN) in Geneva, Switzerland. They will develop scientific
programming and modeling skills, learn how to create and validate simulations,
conduct measurements, and be involved with operations of complex accelerator
systems. All of these experiences will be a realistic introduction to graduate
work, and/or work in advanced industry in one of the many areas in which
accelerators play a key role.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Innovative developments in a
broad range of subfields of accelerator physics and technology will be required
to achieve the beam specifications for the next generation accelerators. There
are two major objectives in this project. First, a general model of the
interaction between the next generation radio frequency (RF) system and the
particle beam dynamics will be generated, which can be applied to future
particle colliders and light sources. Second, this general model will be
validated through application to a particular particle accelerator. The
simulations of the next generation RF and low level radio frequency (LLRF)
systems will be developed as block systems in the computer program Simulink. The
simulation defining parameters and the initial conditions will be set in Matlab.
Multi-particle simulations will also be developed in Python. The validation of
models developed during this project will be done using the Large Hadron
Collider crab cavity system, located at the European Organization for Nuclear
Research (CERN) in Geneva, Switzerland. The validation process will involve
conducting proof of principle simulations, investigating the LLRF-beam dynamics
interaction, studying the LLRF implementation, examining detrimental effects,
and developing control algorithms; thus expanding the deliverables of this
project. This project will have a significant impact on advancing knowledge in
accelerator physics. The knowledge and expertise developed will be directly
applicable to future particle colliders and light sources.