* 1535014
* DMREF/Collaborative Research: Designing and Synthesizing Nano-Metallic Materials with Superior Properties
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2016,01/31/2016
* Michael Demkowicz, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Alexis Lewis
* 01/31/2016
* USD 307,033.00

Often, the main factor limiting the performance of vehicles, power generators,
civil engineering structures, and many other products is the durability of the
metals they are made of. Better metals are therefore key to advancing
technologies at the core of US competitiveness and security: transportation,
energy, and infrastructure. Nano-metallic materials comprise a class of metals
that promise to fill this need: they possess extreme strength, resistance to
damage from repeated loading, and numerous unique properties such as resistance
to radiation damage. This research project addresses a drawback of nano-metallic
materials that has so far limited their practical use. Namely: when they
stretch, they do not elongate uniformly throughout, but rather pinch off in
isolated locations. This project will create nano-metallic materials that
stretch uniformly and are therefore not prone to sudden failures. It will
thereby remove a major impediment to the widespread technical use of nano-
metallic materials and accelerate their deployment to the marketplace. This
project will also undertake outreach activities to high school teachers and
students, women, individuals from underrepresented minorities, and the broader
scientific community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Even though many nano-metallic
materials are intrinsically ductile, they appear to fail in a brittle-like
manner because plastic deformation in them localizes into narrow zones that
subsequently fracture. The goal of this project is to create nano-metallic
materials that resist flow localization by engineering their architectures,
interfaces/surfaces, and compositions via an iterative design process that
integrates theory, modeling, and experiments. The project will follow an
iterative design-synthesize-test cycle that scans the design space rapidly and
integrates insights gained in each iteration by updating theoretical models
connecting design parameters to performance metrics. Due to the nanometer-scale
microstructure dimensions in nano-metallic materials, conventional dislocation-
based mechanisms for averting flow localization are not applicable. Therefore,
this project will explore and implement non-dislocation mechanisms that rely on
twinning, surface and interface stresses, coherency stresses, interface barriers
to slip, confined layer slip, and composites of flow-localizing and uniformly
deforming constituents.