* 1535849
* Workshop: Advanced Manufacturing for Smart Goods; Vancouver, Washington; May 19-20, 2015
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/15/2015,02/29/2016
* David Johnson, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 02/29/2016
* USD 33,401.00

This award supports a workshop to identify advanced manufacturing research needs
for the emerging Smart Goods industry to help U.S. manufacturers more quickly
advance Smart Goods into the marketplace. In 2012, the U.S. information
technology industry, from semiconductors to telecommunications and other
information services, contributed over $1.7 trillion to U.S. gross domestic
product. By 2017, about one half of spending on information technology equipment
in the U.S. is projected to be in smart computing as sensors, actuators,
wireless communications, and low-power computation become embedded in everyday
objects called "Smart Goods", i.e., the Internet of Things. Future smart
computing requirements are challenging conventional wisdom in semiconductor
manufacturing making the U.S. information technology industry vulnerable to
foreign investments aimed to leapfrog current advantages held by U.S. firms in
silicon microelectronics. The main objectives of the workshop are to: (1)
examine and review the state-of-the-art in manufacturing materials and process
technologies for the emerging Smart Goods industry; (2) gather the Smart Goods
industry perspective of the advanced manufacturing research needs, gaps and
challenges upstream of the "big data" value stream; and (3) formulate
recommendations for the next steps to advance manufacturing technologies within
the Smart Goods industry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop will be held in the
Portland, Oregon-Vancouver, Washington metropolitan area, also known as the
Silicon Forest, containing almost 900 semiconductor and electronics companies.
The workshop will bring together an academic and national laboratory audience
with invited industry speakers and panelists to identify advanced manufacturing
research needs for the emerging Smart Goods industry. An organizing committee
consisting of state, university and federal laboratory members will work with an
industry advisory team to select 15-20 distinguished members from industry to
deliver presentations and populate panels. Sessions will involve both
presentations and panels discussing future computing requirements for many Smart
Goods including the integration of low-power computation with new sensors and
small power sources on complex three-dimensional surfaces. Technologies to be
discussed include inkjet printing, the scaling of near monodispersed functional
nanomaterials, and the photonic sintering of particle films into multifunctional
films and devices. The organizing committee will compile a report after the
workshop recapping the key challenges and opportunities in advanced
manufacturing research for Smart Goods, and outlining the next steps for
aligning universities and industry interests around a common pre-competitive
research agenda. The report contents will be disseminated through the workshop
website and an appropriate journal.