* 1535453
* Collaborative Research: Improving Performance and Retention of Engineering Graduate Students through Motivation and Identity Formation
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Adam Kirn, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Dawn Rickey
* 08/31/2020
* USD 249,485.00

This work is supported by the EHR Core Research (ECR) program. The ECR program
emphasizes fundamental STEM education research that generates foundational
knowledge in the field. Investments are made in critical areas that are
essential, broad and enduring: STEM learning and STEM learning environments,
broadening participation in STEM, and STEM workforce development. The program
supports the accumulation of robust evidence to inform efforts to understand,
build theory to explain, and suggest intervention and innovations to address
persistent challenges in STEM interest, education, learning and participation.
This ECR project intends to understand how doctoral engineering student
experiences influence identity formation and motivation and therefore affect
retention, persistence and productivity. While this has been widely studied at
the undergraduate level, graduate-level studies are less available. Engineering
is the least studied fields in graduate education, and if studied, is often
combined with other STEM fields, despite unique disciplinary cultures.
Engineering culture traditionally values industry-driven careers over
academically-driven careers. The focus on career preparation and industry-
relevant experiences can also lead to limited development of research-oriented
skills and future goals by engineering students. Students coming in with limited
definitions of research, particularly research in an engineering context, can
experience a mismatch between their identities, their future goals and
expectations for them as researchers. The proposed work could benefit
engineering graduate students who may be at risk of abandoning their educational
pursuits in engineering. Increasing retention of talented individuals in
graduate engineering programs increases the number of individuals who can train
the new graduates needed to solve the next generation of engineering problems.
Unique approaches to problems solved by engineers are essential as growing
global competition and increased emphasis on new technology drive the need for
creative engineers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A goal of the study is to shape
graduate education best practices for recruitment, retention, and training in
engineering, particularly for doctoral students in engineering, but elements of
this work will be transferable to other populations within graduate education.
Through a mixed methods study of graduate student motivational goal setting and
identity formation the following research questions will be answered: 1. What
are the identity and motivation profiles of engineering doctoral students, which
are based on previous academic and research experiences in STEM? 2. How does the
STEM community influence identity formation and motivational goal setting
processes of engineering doctoral students? 3. How do these processes related to
identity formation and motivation influence engineering graduate student
retention, productivity, and pursuit of doctoral level engineering careers? In
the initial quantitative phase, development, administration, and analysis of a
survey to assess the experiences of a nationally-representative sample of
currently-enrolled engineering graduate students will be completed. Data will be
analyzed using advanced clustering techniques to create attitudinal profiles
that reflect graduate students' identity and motivation. To maximize the sample
size, students will be recruited through engineering societies and targeted
solicitations to graduate engineering programs. In the qualitative second phase
up to 50 students of varying attitudinal profiles will be selected to study the
influence of graduate experiences on identity development and motivational goal
setting. Using a phenomenological lens, students will be interviewed about their
experiences in graduate engineering education. Through the mixed-methods
approach, the interactions of students' identities and motivation will be
captured and how academic experiences influence these profiles will be
determined. Results can be used to inform programmatic decisions in graduate
programs and facilitate interventions that promote motivation and identity
development.