* 1535565
* AitF: FULL: Query Processing with Optimal Communication Cost
* CSE,CCF
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2020
* Dan Suciu, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 07/31/2020
* USD 720,000.00

Big Data analytics is changing traditional query processing in two ways. The
first is a shift from single server or small-scale parallel relational databases
to massively distributed architectures, where hundreds or thousands of servers
are used during the computation of a single query. The second is an increased
complexity in the queries being issued, from single- or star-joins, to complex
graph-like structured queries. This project develops new algorithms for query
processing over large distributed systems, which are optimized for the cost of
communication, then implements and evaluates these algorithms in an open-source
big data management system and service.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project studies
a new approach to query evaluation that computes the entire query at once,
replacing the traditional approach based on a query plan. The theoretical part
of this project builds on a new model, called the Massively Parallel
Communication model (MPC), where the communication is the only cost. The system
development is performed over the Myria big data management system and
service.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Intellectual Merit of the project consists in
advancing the state of the art in both the theory and systems approaches to
query evaluation in modern, massive-scale shared-nothing clusters. It develops
new, fundamental algorithms for processing queries over massively distributed
architectures, with a provably optimal communication cost. The project
implements and deploys these algorithms in a system, validating and informing
the theoretical model. In particular, the project makes the following
contributions: it develops provably optimal, one-round algorithms for skewed
data; it studies how and when multiple rounds can be used to further reduce the
communication cost; it experiments with these novel algorithms on clusters with
up to 1000 worker processes; and it develops a new theoretical model for the
communication cost on large shared-nothing architectures with heterogeneous
hardware.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Broader Impact of the project is to
contribute to a new architecture for massively parallel query processing, where
the traditional multi-step, single-join query evaluation approaches are replaced
with novel, single-step, multi-join algorithms. This change has the potential to
lead to more efficient big data analytics engines, allowing data analysts to
explore large datasets more efficiently. As an immediate application, the
project will impact the domain scientists who already use the Myria big data
management system and service. All algorithmic discoveries in this project will
be implemented in the Myria system, and will significantly improve query
performance, allowing domain scientists to conduct more complex analytics and
explorations over their data.