* 1535299
* Effects of diagrams and spatial skills on undergraduate students' illusions of understanding of introductory biology and geoscience texts
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2020
* Jennifer Wiley, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Dawn Rickey
* 08/31/2020
* USD 896,176.00

A majority of people experience illusions of understanding when reading
explanations of scientific phenomena. That is, people generally think they
understood what they read better than they actually did. This self-assessment
skill (referred to as monitoring) is critical in order for students to regulate
their own learning and tailor their study behaviors so that they develop deep
understanding of science topics. Interestingly, a number of recent studies have
demonstrated that illusions of understanding may be especially likely when
students are presented with diagrams or graphs alongside texts, even though
these visualizations are generally intended to improve understanding. It is thus
critical to identify ways to optimize the learning benefits of diagrams without
creating such illusions of understanding.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this
EHR Core Research (ECR) project is to explore how the inclusion of
visualizations, such as diagrams or graphs, in scientific texts impacts
studying, learning, and comprehension monitoring behaviors of undergraduate
science students. The ECR program emphasizes fundamental STEM education research
that generates foundational knowledge in the field. Investments are made in
critical areas that are essential, broad and enduring: STEM learning and STEM
learning environments, broadening participation in STEM, and STEM workforce
development. This fundamental research on STEM learning will employ experimental
designs to test when, how, and for which students these visualizations may cause
illusions of understanding; whether these illusions differ by discipline or as a
result of spatial skills; and whether different instructional or presentation
conditions can help students to overcome these illusions and more effectively
monitor their understanding. The studies will examine these questions in the
context of first year college students studying introductory biology and
geoscience courses at a diverse, urban public institution. An important theme of
this work will be articulating the kinds of explicit training and skills that
students may need before they can learn and monitor effectively from materials
including visualizations. The results of this study will build foundational
knowledge regarding the conditions that cause illusions of understanding of
scientific texts, and how these illusions may be avoided. The knowledge gained
will in turn help researchers and educators to design instructional materials
that will equip students with the skills they need to thrive in science courses
and persist in science courses and careers.