* 1535412
* DMREF: Collaborative Research: Polymeric Composites and Foams Based on Two Dimensional Surfactants
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2021
* Douglas Adamson, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* John Schlueter
* 09/30/2021
* USD 990,386.00

The challenge of mixing different materials such as plastics, particles, and
solvents is one of the major factors hindering future advances in the
development of functional materials with new or improved properties. A prominent
example of this are graphene-based materials, where graphene's extraordinary
combination of high strength, surface area, and conductivity cannot yet be fully
utilized as graphene sheets tend to clump together and stack due to a lack of
compatibility with other materials. Boron nitride sheets are another example of
a promising material limited by the same problem. This project attempts to
overcome this obstacle by utilizing the high-energy interface between two
immiscible solvents to force stacked graphene sheets to exfoliate and spread.
The understanding of governing physical principles of surface activity of
graphene and boron nitride produced by this activity will be applied to form
emulsions that serve as precursors for the synthesis of foam-like materials
reinforced with graphene or boron nitride with optimized mechanical and
electrical properties. These reinforced polymeric materials have the potential
to be used as strong and lightweight structural materials, electrodes in
capacitors and batteries, substrates for flexible electronics, electrically
conductive, high surface area catalyst supports, and super-absorbent materials.
The project will also be of societal benefit as a result of outreach activities
built on the Chemistry Wizards Program designed to target middle school children
learning about scientific inquiry. The program aims to spur students from
underrepresented populations to pursue post-secondary study and careers in STEM
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mixing of chemically and physically different
species such as polymer chains, colloidal particles, and solvents is one of the
major factors hindering future advances in the development of functional
materials. A prominent example of this are graphene based polymeric materials,
where graphene's lack of compatibility/solubility is commonly overcome by
approaches that compromise its superior electrical, thermal, and mechanical
properties and make the composite materials less attractive for future
development. This project attempts to overcome this obstacle by utilizing the
high-energy interface between two immiscible solvents to force stacked graphene
sheets to exfoliate and spread. Lowering the overall free energy of the system
drives this rearrangement of sheets. This research is centered on the
development of a unifying theoretical, computational and experimental framework
to describe the behavior of two-dimensional materials at the liquid/liquid
interface. The approach is multi-scale, reaching from the atomic to mesoscopic
dimensions. Using graphene and boron nitride as examples, this work will reveal
general selection principles for solvent pairs and reaction conditions for which
the novel concept of using two-dimensional sheets as surfactants can be
realized. The understanding of the governing physical principles of surface
activity of graphene and boron nitride will be applied to form emulsions that
serve as precursors for the synthesis of foam-like materials reinforced with
graphene or boron nitride. The developed theoretical and computational models of
these composite foams aim at the design of materials with optimized mechanical
and electrical properties. These design tools will be tested and calibrated
through experimental studies at nano- and meso-length scales. Ultimately, the
work will outline design principles for nanostructured, multifunctional, two-
dimensional surfactant-reinforced polymeric composites with tailored properties,
enabling material development in a fraction of the time that would be required
by a trial and error approach alone. The reinforced polymeric materials have the
potential to be used as strong and lightweight structural materials, electrodes
in capacitors and batteries, substrates for flexible electronics, electrically
conductive, high surface area catalyst supports, and super-absorbent materials.
The project will also be of societal benefit as a result of outreach activities
built on the Chemistry Wizards Program designed to target middle school children
learning about scientific inquiry. The program aims to spur students from
underrepresented populations to pursue post-secondary study and careers in STEM
fields.