* 1535692
* I/UCRC FRP: Collaborative Research: Super-resolution methods for microwave emission source microscopy
* ENG,EEC
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2017
* Ji Chen, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 07/31/2017
* USD 68,132.00

As clock speeds and data rates in electronic products increase, the problem of
unwanted electromagnetic emissions become more and more severe. As a result,
during the development of electronic products, considerable amounts of time and
effort are spent by electronic device designers in tracking down and resolving
electromagnetic compliance issues. Due to the lack of appropriate sensing tools,
very often electromagnetic compatibility engineers have to resort to ad hoc
trial-and-error techniques to determine compliance, which slows down the device
development cycle. Emission source microscopy provides a potentially powerful
tool that can improve this situation by imaging and/or mapping the locations of
radiating sources in electronic products. However, being essentially equivalent
to a microwave microscope, the emission source microscopy technique, presently,
has resolution limits that only make it useful at frequencies above ~5 GHz. This
research explores ways to improve the resolution limit of microwave microscopy,
making it applicable to lower frequencies where the majority of electronic
compliance problems occur. Besides direct application in locating sources of
unwanted radiation with high accuracy and confidence, which ultimately will
reduce production delays, the proposed methods can also be used in the research
of radiation mechanisms of electromagnetic energy. Additional broader impacts
include the use of this new technology as an educational tool for the
visualization of microwave electromagnetic radiation sources.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ultimate goal of this research is to develop super-
resolution techniques for microwave emission source microscopy so it can be used
to detect sources of electromagnetic radiation with sub-diffraction limit
resolution. Research foci to be explored include: (1) development of super-
resolution microwave microscopy systems with special point spread function; (2)
development of super-resolution microwave microscopy systems with water
immersion; and (3) development of STED-inspired super-resolution microwave
microscopy systems using movable absorber screens or optically-modulated
absorber layers. For each system prototypes will be developed and the resulting
resolution, dynamic range, and sensitivity of the technique will be examined
experimentally. Measurements will come from experiments with passive structures
excited by external sources and active electronic devices.