* 1535364
* Distribution, Sources, and Air-Sea Fluxes of Short-Lived Organic Compounds During the O2/N2 Ratio and CO2 Airborne Southern Ocean (ORCAS) Study
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Elliot Atlas, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 08/31/2019
* USD 337,628.00

A large field campaign is being planned for the Southern Hemisphere summer of
2016 to improve understanding of air-sea exchange processes and the uptake of
oxygen and carbon dioxide in the vast Southern Ocean. This project includes the
measurement of many trace gases to characterize and examine the relationships
between biological activity in the ocean, trace gas fluxes, and carbon and
oxygen exchanges. The results will be used to test a suite of ocean
biogeochemistry models to improve the understanding of key processes and
feedbacks in this under sampled yet climatically important region of the
world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The O2/N2 Ratio and CO2 Airborne Southern Ocean
(ORCAS) field campaign will include the measurement of a range of short-lived
(i.e. reactive) halocarbons and other gases that can have both a regional and
even global impact on atmospheric chemistry. For example, emissions of short-
lived bromine compounds such as bromoform contribute to the global burden of
reactive bromine, which is important in the chemistry of ozone loss in the
stratosphere. Other reactive gases, including dimethyl sulfide and various
organic iodine gases, are related to aerosol formation processes and
heterogeneous chemical processing. Organic nitrate emissions from the surface
ocean represent a major fraction of reactive oxidized nitrogen in the Southern
Ocean atmosphere. Present knowledge of the atmospheric distributions and fluxes
of these reactive species in the region of the Southern Ocean is limited.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will help to link reactive trace gas
exchanges to the basic biogeochemical cycles of carbon and oxygen as well as to
detailed remotely sensed ocean properties. The results will help advance the
ability to predict reactive trace gas fluxes and improve the understanding of
their role in biogeochemical cycles and climate change.