* 1535007
* Collaborative Research: Climate Change, Mesoscale Oceanography, and the Dynamics of Eastern Pacific Coral Reefs
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2021
* Richard Aronson, Florida Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 08/31/2021
* USD 575,695.00

Coral reefs are under threat around the world, and climate change is the main
reason they are declining. Knowing how local conditions on a reef exaggerate or
mask the impacts of climate change make it possible to predict which reefs are
most likely to survive longer and, therefore, which reefs deserve the greatest
effort and funding for conservation. Reefs off the Pacific coast of Panama are
vulnerable to the impacts of global climate change but are also strongly
influenced by small-scale currents and other local conditions. The goal of this
study is to see how those local differences affect coral growth and the ability
of the corals to build reefs. Climate change appears poised to shut down reef
growth off Pacific Panama within the next century. Considering that sea-level
rise is accelerating at the same time, if coral reefs shut down they will not be
able to protect populated shorelines from storm damage and erosion. In addition
to its scientific insights, this project will provide undergraduate and graduate
training, provide research training for underrepresented groups, advance women
in scientific careers, and contribute important information for management and
policy. The results will be incorporated into innovative curricular materials
for K through 12 classes in Title-I schools in Florida aligned with Next
Generation (Common Core) standards, and standards for Climate and Ocean
Literacy. An annual film festival will be organized for K through 12 students to
explore themes in marine science through
videography.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Global climate change is now the leading cause
of coral-reef degradation, but the extent to which mesoscale oceanography
overprints climatic forcing is poorly understood. Previous studies in Pacific
Panama showed that reef ecosystems collapsed from 4100 to 1600 years ago. The
2500-yr hiatus in reef-building occurred at locations throughout the Pacific,
and the primary cause was increased variability of the El Nino-Southern
Oscillation. This study will determine the influence of contemporary variability
in mesoscale oceanography in the eastern tropical Pacific (ETP) on variability
in the condition of local coral populations. Insights from the living
populations will be combined with paleoecological and geochemical studies of
reef frameworks to infer past conditions that were inimical or beneficial to
coral growth and reef accretion. Three primary hypotheses will be tested in
Pacific Panama:&lt;br/&gt;H1. Mesoscale oceanography is manifested in gradients
of reef condition, coral growth, and coral physiological condition.
Physiographic protection from upwelling currents and thermocline shoaling
confers positive effects on coral growth rate and physiology.&lt;br/&gt;H2. The
impacts of mesoscale oceanographic regimes on the growth and condition of reef-
corals were felt at least as far back as the mid- to late
Holocene.&lt;br/&gt;H3. Physiographic protection from upwelling currents and
thermocline shoaling conferred positive effects on vertical reef accretion in
the past and shortened the late-Holocene hiatus.&lt;br/&gt;Specific research
approaches to test these hypotheses will include collecting high-resolution,
oceanographic time series to characterize contemporary environments along
gradients of physical conditions; collecting ecological and geochemical data on
the condition of living coral populations; and extracting cores from the reef
frameworks and analyzing the coral assemblages taxonomically, taphonomically,
and geochemically to assess patterns of biotic and paleoenvironmental
variability. Strong spatial and temporal variability in the physical drivers of
reef development make the ETP an excellent model system in which to examine the
response of coral reefs to climate change over a range of physical regimes. This
research will provide a unique opportunity to tease apart the controls on reef
development across multiple spatial and temporal scales. The climatology
underlying the late-Holocene hiatus was similar to probable scenarios for the
next century, implying that climate change could be driving reef ecosystems of
the ETP (and elsewhere) toward another collapse. Understanding how the hiatus
unfolded along oceanographic gradients will increase our power to predict the
future responses of reefs to a rapidly changing climate.