* 1535588
* SBIR Phase II:  High Efficiency Robocasting for Ceramic Product Application
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2018
* Joseph Cesarano, Robocasting Enterprises LLC
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 09/30/2018
* USD 625,319.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is in the creation of commercial viability for
3-D printing unique ceramic structures by transforming 3-D printing of advanced
ceramics into mass-production additive manufacturing. This will be a new
capability for the US. The 3-D structures being considered can't be easily made
with traditional manufacturing techniques but have significant advantages over
traditionally manufactured geometries. If 3-D printed structures could be
manufactured economically, the societal impact could be tremendous ranging from
creation of hundreds of US manufacturing jobs to reduction in CO2 emissions.
Commercially viable products that can improve existing markets and enable new
markets are realistic expectations. Structures for improved filtration,
catalytic production of clean fuels, H2 reformers, emission controls for
stationary fuel cells, and CO2 sequestration have been inspired by Other
Equipment Manufacturers and are already being jointly developed as a result of
Phase I progress. Interestingly, these products and more could be produced from
the same product lines just by changing a computer program. This great
efficiency of infrastructure is a fortunate trait of additive manufacturing. In
short, this project will position Robocasting Enterprises as a US exporter into
world-wide markets for economic and societal benefit.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is based on foundational technology called robocasting for 3-D printing
ceramic materials. Robocasting is an additive technique demonstrated to be
useful for rapid fabrication of ceramics into advanced lattice structures for
enhanced filtration and catalytic performance. However, robocast products have
been largely limited to products with dimensions less than 2 inches because of
problems related to cracking. The goal of this project is to make additive
manufacturing much more commercially viable for ceramics by: (a) overcoming the
technical challenges for robocasting large ceramic parts and; (b) designing and
implementing a scaled-up manufacturing line commercially competitive with
traditional manufacturing processes and production from low-wage countries. To
achieve these goals; materials, processes, and equipment improvements are
required. Developments will include: 1) material innovations to reduce cracking
in large ceramic bodies; 2) processing innovations to reduce cracking in large
ceramic bodies; 3) equipment and automation innovations to increase production
rates. At the end of Phase II it is anticipated that rapid manufacturing of
large (i.e., 5-10 inch) advanced ceramic lattice structures will be demonstrated
to be commercially viable and penetration into several markets will be
significant. The technology will be perfectly poised for investment from larger
companies and Phase III growth.