* 1535214
* Teaching Struggling Fifth Graders Fractions Concepts, Procedures, and Problem-Solving: A Rigorous Efficacy Trial of a Fractions Intervention.
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2019
* Russell Gersten, RG Research Group
* Standard Grant
* Beth Herbel Eisenmann
* 09/30/2019
* USD 1,795,001.00

Learning of fractions is a significant barrier for many in further study of
mathematics and thus other science, technology, and engineering disciplines.
Many students identified as struggling learners of mathematics are provided with
interventions that focus on simplifying the complexity and breaking up the task
into small discrete pieces, which is counter to the recommendations on
supporting students in learning mathematics from the mathematics education
community. The rigorous, large-scale study will explore potential benefits of a
recently published instructional intervention, TransMath, to improve conceptual
understanding and procedural proficiency with fractions for at-risk, fifth
graders. The study will promote knowledge about a critical issue, learning of
fractions by at-risk 5th graders through an intervention that combines explicit
instruction common to special education (SPED) and problem solving and reasoning
in small groups common to mathematics education (MTED). The research has the
potential to make an important contribution to ways in which knowledge gained
from previous studies in SPED and MTED may lead to improved instruction and
student outcomes for a highly vulnerable population. Any successful initial
efficacy studies about a Response to Intervention Tier 2 intervention in
mathematics has the potential advance knowledge and have a long-lasting and
meaningful contribution to the study of interventions and in the area of
translation to practice. The ECR program emphasizes fundamental STEM education
research that generates foundational knowledge in the field. Investments are
made in critical areas that are essential, broad and enduring: STEM learning and
STEM learning environments, broadening participation in STEM, and STEM workforce
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study design will randomly assign 200
students identified in need of Tier 2 instruction to intervention and business
as usual control groups. Teachers trained by the team to provide the TransMath
instruction will teach students in the intervention group. The study will
document the fidelity of implementation of the intervention, as well as the
control condition for both Tier 1 and Tier 2 instruction. Using a regression
modeling approach, the analysis accounts for partial nesting of students within
small intervention groups to examine changes in student learning.