* 1535841
* Understanding Long Term Relationships Between Environmental Change, Human Resilience And Territoriality
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2015,09/30/2021
* Robert Hard, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 09/30/2021
* USD 216,770.00

This project will investigate the evolution of human territoriality across deep
time and will allow Drs. Robert Hard, Raymond Mauldin, Jacob Freeman, and
Deborah Bolnick to address fundamental questions about the emergence of
territorial systems. How and why territorial systems emerge is poorly understood
although its importance as a fundamental social process is clear. Territoriality
has been linked to the development of property rights and social scientists have
argued that territoriality enhances the sustainable use of natural resources
such as fisheries and forests. Anthropologists know that human societies develop
widely varying approaches to maintaining and holding territories. Some hunter-
gatherer societies have little concern for maintaining territorial boundaries
while others closely patrol and defend small patches, yet the conditions
underlying this variability are not well understood. While most information
about human territoriality comes from ethnographic cases, the archaeological
record is the only source of data concerning the changing nature of human
territoriality across hundreds of generations. Such information contextualizes
and has the potential to shed new insight on territorial changes occurring in
the world today.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over thirty years ago, anthropologists
used ethnographic data to propose the Model of Economic Defensibility. The model
states that as resources become more dense and predictable, given a sufficient
level of competition, individuals will maximize their fitness by claiming
ownership over a territory. In the Model of Economic Defensibility, the
productivity and predictability of resources determines the area (i.e., the
home-range) an individual needs to find food. In turn, the size of an
individual's home-range changes the costs versus benefits of investment in
territoriality. To adopt territoriality, individuals must expend time and energy
to monitor boundaries and attack intruders. As an individual's home-range size
increases, the costs associated with restricting access rise more quickly than
the benefits attained. That is, holding competition equal, the larger an
individual's home-range, the lower the net benefit of territoriality. Despite
its fundamental importance, this model has yet to be rigorously evaluated with
archaeological data. The Morhiss site, located in the Texas Coastal Plain, is an
ideal setting to evaluate this model. Located 20 miles from the coast, Morhiss
represents at least 6000 years of use, and contains a record of shifting
territoriality. Excavated 75 years ago, these collections hold data necessary to
evaluate this model. Drs. Robert Hard (University of Texas at San Antonio),
Jacob Freeman (Utah State University), Raymond Mauldin (University of Texas at
San Antonio), and Deborah Bolnick (University of Texas at Austin) will use an
array of laboratory analyses including, radiocarbon dating, carbon, nitrogen,
and strontium isotopes, and ancient DNA to conduct this research. This work will
be fundamental to the formation of regional databases, will contribute to a
general procedure to assess the assumptions of the Model of Economic
Defensibility, and will contribute to understanding the evolution of property
rights. Finally, our approach will establish a protocol to use minimally
destructive techniques to build datasets from curated collections. The team's
work will contribute to the education of graduate and postdoctoral students as
well as an outreach program for high school teachers.