* 1535276
* Exploring Transfer Between Computing and Algebra and Its Effects on Mathematics Pedagogy and Self-efficacy in Computing Teachers
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Shriram Krishnamurthi, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steele
* 08/31/2020
* USD 1,513,373.00

As computing has become such an integral part of the STEM disciplines, the
STEM+Computing Partnership (STEM+C) program advances the integration of
computational approaches in STEM teaching and learning and how this integration
can improve STEM learning, engagement, persistence, and computational thinking.
Computational Thinking (CT) is a relatively new educational focus and a clear
need for learners as a 21st century skill. This proposal tackles this
challenging new area at the high school level by leveraging a curriculum
designed to integrate mathematics and computing to improve learning in both to
understand how learning these two subjects together can lead to improvement in
both students' understanding and teachers' perceptions of and knowledge about
these subjects. Understanding the ways that learning mathematics impacts
learning computing and vice-versa is an important research goal. Learning
computing is vital for preparing today's students for the many job opportunities
available in this area. In addition, the project will train over 600 teachers in
diverse schools in using this curriculum, leading to a strong possible impact on
improving learning and retention in STEM and computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will investigate the ways that learning mathematics and programming
mutually influence each other. The project uses the Bootstrap curriculum in
which students program videogames. Bootstrap is a function-based computing
language that targets important algebraic concepts. The curriculum is designed
around key mathematical practice standards to help teachers incorporate it into
their existing courses. The research on student learning will focus on: 1) which
of the intended concepts transfer from Bootstrap to algebra, 2) the type of
scaffolding that best supports this transfer, and 3) the aspects of the
curriculum that contribute to that transfer. The research on teachers will focus
on: 1) the effect of using Bootstrap on teacher perceptions of connections
between math and computing, 2) the aspects of the curriculum's pedagogical style
and the professional development provided that affect teachers skill and
confidence level teaching computing, and 3) possible differential effects for
teachers whose primary area was mathematics or computing prior to using
Bootstrap. In addition to the 200 teachers the project team has already trained,
they will train an additional 600 teachers over the course of the project.
During the project, they will collect teacher data from at least 100 teachers in
each year for Years 2 and 3 of the project and student data from 20 of those
teachers' classes.