* 1535764
* Preparation and Distribution of Dissolved Organic Carbon Consensus Reference Materials
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Dennis Hansell, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 08/31/2019
* USD 483,041.00

The dissolved organic carbon (DOC) in the world ocean is part of the global
carbon cycle that interacts with the planetary climatic system through its
connection with atmospheric carbon dioxide. Keeping track of this DOC requires
the cooperative effort of many marine laboratories worldwide. Making sure that
all of these laboratories are making accurate DOC measurements requires that
each one have access to a standardized sample of seawater for which the DOC
concentration is set by international consensus. This award will fund the
University of Miami to continue a consensus reference material (CRM) program
that was first developed in 1998 in support of consistent, high quality
measurements of dissolved organic carbon by the international ocean chemistry
community. With continuation of this work, the US and international communities
will create with confidence consistent measurements of a major marine carbon
reservoir, thereby advancing society?s ability to assess changes in the marine
carbon cycle and the role of the ocean in climate
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With continued strong international efforts to
investigate the marine carbon cycle, the existing CRM program provides the
necessary benchmark for globally comparable marine DOC measurements. Water from
the deep Florida Strait (~42 mol/kg DOC) will be collected, ampoulated, and
distributed to the US and international community. Since program launch, 126,000
ampoules of deep seawater and 90,000 ampoules of low carbon water have been
distributed to 240 US and international laboratories in 42 nations at the rate
of 13,000/year. With renewal of the reference material program for a sixth
3-year period of support, distribution of deep ocean water containing
biologically refractory dissolved organic carbon and low carbon reference water
will continue to aid the analytical work of the DOM community. A website is
maintained that provides direct and convenient links to a growing number of DOM
data collected from the global ocean.