* 1535665
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Impact of Public Participation in Constitution Making
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2016
* Alexander Hudson, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* scott barclay
* 08/31/2016
* USD 22,496.00

Direct public participation in the constitution-­drafting process has become
more and more common since the 1980s, and is now a standard element of such
processes around the world. Yet, we remain ignorant of the actual impact of
these opportunities for participation. The central question in this project is
when, and how much, impact public participation through popular consultations
and written submissions has on the final text of the constitution.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will utilize cutting-­edge text analysis
techniques to classify, model, and analyze the proposals that citizens of Brazil
and South Africa sent to their constituent assemblies as well as the
constitutional text these assemblies produced. Beyond the direct impact on the
words of the constitutional text, this research project will also consider the
more indirect ways in which public comments and petitions may have influenced
the content of the constitution through agenda setting in the constituent
assemblies. This quantitative analysis of the textual data will be supplemented
with interviews with members of the constituent assemblies and the support staff
that facilitated their work, and where possible, with the members of the public
who participated. Insights gained from the quantitative text analysis will be
compared with the accounts given by those involved in the process, in the end
producing a complete account of the role that public participation played in the
creation of these constitutions.