* 1535592
* I/UCRC FRP:  MicroSURF (MicroSuperhydrophobicUltraRapidFluidics) for Enhanced Diagnostics
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2017
* Michelle Khine, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 08/31/2017
* USD 200,000.00

By leveraging the unique physics of flow on non-wetting superhydrophobic
surfaces, this research seeks to overcome the persistent bottlenecks associated
with manipulating fluids at extremely small volumes (microfluidics). While
microfluidics holds much promise for early and deployable disease diagnostics,
practical challenges associated with such precision manipulations have
heretofore hindered its widespread dissemination. Microfluidics on
superhydrophobic surfaces can solve many disease diagnostic problems by
enabling: loss-less sample manipulations, novel hydrodynamic properties,
extremely fast and controlled flows, and enhanced mixing. The knowledge and
insight generated through this research will significantly improve and propel
the field of microfluidics forward by elucidating the fundamental mechanisms of
enhanced flow through engineered surface effects. It will also enable practical
implementation and deployment of these mechanisms for real-world impact. Broader
impacts of the work include the potential for mass manufacture superhydrophobic
surfaces in commodity plastics and integration of them into microfluidic devices
already in use. Additional impacts include K-12 science and engineering outreach
programs, one entitled "A Hundred Tiny Hands" developed for children (ages 5 and
up) where they can design and make their own superhydrophobic building blocks as
part of our 'Inventor's Toolboxes' while learning modern science and engineering
concepts with our accompanying comic books. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
involves the creation and implementation of superhydrophobic surfaces in
commodity plastics on the large scale with standard roll to roll manufacturing,
which allows the optimization of such substrates and enables the ability to
inexpensively integrate them into standard microfluidics devices. This research
systematically designs and optimizes both superhydrophobic surfaces and
microfluidic designs to best leverage surface enhancements for key microfluidic-
enabled diagnostic functionalities. Goals of the research are to create mass
manufacturable configurable superhydrophobic surfaces tailored for specific
microfluidic applications so they can be integrated into commercial microfluidic
devices by probing the physics at the micro- and nano-scale. Other goals include
pushing the current limits of our understanding of the physics of microfluidics,
with an outcome that is physically tangible: i.e., mass manufactured diagnostic
devices with significantly improved performance due to integrated
superhydrophobic surfaces.