* 1535572
* Fundamentals of Team Science and the Science of Team Science
* EDU,DRL
* 04/15/2015,08/31/2016
* Stephen Fiore, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Gregg Solomon
* 08/31/2016
* USD 49,736.00

This award is for a workshop to take place just prior to the Science of Team
Science annual meeting in 2015. The workshop, led by a team from the University
of Central Florida, is to serve as a high-level review of the state of this
interdisciplinary area of study. A synthesis of the field especially important
given the advances currently being made. The interdisciplinary nature of the
field is both an advantage and a challenge, for work is currently being
conducted in a range of different literatures. The workshop will provide a means
by which researchers can get a better, more nuanced sense of other literatures,
methods, and findings. This is especially important when the attendees are drawn
from so many different research traditions and cannot be expect to be familiar
with all of the work that is relevant to their questions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop is organized around a series of panel
discussions, presentations by major figures in the field, and discussions of
current and future topics for research of importance to the nation. The workshop
should have a broader impact even beyond attendees, for the workshop itself
could serve as a template for future interdisciplinary meetings. Finally, as
part of the workshop, the organizers will pull together a reading list of
seminal findings on the topic as well as sample syllabi for undergraduate and
graduate courses on the topic from a range of orientations.