* 1535813
* Assessing the Impact of Non-Practicing Entities on U.S. Innovation
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2021
* Lauren Cohen, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Mary Feeney
* 08/31/2021
* USD 385,502.00

The United States government protects intellectual property (IP) in order to
encourage innovation; however, the use and assertion of ownership claims on
patent rights has recently undergone a striking shift. A new organizational
form, the non-practicing entity (NPE), has emerged as a major driver of IP
litigation. NPEs amass patents not for the sake of producing commercial
products, but in order to claim license fees and/or litigate infringement on
their patent portfolios. Proponents of NPEs argue that NPEs serve a key
financial intermediary role, policing infringement by well-funded firms that
could otherwise infringe upon small inventors' IP at will. Opponents cast NPEs
as organizations that simply raise the costs of innovation by exploiting the
fact that an imperfect legal system will rule in their favor sufficiently often
-- even if no infringement has actually occurred -- that the credible threat of
the legal process can yield rents from producing, innovative firms. In the past
few years, Congress has considered a dozen bills to regulate the licensing and
assertion of patents, and the United States Patent and Trademark Office has
undertaken an initiative on "Enhancing Patent Quality." This project will
provide both data- and theory-driven approaches to reducing patent trolling by
NPEs, and stands to guide policy regarding NPEs more generally.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will systematically investigate the behavior
and impacts of NPEs. The work will provide the first large-sample evidence on
precisely which corporations NPEs target in litigation, when NPE litigation
occurs, and how NPE litigation impacts targeted firms' innovative activity. This
research will determine how NPEs' IP holdings and strategies differ from those
of more standard practicing entities that produce commercial products).
Additionally, the work will uncover how NPE litigation affects both firm- and
industry-level innovation. The results will inform new policy strategies for
changing the incentives surrounding IP to reduce "patent trolling" (that is, to
reduce low-quality patent assertion). Finally, the work will yield novel indices
that researchers, practitioners, and policymakers can use to assess patent
litigation risk.&lt;br/&gt;