* 1535120
* STIR Cities: Engaging Expert Performances of Sociotechnical Imaginaries for the Smart Grid
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2019
* Erik Fisher, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 07/31/2019
* USD 324,683.00

General Audience Summary &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will analyze the
shaping of emerging sociotechnical smart energy systems, and it will explore the
potential for social science engagements with alternative forms of imagination
and design. The PI and his team will collaboratively engage with a distributed
network of technical experts constructing smart energy systems in Phoenix, AZ
and Portland, OR. The project will comparatively investigate how smart energy
systems are being developed and deployed in urban centers, how they are being
imagined to meet and create desirable forms of social and technological order,
and to what extent engagements with diverse technical experts across these
systems foster reflexive learning and deliberation over broader emerging
alternative forms of social and technological order. The study has the potential
to influence socially responsive expert practices and technological design
choices; it will assess the effectiveness of the design and deployment of smart
grid technologies in terms of whether they are currently advancing the social
and public goals that have been invoked to justify them in both national and
urban contexts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will explore the relationship between collectively imagined forms of
social life including understandings of what is socially good or desirable,
technological system design including its situated performance, and
intervention-oriented socio-technical integration research (STIR). It combines
theoretical work on sociotechnical imaginaries with empirical work on social
science engagements by investigating the active performance of sociotechnical
imaginaries in everyday technical expertise and the results of social science
engagement therewith. The project will also provide theoretical insights into
how local situations can generate distinct sociotechnical imaginaries and how
they articulate with national discourses. Additionally, the project adapts a
demonstrably effective form of collaborative social science engagement with the
laboratory to a broad diversity of actor sites (laboratories, utilities,
regulators, industry associations, civil society, etc.), and monitors the
effects of this collaborative engagement on expert decisions and technological
system design over significantly longer periods of time.