* 1535917
* AitF: FULL: Collaborative Research: Practical Foundations for Software-Defined Network Optimization
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2019
* Michael Reiter, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 09/30/2019
* USD 173,333.00

Society today critically depends on Internet services. The safety and
performance of these Internet services in turn depends on the ability of
individual networks to successfully&amp;#8203; manage and optimize their network
configurations in reaction to a changing operating environment (e.g., sudden
increases in traffic or attacks or changes in policy compliance requirements).
Today, network operators often resort to ad hoc and brittle solutions that
affect the safety and performance of the networks. The goal of this project is
combine theory and practice to develop foundational mechanisms enabling network
administrators to implement diverse network operations tasks. This project will
develop abstractions for expressing a broad spectrum of network optimization
tasks and algorithmic foundations to reason about and achieve optimal (or
near-­optimal) solutions that will be better than current state-of-the-art.
&amp;#8203;The project will develop and release open­-source toolkits that will
dramatically reduce the time to prototype and deploy novel network management
applications, and democratize these benefits for a larger audience. The project
will lead to educational advances that help create a well­-rounded workforce
capable of handling future technology challenges by applying transformational
research that couples theory and practice. The project will actively encourage
participation from underrepresented groups as part of the proposed work and
mentor them to be future technology
leaders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Software-­defined networking (SDN) is an emerging
paradigm to simplify network management by moving policies embedded in the
configurations of the network hardware to software running in centralized
controllers. Realizing the potential benefits of SDN, however, currently
requires significant theoretical and practical effort. Specifically, at the core
of many SDN applications are complex optimization problems to tackle goals and
requirements that arise in practice. These problems are ones for which good
theoretical solutions are unknown.The goal of this project is to design and
implement a novel framework that enables SDN application developers to express
new application goals and constraints in a high-­level language, using a sound
algorithmic approach to generate near­-optimal solutions, and then to generate
compliant configurations that can be deployed to SDN control platforms directly.
There are two requirements for this vision to be successful in practice: (i) the
ability to express the requirements of a broad spectrum of applications and
(ii)­­ generating provably optimal (or close ­to ­optimal) configurations, on a
timescale that is responsive to application needs. The proposed research will
investigate theoretical foundations and practical implementations to
simultaneously achieve both goals. The project's contributions will include: (1)
investigating the robustness of path-­based optimizations for a wide spectrum of
SDN applications and developing algorithms for ensuring that such path­-based
reformulations do not sacrifice efficiency; (2) designing richer abstractions
for applications that require more dynamic network processing features and
developing near­-optimal and practical algorithms for these applications; (3)
designing efficient optimization-­preserving translations of solutions from such
theoretical frameworks into practical network configurations; and (4)
implementing these techniques in an end­-to-­end open-­source tool integrated
with state­-of-­the-­art network management platforms.