* 1535036
* The role of naturalistic movements on the generalization of locomotor learning
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2020
* Gelsy Torres-Oviedo, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 06/30/2020
* USD 517,340.00

A major issue in rehabilitation robotics is that devices like exoskeletons and
treadmills correct patients' movements only while they are using the device.
This lack of generalization of motor learning limits the efficacy of robotic
interventions. The proposed work will investigate how to manipulate robotic-
assisted motor learning to increase its generalization to natural movements in
unimpaired people and post-stroke patients. The research has broad impact to
public heath because it aims to guide the use of technology for effective gait
rehabilitation after stroke, which is the leading cause of long-term disability
in the United States. In addition, the PI will use the research objectives in
this proposal as a means to increase the participation of students from under-
represented groups in science and engineering by recruiting and mentoring
undergraduate students from Hispanic-serving universities in Puerto Rico to
pursue graduate training. She will also incorporate her research activities with
the INVESTING NOW and Pitt EXCEL programs at The University of Pittsburgh. These
programs prepare high school students from under-represented groups to pursue
degrees in science and engineering and mentor them during their undergraduate
studies to ensure their success. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Split-belt walking, in
which one leg moves faster than the other, has been shown to induce locomotor
learning in the unimpaired and in post-stroke patients. The PI will use
analytical tools to characterize the statistics of movements when walking on the
treadmill vs. over ground. The empirical studies will determine if the learning
phase on the split-belt treadmill can be altered to enhance the generalization
of learned movements to natural walking. The research will be informative about
motor learning mechanisms available to patients post-stroke and will suggest
ways to improve their mobility beyond the clinical setting.