* 1535399
* Collaborative Research: STEM Training, Employment in Industry, and Entrepreneurship
* EDU,DGE
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2020
* Bruce Weinberg, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Earnestine Psalmonds
* 08/31/2020
* USD 1,558,680.00

Ohio State University and the University of Michigan are investigating factors
that affect graduate student pathways to non-academic careers. The
interdisciplinary research team examines two research questions: (1) What are
the pathways that graduate students take into non-academic careers? and (2) What
is the role of their training environments, including faculty sponsors and
networks, in guiding those pathways? To investigate these questions, the
researchers will develop a data infrastructure that links the STAR METRICS data
to the Survey of Earned Doctorates/Survey of Doctoral Recipients and the Census
Bureau Business Register to measure the likelihood that a graduate student would
enter a particular career and the subsequent success in following that career
path. They explore the relationships between the choice of career pathway and a
range of measures of the graduate training environment and examine the links
between graduate training and entrepreneurship and industry careers by
estimating the causal links between graduate training and entrepreneurship and
employment in industry. The project will develop best practices for making these
links to study entrepreneurship and industry employment, document the complex
pathways for academic-industry engagement, pave the way for an exploratory
analysis of the careers of postdocs and non-PhD completers, and lay the
foundation for new theoretical models to guide practice. The project also will
help inform future national surveys by reporting data and suggesting items that
could enable more useful workforce trend analyses. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
primarily empirical research design is guided by a range of theoretical
paradigms, including student identity theory or student socialization research,
life course theory from sociology, career development theory, and human capital
theory from economics. The researchers will apply a wide range of statistical
models to test seven theories. These range from a human capital-based conjecture
that experience working on risky and/or interdisciplinary research projects
prepare students for jobs in the rapidly-changing, high growth (and high
volatility) industries that are engines of growth for the nation?s new economy,
to a conjecture of socialization and information transmission through networks
where connections to industry and entrepreneurship through advisors, peers, and
suppliers facilitate entry into industry and entrepreneurship careers. At the
same time, the researchers expect new theories to emerge from their exploration
of the rich new data that will be constructed. This iterative process will be
enhanced by interactions with the expert advisory board, which includes many
members of the STEM policy community, who will inform the implementation of the
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is supported by the ECR program that
emphasizes fundamental STEM education research that generates foundational
knowledge in the field. Investments are made in critical areas that are
essential, broad and enduring: STEM learning and STEM learning environments,
broadening participation in STEM, and STEM workforce development. ECR supports
the accumulation of robust evidence to inform efforts to understand, build
theory to explain, and suggest intervention and innovations to address
persistent challenges in STEM interest, education, learning and participation.