* 1535871
* R/V Langseth - Oceanographic Instrumentation 2015 II (Streamer)
* GEO,OCE
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2017
* David Goldberg, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* James Holik
* 07/31/2017
* USD 1,796,805.00

Project Summary&lt;br/&gt;The instrumentation requested in this proposal will be
used to enhance R/V Langseth?s seismic functionality and reliability. The
proposal states that replacing the existing SYNTRAK MCS system with the proposed
Sercel SEAL 408 system is critical for the future of Langseth and the science
community that requires it for seismic imaging. References are made to the
Langseth ?Incline Village? Science workshop report in 2010, where the science
priorities provided detail on future scientific goals that require a more
capable system. The current system is more than 20 years old, is no longer
supported and is well beyond its expected service life. In order to meet the
needs of scientific community, upgrading the multi-channel seismic (MCS)
capabilities of the National Seismic Imaging Facility is a necessity. The
premise of the proposal is that the purchase of the Sercel SEAL 408 satisfies
these requirements and does so in a fiscally responsible
way.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;The principal impact of the
present report is under Merit Review Criterion 2 of the Proposal Guidelines (NSF
13-589). It provides infrastructure support for scientists to use the vessel and
its shared-use instrumentation in support of their NSF-funded oceanographic
research projects (which individually undergo separate review by the relevant
research program of NSF). The acquisition, maintenance and operation of shared-
use instrumentation allows NSF-funded researchers from any US university or lab
access to working, calibrated instruments for their research, reducing the cost
of that research, and expanding the base of potential researchers.