* 1535598
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Accountability in Rebel Regimes
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2016
* Virginia Page Fortna, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* scott barclay
* 08/31/2016
* USD 16,821.00

The project investigates local governance and the establishment of law-like
systems of order in territory controlled by rebel organizations during civil
war. In particular, the project explains variation in rebel organizations'
provision of public goods and services as well as their use of coercive violence
against civilians to control territory. Departing from existing research, the
argument examines civilian political mobilization and collective action to
constrain rebel organizations, advancing a political accountability theory of
rebel governance. Civilian communities with greater coordination capacity, the
ability to achieve collective action to serve common interests despite
distributional conflict, may well be more successful in controlling rebel
behavior. The political accountability framework identifies the conditions
conducive to rebel accountability and the tools of political participation
available to civilians under rebel control. The result provides policymakers
with a clear roadmap for how to strengthen and engage with war-affected
communities.

This theory is tested on a combination of qualitative and quantitative
community-level evidence from insurgent-influenced areas in Mindanao,
Philippines. The qualitative case comparison selects municipalities for
variation in coordination capacity, the independent variable, and uses semi-
structured interviews to "process trace" the link between community collective
action and rebel behavior. The quantitative analysis examines an original survey
of insurgent-influenced municipalities to be implemented in Northern and Central
Mindanao. The findings will carry implications for academic and policy debates
regarding the conduct of insurgency and the efficacy of counterinsurgency and
peacebuilding strategies. Investigating the formation of law and order under the
temporary breakdown of state sovereignty during civil war provides clear and
consistent criteria for diagnosing strategic and tactical counterinsurgency
challenges and an understanding how these conditions vary across locations
within a given war zone.