* 1535676
* Advanced Accelerator Research: Photocathode Sources
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2020
* Linda Spentzouris, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 07/31/2020
* USD 504,000.00

Particle accelerators and light sources are important tools for scientific
discovery across many disciplines such as biomedical, biological, chemical, and
physical sciences. Photocathodes with improved emission properties are desirable
for certain next generation light sources, such as those based on Free Electron
Laser (FEL) or Energy Recovery Linac (ERL) technologies. They are also needed
for high-resolution microscopy tools such as Dynamic Transmission Electron
Microscopy (DTEM) devices. Accelerators are also used by industry for a variety
of manufacturing tasks. Thermionic cathodes are typically used for industrial
accelerators, although the beam properties of photocathodes would in some
applications be more desirable. Some examples are medical radiological
accelerators, and electron beam machining and welding. The cost and complication
of photocathode operation discourages their use in industry. A goal of this
award is to apply a multidisciplinary research approach to discover methods to
modify the photocathode surface to manipulate emission properties, making them
cheaper to operate, or else improve their performance.

With this award, an investigation of the use of thin film deposition to modify
photo-emissive surface properties in a systematic way will be carried out.
Specifically, development of novel photocathodes including plasmonic cathodes
with thin coatings, and thin epitaxial multilayered MgO/Ag/MgO structures is
planned. It may be possible to make robust, high quantum efficiency metallic
plasmonic nanostructured cathodes by deposition of a thin layer of material such
as BaO on the surface. The goal is to manipulate the photocathode to operate at
visible, rather than ultra-violet wavelengths, making the technology more
accessible for industrial applications. The thin flanking layers of MgO utilized
in multilayered MgO/Ag/MgO structures modify the surface band structure; and
emission properties vary systematically with layer thickness. Previous research
can be continued, both to investigate how robust these structures are in an
accelerator environment, and to determine more fully how performance depends on
properties such as the surface roughness.