* 1535887
* AitF: EXPL: Wide-area Dissemination under Strict Timeliness, Reliability, and Cost Constraints
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Yair Amir, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 08/31/2019
* USD 400,000.00

Many new Internet applications have extremely strict reliability and timeliness
constraints. For example, when trying to remotely manipulate an object (such as
in remote robotic surgery), in order to provide seamless feedback the connection
needs to be essentially uninterrupted and have delay of at most 130 ms. One way
of achieving this is to build an overlay network: a small number of computers,
strategically positioned in datacenters around the world, which communicate with
each other over the Internet in a way designed to improve reliability while
maintaining timeliness.

This project seeks to provide timeliness and reliability by sending messages
over a select subset of the network, rather than along the best path, and to
select subsets that are cost-effective. Successfully designing such techniques
will enable applications that require timely, reliable service, well beyond what
the current state-of-the-art can provide over the Internet. In addition to the
practical benefits, this research will also significantly improve our
understanding of the theory of overlay networks and network design: existing
algorithms and techniques do not give the strong guarantees that are required,
so we will need to develop both new algorithms and new mathematical tools to
analyze these algorithms. Hence this research will also have significant impact
on the state of the art in the mathematics and theory of networking.

This project will develop new theory and a practical architecture for resilient
routing. There has since been extensive work on designing approximation
algorithms for related reliability-under-random-faults problems, as well as
studying them for specific graph classes. However, there has been almost no work
on the network design versions of these problems, which form the theoretical
aspects of this proposal. Thus the results of this work will be a significant
step forward in fault-tolerant network design. Moreover, the proposed research
will advance the understanding of how to model practical networking problems and
how to translate theoretical solutions into concrete systems, by evaluating
solutions developed under different levels of abstraction in a fully realistic
setting.