* 1535124
* The Fate of the Native Language in Second Language Learning
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Judith Kroll, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 07/31/2019
* USD 146,884.00

Adults often find it difficult to learn a second language. Some adult learners
do manage to successfully achieve native-like performance in a second language,
but how that occurs or what helps the learner is still unknown. The planned
studies will investigate a new hypothesis that proposes that successful adult
learners are individuals who are able to tolerate change in their native
language. The changes that may be required to enable successful adult language
learning may involve processing costs that initially slow the native language
and make native language performance more error prone, make learners less
sensitive to some features of the native language, and that open the native
language to the influences of the language being learned. The project asks
whether some adults are better able to accommodate the changes to the native
language and, as a result, are more likely to succeed in mastering a second
language.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using both cross-sectional and longitudinal
designs, the investigators will examine learners at different levels of
proficiency in typical classroom learning contexts, immersed in English in the
US or in Spanish in Spain. Changes to the native language will be examined at
the level of the lexicon and the grammar, comparing comprehension and
production, using behavioral measures of speed and accuracy, eye tracking
measures during reading, and electrophysiological measures that examine the
earliest time course of language processing. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
has a number of broader implications for improving adult second language
learning. It can also inform educational issues in a society in which many
learners, e.g., immigrant adolescents, are faced with the task of acquiring a
second language past the earliest stages of childhood and for whom failure in
this task is associated with poor academic, social, and economic outcomes. The
research will contribute to the training of a diverse group of cognitive
scientists by involving both undergraduate and graduate students, many of whom
are bilinguals or second language learners themselves, and will foster an
international scientific collaboration.