* 1535359
* SBP: The Price of Parenting in STEM: Explaining Career Paths and Pay Consequences of Parenthood among Science and Engineering Professionals
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2015,05/31/2017
* Erin Cech, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Jolene Jesse
* 05/31/2017
* USD 396,639.00

This proposal was submitted in response to EHR Core Research (ECR) program
announcement NSF 15-509. As part of ECR, this project is funded by the Research
on Gender in Science and Engineering (GSE) program. GSE seeks to understand and
address gender-based differences in science, technology, engineering and
mathematics (STEM) education and workforce participation through education and
implementation research that will lead to a larger and more diverse domestic
STEM workforce. Over the past two decades, social science research has found
that girls and women encounter barriers in STEM education and then face
additional obstacles entering and advancing in STEM careers. Yet, the effects of
motherhood and fatherhood on the careers of STEM professionals are not well
studied. This research will explore whether parenting--especially motherhood--
incurs penalties in STEM employment in terms of retention, advancement, and
salary. Using a sociological theoretical perspective that socially structured
life courses move through gendered institutions, the study will examine how
parenthood shapes career trajectories, retention, and salaries for women and men
in STEM fields. The proposed empirical research project will use representative,
longitudinal data to analyze these parenthood effects among STEM professionals.
The researchers will also investigate how these parenthood effects differ by
race/ethnicity, education level, sector, and STEM field. The findings will
inform theory about gender differences in retention across all career stages and
efforts to develop interventions that improve women's long-term persistence and
success in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will use nationally
representative, longitudinal, restricted-use data of STEM professionals from the
Nation Center for Science and Engineering's (NCSES) Science and Engineering
Statistical Data System (SESTAT) to examine the effects of parenthood on career
paths and pay. The sample (N=17,599) includes STEM professionals employed full-
time in 2003 and followed through 2010. Through a series of bi- and multivariate
statistical analyses, the researchers will address the following research
questions: Who leaves full-time STEM employment after becoming a parent? Where
do they go? How do these parenthood effects vary by gender, race/ethnicity,
education level, sector, and STEM field? Is the cost in lost income of making a
career change higher if respondents made the change for family reasons compared
to other reasons? Among workers who remain in full-time STEM careers, how do
gender, parenthood, education level, and race/ethnicity affect salary? Since a
large majority of workers become parents at some point during their careers,
understanding the gendered effects of parenthood on the careers of STEM
practitioners is central to understanding the retention of talented women and
men in these fields. The researchers will also look for systematic variation by
race/ethnicity, education level, sector and STEM field.