* 1535799
* NSF Travel Grant Support for IEEE/ACM CCGrid 2015 Conference
* CSE,OAC
* 04/15/2015,09/30/2015
* Palden Lama, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Rajiv Ramnath
* 09/30/2015
* USD 25,000.00

This project will assist approximately 15 United States-based graduate students
to attend the 15th IEEE/ACM International Symposium on Cluster, Cloud and Grid
Computing (CCGrid 2015) that will be held May 4-7, 2015. Participation in
conferences such as IEEE/ACM CCGrid is an extremely important part of graduate
student research and career development, providing the opportunity for them to
present their own work, attend panel and keynote speech sessions, attend
doctoral symposium, interact with peers and more senior researchers, and expose
themselves to leading edge work in the field of cluster, cloud and grid
computing. The support requested in this proposal will enable more participation
of the US-based graduate students who would otherwise be unable to attend CCGrid
2015. Women and minority candidates will be particularly encouraged to
apply.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The student activities planned this year are
separated into three categories: (1) Conference planning, where senior
researchers who are more experienced with the conference will explain the
various events at the conference and work with individual students to custom
create an agenda for each student, (2) Posters and Doctoral Symposium where all
students participating in this program are required to present a short talk
during the conference and present a poster describing their research areas at
the poster session, and (3) Lunchtime Mentorship Activities, where the students
would interact with senior researchers, discussing various topics of interest
with them, such as (a) how to write effective papers, (b) careers in academia,
industry and national labs, and (c) paper presentation techniques.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At the end of he conference, travel grantees will be asked
to write up about their experiences and what they learned from these
discussions. A short report will be generated at the end of the conference
explaining the full extent of these activities, and published on the conference
website. A few selected students may be invited to participate in the report
generation process.