* 1535509
* Collaborative Research: Recruiting STEM Faculty:  A systematic analysis of the faculty hiring process at Research Intensive Universities
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2021
* Kimberlee Shauman, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Jolene Jesse
* 08/31/2021
* USD 1,184,546.00

This proposal was submitted in response to EHR Core Research (ECR) program
announcement NSF 15-509. As part of ECR, this project is funded by the Research
on Gender in Science and Engineering (GSE) program. GSE seeks to understand and
address gender-based differences in science, technology, engineering and
mathematics (STEM) education and workforce participation through education and
implementation research that will lead to a larger and more diverse domestic
STEM workforce. This study will address two core research questions in the area
of STEM Workforce Development: Are there gender and racial/ethnic disparities in
STEM faculty hiring? If so, what conditions, processes and social contexts
generate/mitigate these disparities? The researchers will conduct a systematic
theory-driven evaluation of the faculty hiring process by compiling an
unprecedented dataset on faculty hiring across ten research-intensive
universities. The data will be used to test hypotheses about how gender and
race/ethnicity influence applications for faculty positions, evaluation of
applicants, and outcomes at multiple stages in the faculty hiring process. By
identifying the steps in the hiring process that are most susceptible to bias
and the characteristics of the hiring process that amplify/mitigate disparities,
this study will identify the most important targets for policy interventions
aimed at increasing equity and diversity in faculty
hiring.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study will be framed by expectation states
theory, which explains how status beliefs (widely shared beliefs that people in
one category of a status-based social distinction, such as gender or race, are
more socially worthy and competent than those in another category) influence
interpersonal interactions, evaluations of self and others, and individual and
group behavior to generate and reinforce social inequality. The researchers will
construct and use a unique dataset from an online administrative system that
compiles information from all faculty recruitments at all University of
California campuses. This rich data source includes detailed information on
applicant pools, applicant credentials and achievements, hiring processes and
committees, and candidates? progression from application through the short list,
interview, and offer steps in the process. The richness of the administrative
data will be enhanced using automated text analytic tools to generate a dataset
that provides large sample sizes, detailed measurement of key variables, links
to supplemental data sources that provide measures of influential factors (e.g.,
institutional prestige), and observable variation in factors which theory
predicts affect bias in faculty hiring. Multilevel statistical models will be
used to accurately identify and disentangle the influences operating at the
faculty search-level versus those operating at the applicant-level to affect the
faculty hiring process. Analyses will be disaggregated by STEM discipline,
gender, detailed race/ethnicity and race-by-gender categories.