* 1535789
* Student Support: 2015 Manufacturing Science and Engineering Conference and 43rd North American Manufacturing Research Conference; Charlotte, North Carolina; June 8-12, 2015
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2015,10/31/2016
* Gracious Ngaile, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Steve Schmid
* 10/31/2016
* USD 34,500.00

This award supports 60 graduate and undergraduate students studying at US
institutions to participate in the co-located conference event consisting of the
2015 International Manufacturing Science and Engineering Conference sponsored by
the American Society of Mechanical Engineers and the 43rd Annual North American
Manufacturing Research Conference sponsored by the North American Manufacturing
Research Institution of the Society of Manufacturing Engineers. These two
leading conferences in the Manufacturing Engineering field act as global bridges
between industries, government laboratories, and academic institutions. The
award provides student participants with opportunities to exchange ideas with
leading researchers and engineers from worldwide industrial and governmental
facilities, as well as with students and faculty from both domestic and
international engineering schools. In addition to nurturing a global
manufacturing vision, participants will learn the latest research areas and
results in manufacturing fields.

The support will cover (1) the registration fee at $325 per student, (2) the
accommodation cost at $270 per student in a shared room for the entire duration
of the conference, and (3) transportation expenses at $350 per student for
selected students who make poster presentations on NSF-sponsored projects. The
call for student support applications is disseminated through posting on main
conference websites, promulgation through conference organizers, track chairs,
and symposium organizers, and direct communication with students involved in
poster session, student design competition, and student author research
presentation competition. Submitted applications go through a selection process
by the conference committee. Eligibility criteria to receive the support include
(1) students must be from US institutions, and (2) students must be actively
participating in the conference through presenting a paper or poster, or
participating in a competition. After the conference, the list of students who
have received the support will be announced on the main conference website, in
the Manufacturing Science and Engineering 2015 post-conference report in the
Manufacturing Engineering Division's Newsletter, and in the Award and
Recognition section on the North American Manufacturing Research Institution's
website. This award enables these students to improve their knowledge of
manufacturing technologies, and helps them to become engineers and researchers
to lead the next generation of US manufacturing.