* 1535819
* United States Representation in the International Arctic Science Committee (IASC): 2015-2018
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Larry Hinzman, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Gregory Anderson
* 08/31/2019
* USD 417,789.00

This is a time of rapid changes in the Arctic and in our abilities to
understand, predict, and respond to those changes. No one country is able to
support the level of research necessary to keep pace with the changing arctic
environment, and therefore organizations like the International Arctic Science
Committee (IASC) represent important platforms for discussing scientific issues
and promoting international, interdisciplinary, and in some cases, large-scale
projects in the region. This grant is to support the United States'
participation in the International Arctic Science Committee, a nongovernmental
international organization that encourages and facilitates cooperation in all
aspects of arctic research, in all countries engaged in arctic research, and in
all areas of the Arctic region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant will support the
US delegate to the International Arctic Science Committee (IASC) to participate
on behalf of the US Arctic science community on the IASC Council, its Executive
Committee, and at national arctic planning meetings; to improve communication of
IASC activities to US arctic stakeholders and the research community; and to
coordinate US working group membership. It will also support some travel for US
representatives to working groups appointed through the US National Academies
process, and assistance for US IASC working group activities. IASC is not a
funding agency, but facilitates international science development through
workshops, networks, planning meetings, and early-career science support. It
promotes and facilitates international research activities with an emphasis on
issues that cross national boundaries, disciplines and timescales. National
support for US participation is essential to ensure the US maintains a role in
planning and coordinating these research efforts in the international
arena.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As one of four Vice Presidents on the Executive
Committee of IASC, the PI has direct involvement in IASC decision-making related
to IASC programmatic direction and programmatic funding recommendations for
international planning, as well as influence on decision-making to the benefit
of US scientific interests in the Arctic. The US delegate's role is to convey
the objectives and goals of the US scientific community within international
planning efforts.