* 1535215
* Comprehensive Analysis of Transverse Gradient Undulator for Compact X-Ray FELs based on Laser Plasma Accelerators
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Zhirong Huang, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 08/31/2019
* USD 375,000.00

Our capabilities to capture images of atoms and molecules in motion have been
revolutionized by X-ray free-electron lasers (FELs) driven by large-scale radio-
frequency accelerators. Plasma acceleration is a cutting-edge technique that
accelerates electrons more than a thousand times faster than these conventional
accelerators. In particular, laser-plasma accelerators are leading the way
toward self-contained compact accelerators and light sources. This award will
investigate a novel way to produce extreme ultraviolet and X-ray free-electron
lasers based on laser-plasma accelerators. The advancement will be used to
develop practical applications of laser-plasma accelerators in compact and
coherent radiation sources. The award will also support the training of graduate
students at Stanford University, engaging them in the development of advanced
beam and free-electron lasers theory and simulation tools.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Laser-plasma accelerators (LPAs) have shown the abilities
to accelerate electron beams from rest up to a few GeV using high-intensity
lasers interacting in centimeter-scale plasmas. Although the beams have
relatively low emittance and high peak current with only a few femtosecond pulse
duration, the beam energy spread is two orders of magnitude larger than the
spread from conventional radio-frequency accelerators. Such a large energy
spread can make the FEL interaction in a normal undulator very ineffective. A
transverse gradient undulator (TGU) can be used to compensate the effects of
beam energy spread if the electron energy is correlated with its transverse
position in the TGU. Previous theoretical and numerical studies have shown that
such a concept may drastically improve the LPA FEL performance. This award will
take the concept to practice by studying beam transport and dynamics from a LPA
to and inside a TGU with the desired optics properties, and by developing FEL
simulation tools that take into account various effects in a TGU. For
verification of results, comparisons will be made, where applicable, to TGU
experiments through external collaborations.