* 1535117
* Investigating the Use of Peer Role Models to Inspire Women to Thrive in STEM
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2021
* Lisa Lamb, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Jolene Jesse
* 08/31/2021
* USD 1,530,445.00

This proposal was submitted in response to EHR Core Research (ECR) program
announcement NSF 15-509. As part of ECR, this project is funded by the Research
on Gender in Science and Engineering (GSE) program. GSE seeks to understand and
address gender-based differences in STEM education and workforce participation
through education and implementation research that will lead to a larger and
more diverse domestic STEM workforce. Stereotype threat and feelings of not
belonging are suggested as important contributors of the under-achievement and
underrepresentation of women in STEM. Numerous past laboratory experiments have
shown that math-talented peer female role models alleviate the negative effect
of stereotype threat, which should then foster feelings of belongingness in
STEM. The key mechanism underlying the beneficial effect of peer role models
seems to be gender similarity. This research study will engage in an in-depth
exploration of similarity in order to build understanding of the peer role model
effect and identify ways to make peer role models optimally
effective.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will provide a rich amount of lab-
based and prospective, real-world data that will advance theory and knowledge on
ways peer role models can inspire women to thrive and persist in STEM.
Experiments will investigate the impact of increasing similarity between women
and peer role models, examine whether substituting one source of similarity with
another can turn male peers into role models, and attempt to identify the source
or combination of sources of similarity that optimize the peer role model
effect. The research will be conducted at San Diego State University (SDSU) and
the knowledge gained from this research will then be used to inform a
prospective field study conducted in San Diego high school math classrooms. High
school is a time when mathematics-related gender differences begin to emerge and
these gender differences seem to be strong predictors of women's choice to
pursue and persist in STEM. This is also a time when peer influence is
particularly strong. Hence, introducing peer role models into high school math
classrooms would be a particularly beneficial method for reducing the gender gap
in STEM.