* 1535912
* AitF: Full: Collaborative Research: Modeling and Understanding Complex Influence in Social Networks
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Grant Schoenebeck, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 08/31/2018
* USD 379,154.00

Information, beliefs, diseases, technologies, and behaviors propagate through
social interactions as a contagion. Understanding of how these contagions spread
is crucial in encouraging beneficial and healthy behaviors and discouraging the
ones that are destructive and damaging. Rigorous, mathematical understanding of
complex social contagions is not just an abstraction, but will guide
applications from healthcare to word-of-mouth advertising. The technical content
of this project is inherently interdisciplinary, and its lessons will apply to
related fields such as probability, economics, sociology, and statistical
physics. The research efforts are integrated with the educational and outreach
activities of the PIs, who have strong records of broadly disseminating cutting-
edge research to high school, undergraduate, and graduate students through
teaching, outreach programs, and personal mentoring. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will transform our understanding of social contagions by: 1) Developing
a suite of technical tools to enable improved understanding of specific complex
processes; 2) Determining how various parameters of cascade and social structure
together impact the chances of a cascade's success or failure; and 3) Obtaining
empirical evidence to both corroborate the theoretical findings, and uncover the
space of realistic setting for certain parameters. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many
existing models of contagion assume that increasing the number of infected (or
affected) neighbors marginally decreases the chance of infection. Many
contagions, such as adoption of expensive new technology, fail to have this
property, but instead have more complex rules for infection. This leads to
different spreading behaviors even on the same networks. Motivated by sociology
research findings, this project will greatly enhance our understanding of social
contagions in three aspects. First this project will provide rigorous study of
the spreading behavior of a simplified theoretical model called k-complex
contagions and its interactions with structures in the underlying graph such as
tie strength, unusually influential nodes, and community structures. Second,
this project presents a general model for studying cascades that is both
theoretically tractable and practically motivated. The general model generalizes
most previous theoretical models of complex and simple contagions and includes
homophily and environmental factors on cascades. Finally, this project will use
post-hoc analysis as well as real world social experiments to verify the
veracity of the model and fit the parameters in different settings.