* 1535824
* Early Career: Upgrade of Isotope Ratio Mass Spectrometer at Boston College
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2016,02/28/2018
* Jeremy Shakun, Boston College
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 02/28/2018
* USD 162,557.00

1535824&lt;br/&gt;Wong&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant supports acquisition of
two sample introduction systems, a Gas Bench II inlet and Hydrogen Cup, that
will be mated to an extant gas source stable isotope ratio mass spectrometer
(SIRMS) in Department of Earth and Environmental Science (EES) at Boston College
(BC). The SIRMS and peripherals will support the research programs of two early
career, tenure-track faculty whose research focuses on questions of past climate
and require large numbers of isotopic analyses (several hundred, to a few
thousand per study). Support will enable full utilization of analytical
equipment that is at present underutilized as sample introduction equipment that
allows for high throughput stable isotopic analysis to support high resolution
paleoclimate studies is presently lacking. Specific research to be supported
with the requested SIRMS includes studies of stable isotopic records of Holocene
climate dynamics as recorded in speleothem carbonate from low and mid latitudes
caves in the Americas to study regional climate dynamics and its relationship to
ocean-atmospheric dynamic changes over decadal to millennial time scales and
stable isotopic studies of marine sediments to investigate the linkages between
global climate, ice sheet dynamics and Earth system sensitivity to greenhouse-
gas forcing over longer time scales. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Investigator research
that will be fostered by this equipment grant has implications for understanding
the relationship between climate dynamics and ecosystem stability, the carbon
cycle and sea level dynamics. The investigators will engage undergraduate and
graduate students in experiential learning in methods of stable isotope
geochemistry and applications to paleoenvironmental research. This support is
congruent with NSFs mission of promoting the progress of science and may advance
the national prosperity and welfare through advancing knowledge of Earth system
climate dynamics and its forcing and feedbacks with the global and regional
water cycles as well training students in analytical methods that are widely
used in both academia and industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;***