* 1535285
* Student Travel Support for the 2015 SIAM International Conference on Data Mining
* CSE,IIS
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2017
* Nitesh Chawla, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 03/31/2017
* USD 35,424.00

The 2015 SIAM International Conference on Data Mining (SDM 2015) is being
organized by the Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics (SIAM) in
cooperation with the American Statistical Association. SDM 2015 will be held in
Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada on April 30th to May 2nd, 2015. This premier
conference provides a venue for researchers who are addressing problems in data
mining to present their work in a peer-reviewed forum. It is widely attended by
researchers and practitioners in the field. Participation in premier research
conferences in data mining is an integral component of the training of Ph.D.
students in data mining. The SDM 2015 Ph.D. Student Forum is aimed at providing
an opportunity for Ph.D. candidates to present their work and receive
constructive feedback and mentoring from established researchers in data mining.
Such feedback and mentoring is expected to improve the quality of the students'
thesis research. Similarly, student recipients of a travel award will be able to
attend technical sessions, plenary talks, panels, tutorials and workshops. They
will interact with peers who share similar interests from other universities, as
well as hundreds of leading researchers in data mining from around the world.
This experience will be extremely formative and fruitful towards the shaping of
their future research endeavors.