* 1535600
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Expectations of Privacy: Development, Digital Natives, and Online Information Management
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2015,04/30/2018
* Eve Brank, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Mark Hurwitz
* 04/30/2018
* USD 13,468.00

The Fourth Amendment of the United States protects against unreasonable searches
and seizures; the question of whether a search violates the Fourth Amendment
hinges on whether the individual searched had a subjective expectation of
privacy that society is willing to recognize as reasonable. Expectations of
privacy can be impacted by current events (such as the 2013 NSA surveillance
scheme leaks), increased use of technology and digital communication, or even
individual differences such as age or generation effects. The current research
examines how expectations of privacy develop through adolescence and adulthood
and whether this development is due to a "generation gap" in use and familiarity
with digital communications or due to developmental changes in risk taking.

This research uses cross-sectional surveys to examine how reasonable
expectations of privacy differ among various age groups. In addition, an in-lab
study will test whether Steinberg's (2010) Dual Systems Model of Adolescent
Risk-Taking can explain differences between adolescents' and adults'
expectations of privacy in on-line communications. The proposed research will
integrate three bodies of research (lay adults' reasonable expectations of
privacy, adolescent decisionmaking, and privacy- protecting behaviors in on-line
communications) to examine how reasonable expectations of privacy differ across
the lifespan. The findings of the proposed research can help inform courts and
attorneys how expectations of privacy are changing with advances in
technologies. The current standard courts use to evaluate whether a search was
protected by the Fourth Amendment (examining both subjective and objective
expectations of privacy) may prove to be increasingly difficult for courts to
administer as technology continues to develop. The current research aims to
provide evidence of whether that standard adequately protects Fourth Amendment
rights.