* 1535972
* AitF: FULL: Collaborative Research: Optimizing Networked Systems with Limited Information
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Bruce Maggs, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 08/31/2020
* USD 367,990.00

Over the past decades, the world's dominant computational infrastructure has
gradually transitioned from individual personal computers to massive networked
systems of unprecedented scale and complexity. Not only has this led to
tremendous technological and engineering challenges, but it has also called into
question fundamental assumptions in classical algorithmic theory. A defining
distinction is the limited information that algorithms in such decentralized and
heterogeneous systems have access to. For example, a content delivery network
serves a heterogeneous set of end devices, and has to optimize performance often
without knowledge of the device it is optimizing for. Similarly, a data center
scheduler must be optimized for future demands that it is oblivious to. In this
project, the PIs seek to address novel algorithmic questions in non-clairvoyant
models of computation that arise in real world networked systems. The successful
completion of this project will lead to new advances in building reliable and
resilient information networks. The project will enable collaborations and
exchange of ideas between theoreticians and practitioners, and will provide
extensive training in real world algorithms to several graduate students, with
attention paid to gender diversity and participation of under-represented
groups.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The goal of the project is to design novel
algorithms with provable guarantees for networked systems in limited information
settings. In particular, the PIs plan to address key algorithmic problems in the
three dominant computational infrastructure models in the Internet: (a) data
centers: allocating parallelizable jobs requiring multiple resources on
processing nodes and clusters; (b) wide-area network of clusters: long-term
planning of resource deployment and synergistic operations in the client-server
model; and (c) P2P browser clouds: content delivery in web and gaming
applications and swarm computing on a fabric of a large number of loosely
coupled unreliable browsers. These problem domains are characterized by
uncertainty and limited information for several reasons, including uncertainty
about future predictions, autonomy of individual components in the networked
system, and distributed implementation of the network architecture. The
algorithms designed as part of this project will be evaluated on and optimized
for real world testbeds.