* 1535577
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Return Migration and Post-Conflict Governance
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2017
* Virginia Page Fortna, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Mark Hurwitz
* 08/31/2017
* USD 17,055.00

Violence wrought by civil war forces millions of people to flee their homes.
While scholars have demonstrated how these population movements can spread and
exacerbate conflict, return-migration is assumed to be a purely logistical
issue. Once the war is over, people will simply return home and pick up where
they left off. Yet, conflict between returning and non-migrant populations is a
nearly ubiquitous issue for post-conflict societies from South Sudan to Iraq and
Rwanda. Why does return-migration -- usually a sign of increased peace and
stability -- so often lead to conflict? To understand this puzzle, the author
develops a two part theory: first that migration during and after civil war
creates social divisions based on where individuals were during the war, e.g.
those that stayed, those who left and returned, and those who left and remain
abroad. Second, these divisions become more or less invidious depending on how
"returnees" and "stayees" interact with post-conflict governing institutions,
such as property and land rights, language laws, and citizenship regimes.

To test this theory, the project uses political ethnographic methods, including
semi-structured interviews, documents and archive analysis, in the primary case
of Burundi. The author then uses comparative case studies to demonstrate how the
theory works across civil war contexts. International intervention for post-
conflict statebuilding has become an increasingly high-profile issue on the
international scene. However, a lack of understanding about the changing sources
of violence after war, for instance as a result of migration, has hindered the
development of effective policy solutions. By providing an explanation for how
an often-ignored but ubiquitous consequence of civil war -- the return of
displaced populations -- affects post-conflict communities, this project will
generate a more holistic account of the dynamics of violence after civil war and
help advance both the study and the practice of post-conflict peacebuilding.