* 1535664
* Mixed-Status Families and Citizenship in the Contemporary Migration Experience
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2019
* Heide Castaneda, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Reginald Sheehan
* 08/31/2019
* USD 143,855.00

There are 2.3 million mixed-status families in the US, in which the uncertain
legal status of some members influences opportunities and resources for all,
including permanent residents and US citizens. A focus on individuals in US law
and policy largely overlooks cumulative ripple effects on families, although
individuals are always embedded within these complex social units. This study
examines how mixed-status families experience specific policies related to
health care and education, and seeks to understand how they collectively
navigate opportunities and obstacles. It is necessary to understand the
experiences of these families -- including and especially the impacts on some
4.5 million US citizen children -- in order to ensure equitable application of
policy and to reduce disparities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using mixed-status
families as a primary unit of analysis, this project advances scholarship on how
juridical categories shape socialization to identities within the domestic
sphere as well as in relation to public institutions such as health care and
education. This ethnographic study examines how families actively negotiate
institutions by employing a longitudinal, three-year design. Data from multiple
members of 40 mixed-status families will be examined across two points in time.
This will be contextualized through participant observation and interviews with
50 service providers and community experts. This study seeks to transform
theories of migration and law by shifting the focus from individuals to
families, better revealing social impacts and how difference are shaped at the
family level. Bridging experiences at the micro-familial with those at the
policy level will result in advances for understanding the contemporary
migration experience and theoretical concerns in the social science of law.