* 1535031
* SI2-SSE: Collaborative Research: TrajAnalytics: A Cloud-Based Visual Analytics Software System to Advance Transportation Studies Using Emerging Urban Trajectory Data
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Ye Zhao, Kent State University
* Standard Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 08/31/2019
* USD 300,000.00

Advanced technologies in sensing and computing have created urban trajectory
datasets of humans and vehicles travelling over urban networks. Understanding
and analyzing the large-scale, complex data reflecting city dynamics is of great
importance to enhance both human lives and urban environments. Domain
practitioners, researchers, and decision-makers need to manage, query and
visualize such big and dynamics data to conduct both exploratory and analytical
tasks. To support these tasks, this project develops a open source software
tool, named TrajAnalytics, which integrates computational techniques of scalable
trajectory database, intuitive and interactive visualization, and high-end
computers, to explicitly facilitate interactive data analytics of the emerging
trajectory data.

The software provides a new platform for researchers in transportation
assessment and planning to directly study moving populations in urban spaces.
Researchers in social, economic and behavior sciences can use the software to
understand the complicated mechanisms of urban security, economic activities,
behavior trends, and so on. Specifically, this software advances the research
activities in the community of transportation studies. The software also acts as
an outreach platform allowing government agencies to communicate more
effectively with the public with the real-world dynamics of city traffic,
vehicles, and networks. The integration of research and education prepares the
next generation workforce, where students across multi-disciplines can benefit
through their participation in the development and use of the software.

In order to lay the foundations for effective analysis of urban trajectory
datasets, this software (1) facilitates easy access and unprecedented capability
for researchers and analysts with a cloud-based storage and computing
infrastructure; (2) develops a parallel graph based data model, named TrajGraph,
where massive trajectories are managed on a large-scale graph created from urban
networks which is naturally amenable for studying urban dynamics; and (3)
provides a visualization interface, named TrajVis, which supports interactive
visual analytics tasks with a set of visualization tools and interaction
functions. A variety of transportation-related researchers from geography, civil
engineering, computer science participate in the design, evaluation, and use of
the software. This robust and easy-to-use software enables the users to conduct
iterative, evolving information foraging and sense making.