* 1535322
* Preparing Local Talent for Jobs in the Sub-baccalaureate STEM Economy: A Study of the Marcellus ShaleNET Program and the Energy Sector
* EDU,DGE
* 10/01/2015,01/31/2019
* Robert Bozick, Rand Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Earnestine Psalmonds
* 01/31/2019
* USD 1,499,497.00

The research project will examine an industry-college collaborative model to
align workforce development strategies to employment needs in a sector-specific
economy. The research team will conduct a mixed-methods research study in the
context of the Marcellus ShaleNET Program ? a unique partnership between the
energy sector and a consortium of colleges in Ohio, Pennsylvania, Texas, and
West Virginia. Through this partnership, local employers have designed sub-
baccalaureate credentialing programs that teach critical, occupation-specific
STEM skills to students set to prepare them for high-demand semi-skilled STEM
jobs in the expanding energy sector across these regions. The proposed study
will contribute to the knowledge of the role that sub-baccalaureate
credentialing programs play in providing workers with the skills and training
necessary to succeed in the STEM labor market. It will provide additional
insights also about the relationship between sub-baccalaureate programs and
labor force outcomes to better inform local colleges and employers seeking to
improve the economic prospects of those not seeking four-year degrees.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers will collect and analyze primary data and
conduct interviews and surveys to draw inferences about the program?s
effectiveness by investigating the following research questions: (1) How do
regional business leaders and sub-baccalaureate education and training programs
collaborate to ensure that such programs are producing graduates who have
acquired the necessary knowledge, skills, and abilities (KSAs) to succeed in the
energy sector?, (2) Do oil and gas industry-specific credential programs convey
knowledge, skills, and abilities required of employers in the sub-baccalaureate
STEM labor market? (3) Are workers who earn oil and gas industry-specific
credentials more successful in the STEM labor market than their peers who pursue
other postsecondary training options? The research will be guided by labor
market screening theory, which emphasizes employers? trust in the credential
because of its value in reducing uncertainty in the hiring process by accurately
conveying the KSAs of the applicant, and human capital theory, which predicts
that those with more valuable job-specific training will be more highly rewarded
by employers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is supported by the ECR program
that emphasizes fundamental STEM education research that generates foundational
knowledge in the field. Investments are made in critical areas that are
essential, broad and enduring: STEM learning and STEM learning environments,
broadening participation in STEM, and STEM workforce development. ECR supports
the accumulation of robust evidence to inform efforts to understand, build
theory to explain, and suggest intervention and innovations to address
persistent challenges in STEM interest, education, learning and participation.