* 1535093
* How do children construct linguistic color categories?
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* David Barner, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Peter Vishton
* 07/31/2019
* USD 400,000.00

When children learn a new word, such as the name for an object, they must then
figure out what other objects should receive this same label. This can be an
especially challenging problem for color words because different examples of the
same color category can vary widely and the exact boundaries of individual color
labels are not obvious. For example, once a child learns that blue can refer to
the color of the sky, she must also determine whether blueberries, grapes or
grass receive the same label. Although the boundaries for what differentiates
blue from purple or green seem straightforward to adults, children experience
some ambiguity, and different cultures actually employ different color
categories with different boundaries. For example, some cultures refer to blue
and green things with the same color label. Thus, to learn color terms, children
must figure out where blue begins and ends. The current research investigates
how children solve this complex problem by examining color word learning in
speakers of English and Otji-Herero. Otji-Herero is spoken by the Himba, an
ethnic group in rural Namibia, and contains only 5 color terms to cover the same
range of colors that English speakers typically label using 11 terms (red,
orange, yellow, green, blue, purple, pink, brown, gray, black and white). The
research investigates how differences in exposure to visual colors, combined
with differently sized and structured color vocabularies, affect how individuals
establish color word categories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
investigate how learners encode color with language in three parts. First, it
will test children's early comprehension using infant-friendly eye-tracking
methods to determine the initial assumptions that guide first color word
meanings in English-learning children (18-30 months). Second, the project will
test longitudinal category change. To do so, the researchers will follow
children from the time they produce their first color words until they acquire
adult-like meanings for all 11 English basic color terms. Finally, these
naturalistic studies of category change will be complemented by studies of
experimental categorical change in which researchers introduce new color words
to individuals who have divided their color space into 5 (Otji-Herero) or 11 (as
in English) words while manipulating the type of visual evidence they receive
during training. The researchers will also photograph the learning environments
of participants to test how visual experience impacts changes in color word
meanings. These photographs will be used to create a valuable online database as
a resource for other researchers. Using these visual images as well as existing
databases on children's linguistic input, the researchers will construct a
computational model of how learners use visual and linguistic information to
construct color word meanings.