* 1535070
* SI2-SSE: AttackTagger: Early Threat Detection for Scientific Cyberinfrastructure
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Ravishankar Iyer, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Stefan Robila
* 08/31/2020
* USD 499,136.00

The cyber infrastructure that supports science research (such as the
cyberinfrastructure that provides access to unique scientific instrumentation
such as a telescope, or an array of highly distributed sensors placed in the
field, or a computational supercomputing center) faces the daunting challenge of
defending against cyber attacks. Modest to medium research project teams have
little cyber security expertise to defend against the increasingly diverse,
advanced and constantly evolving attacks. Even larger facilities that have with
security expertise are often overwhelmed with the amount of security log data
they need to analyze in order to identify attackers and attacks, which is the
first step to defending against them. The challenges of the traditional approach
of identifying an attacker are amplified by the lack of tools and time to detect
attacks skillfully hidden in the noise of ongoing network traffic. The challenge
is not necessarily in deploying additional monitoring but to identify this
malicious traffic by utilizing all available information found in the plethora
of security, network, and system logs that are already being actively collected.
This project proposes to build and deploy, is needed in research environments,
an advanced log analysis tool, named AttackTagger, that can scale to be able to
address the dramatic increase in security log data, and detect emerging threat
patterns in today's constantly evolving security landscape. AttackTagger will
make science research in support of national priorities more
secure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;AttackTagger will be a sophisticated log analysis
tool designed to find potentially malicious activity, such as credential theft,
by building factor graph models for advanced pattern matching. AttackTagger will
integrate with existing security software so as to be easily deployable within
existing security ecosystems and to offload processing and computational work
onto better suited components. It can consume a wide variety of system and
network security logs. AttackTagger accomplishes advanced pattern matching by
utilizing a Factor Graph model, which is a type of probabilistic graphical model
that can describe complex dependencies among random variables using an
undirected graph representation, specifically a bipartite graph. The bipartite
graph representation consists of variable nodes representing random variables,
factor nodes representing local functions (or factor functions , and edges
connecting the two types of nodes. Variable dependencies in a factor graph are
expressed using a global function, which is factored into a product of local
functions. In the practice of the security domain, using factor graphs is more
flexible to define relations among the events and the user state compared to
Bayesian Network and Markov Random Field approaches. Specifically, using factor
graphs allows capturing sequential relation among events and enables integration
of the external knowledge, e.g., expert knowledge or a user profile.