* 1535450
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: An Ethnographic Study of Lay Participation in the United States Criminal Justice System
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Anna Offit, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Bornstein
* 08/31/2018
* USD 21,033.00

This project undertakes an anthropological study of the United States federal
jury system, focusing on how prosecutors pick jurors. The process by which
citizens are selected or excused from jury service has not been studied
ethnographically, leaving lawyers and social scientists with an incomplete
understanding of the relationship between attorneys' practices of social
evaluation and their formulations of justice as dimensions of their
professionalism. Significant contributions to sociolegal research and the legal
profession flow from this project. It will shed light on how prosecutors
evaluate individuals who report for jury service in relation to the case at
hand. A key finding in this research to date is that prosecutors draw on
multiple interpretive resources as they seek to compose a jury based on the
attributes of jurors. These resources include their professional training in the
law, their collegial consultation as they prepare cases for trial, and their
personal experience, among other sources of social knowledge. Since jurors are
by definition strangers to prosecutors, prosecutors often use iconic "types" as
shorthand for the ways social characteristics align (in their own
understandings) with different analytical abilities and/or orientations to crime
and punishment. This research will also illuminate how prosecutors translate
their felt obligation to do justice into action, as they work with juries. The
insights of this study contribute to the anthropology of law and sociolegal
studies, and can be returned as well to the legal profession through Continuing
Legal Education (CLE) courses that focus on the theory and practice of jury
selection.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Drawing on ethnographic methods, this research
will include participant observation in multiple U.S. Attorney's Offices and
courtrooms in a federal judicial district. The researcher will conduct semi-
structured and unstructured interviews that explore how prosecutors' ideas about
lay decision-makers shift from one juror(and trial)to the next. It will also
involve the analysis of trial transcripts.