* 1535937
* A global survey of marine magnetic anomalies to constrain the Late Cretaceous-Eocene time scale
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Alberto Malinverno, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Candace Major
* 08/31/2019
* USD 246,280.00

Part 1&lt;br/&gt;The Late Cretaceous-Cenozoic geomagnetic polarity time scale
based on the C-sequence magnetic anomalies created by seafloor spreading
provides an independent measure that can guide magnetic polarity time scale in
sediments and thus its importance to geochronology. Since the time scale based
on magnetic anomalies was last attempted over 20 years ago the global data has
grown considerably, and detailed finite plate rotations have been determined on
several spreading centers. The PI plans to use these new results for time scale
information to substantially update the time scale information provided by
marine magnetic anomalies by extending the analysis originally done in the S
Atlantic to several spreading centers. The results will impact all of geological
disciplines that require accurate time scale for the Cretaceous through Tertiary
interval. The educational components comprise undergraduate training, workshop
for Earth2Class program for K-12 science teachers and outreach at Lamont Open
House. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part 2&lt;br/&gt;The Late Cretaceous-
Cenozoic geomagnetic polarity time scale based on the C-sequence magnetic
anomalies created by seafloor spreading provides an independent measure that can
guide magnetic polarity time scale in sediments and thus its importance to
geochronology. The latest in-depth analysis of marine magnetic anomalies, mostly
based on the South Atlantic patterns, was carried out more than twenty years
ago. The global marine magnetic anomaly record has since grown considerably, and
detailed finite plate rotations have been determined on several spreading
centers (Central and SE Indian Ridge, Pacific-Antarctic Ridge, NE Pacific,
Central N Atlantic). These new results have not been fully analyzed for time
scale information, and magnetic anomalies are presently underutilized. The
proposed project is to substantially update the time scale information provided
by marine magnetic anomalies by extending the analysis originally done in the S
Atlantic to several spreading centers. Advancing the state of the art in dating
and correlating past events has significant implications in a wide range of
geoscience disciplines. To enhance the broader understanding of the fundamental
concepts behind the development of a quantitative geologic time scale and to
promote scientific training, the project will support an undergraduate student
during a 10-week summer internship at the Lamont-Doherty Earth Observatory. The
PI will closely supervise the student in selecting suitable profiles,
identifying magnetic anomalies, constructing reversal distance data sets, and
preparing a presentation of the results. The PI will also run a workshop on the
proposed project in the Earth2Class program, where K-12 science teachers are
introduced to research by Lamont scientists. The quantification of deep time
will be presented to the general public during the Lamont Open House, an annual
outreach event that attracts thousands of visitors.