* 1535721
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Design of Legal Power in Authoritarian Regimes
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2015,02/28/2017
* Tsering Youdon, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* scott barclay
* 02/28/2017
* USD 16,347.00

Stable governance in developing countries, especially in nascent democracies
with long histories of authoritarian rule, is a national security interest of
the United States. While rule of law is considered a hallmark of stable
governance, it is often lacking in these regions. Over the past half-century,
American efforts to build democratic rule of law in developing countries have
encountered limited successes and repeated failures. This project aims to
uncover the origins of undemocratic legal systems in the developing world and
why they are so resistant to reform during transitions to more democratic
governance by focusing on the institutional choices made by governments during
key periods of authoritarian consolidation. During the early years of
dictatorship, some dictators confer legal authority to the formal judiciary,
while others choose to erect ad hoc legal forums. These decisions have lasting
legacies in determining the locus of judicial authority in developing countries,
which ultimately affects how justice operates and who it ultimately serves. This
has further implications for the protection of human rights under dictatorship.
For American policymakers, identifying the stakeholders in authoritarian legal
systems is thus an imperative first step towards creating effectively targeted
reforms and building democratic rule of law abroad.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To
understand how authoritarian legal systems in developing countries have emerged
and evolved over time, this project utilizes mixed-methods analysis that
combines both qualitative process-tracing techniques and statistical analysis.
Original data will be gathered from British and American archives containing
records on the political and legal development of developing countries in Sub-
Saharan Africa and Southeast Asia. Archival research will leverage a variety of
underutilized historical documents -- including party documents, official
correspondences, judicial registers, court rulings, and memoires -- to
understand how legal institutional design emerged and evolved across a large
portion of the developing world. Using process-tracing techniques, case studies
of countries such as Malawi, Kenya, and Burma will provide insight into how
legal and authoritarian power was structured in the postcolonial period, and
also examine how early legal decisions had lasting legacies that persist until
today. Archival data will also be instrumental in creating an original cross-
national dataset of cases that have been adjudicated in a variety of legal
forums. This dataset, covering the period from independence to the modern day,
will help identify generalizable patterns of legal decision-making across
countries and over time. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project contributes
to the understanding of authoritarian legal systems and the consolidation of
dictatorships across a large portion of the developing world. It will deepen
theoretical and empirical understanding of these themes in three important ways.
First, it will help identify how despotic power can have long-lasting effects on
the design and operation of legal institutions, even after the transition to
democracy. Second, it will draw attention to the political effects of legal
institutions in countries of Sub-Saharan-Africa and Southeast Asia, regions that
have become critical economic and diplomatic partners of the United States.
Third, it will provide new data on legal design from a critical period of
nation-building in developing countries that can be employed for other studies
extending beyond the scope of this project. This data will be made publicly
available upon publication of the findings.