* 1535024
* A Study of Elements of Teacher Preparation Programs that Interact with Candidates' Characteristics to Support Novice Elementary Teachers to Enact Ambitious Mathematics Instruction
* EDU,DGE
* 10/01/2015,03/31/2020
* Corey Drake, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 03/31/2020
* USD 1,796,117.00

Preparing large numbers of elementary teachers to enact high-quality or
ambitious mathematics instruction is a central policy challenge in the U.S.
While several studies have tried to identify linkages between features of
teacher preparation and student achievement outcomes, few large-scale studies
have addressed the relationship between teacher preparation and ambitious
mathematics instruction, a more proximal outcome. To meet the need for ambitious
mathematics instruction, a more robust research base is needed regarding how to
support beginning teachers in enacting such instruction. To that end, this NSF
EHR Core Research Level II study will investigate how teacher preparation
programs support elementary candidates in developing ambitious mathematics
instruction and factors that are associated with how graduates of these programs
enact mathematics instruction as first- and second-year teachers. Cultural-
historical activity theory (CHAT) in a mixed-methods research design will be
applied to examine how elementary candidates' characteristics (i.e., their
teaching identity, beliefs, and knowledge with regard to teaching mathematics)
interact with their opportunities to learn (OTL) in mathematics methods courses
and student teaching experiences to influence their enactment of ambitious
mathematics instruction as first- and second-year teachers. The study will also
explore how novice teachers' characteristics interact with resources and
expectations in their schools to influence their mathematics instruction as
teachers of record. The study results will inform the design of university-based
teacher preparation programs, including the selection of elementary candidates
with particular characteristics, the content of mathematics methods courses, and
desirable characteristics of student teaching assignments. This work is
supported by the EHR Core Research (ECR) program. The ECR program emphasizes
fundamental STEM education research that generates foundational knowledge in the
field. Investments are made in critical areas that are essential, broad and
enduring: STEM learning and STEM learning environments, broadening participation
in STEM, and STEM workforce development. The program supports the accumulation
of robust evidence to inform efforts to understand, build theory to explain, and
suggest intervention and innovations to address persistent challenges in STEM
interest, education, learning and participation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study
will feature surveys of 150 elementary candidates from a purposively sampled set
of six teacher preparation programs in three states during their final year of
preparation and their first two years of teaching. The Mathematics Scan (M-Scan)
classroom observation instrument will be used to observe these graduates
multiple times as they teach mathematics as first- and second-year teachers.
M-Scan measures ambitious mathematics instruction by assessing teachers' use of
mathematical tasks, discourse, representations, and coherence. In addition, this
study will feature interviews with elementary preparation program directors and
mathematics methods instructors at each university; and it will feature surveys
of teacher educators, practicing teachers, mathematics instructional coaches,
and principals who work with the novice teacher study participants. The study's
primary outcome is to measure novices' enactment of ambitious mathematics
instruction by using the four M-Scan constructs: mathematical tasks, discourse,
representations, and coherence. Each construct represents its own dependent
variable. Multiple regression will be used to study the main outcome as a
function of several independent variables (including individual teacher
characteristics, OTL in mathematics methods courses and student teaching, and
resources and expectations in novice teachers' schools) and interactions among
these variables. All models will include a vector of controls for teacher
attributes (e.g., the teacher's ACT/SAT score, selectivity of undergraduate
institution, undergraduate grade point average) and school attributes (e.g.,
student race/ethnicity, student eligibility for free/reduced lunch, school size,
urbanicity, curriculum policy, professional development offerings). This project
will contribute to building the knowledge base for designing high-quality
teacher preparation and induction programs that support elementary candidates
and novice teachers with a range of background experiences, beliefs, and
knowledge. This includes understanding factors that inhibit or promote the
development of ambitious mathematics instruction to ensure that new elementary
teachers are able to provide all students with instruction that supports their
deep conceptual understanding of mathematical content.