* 1535689
* I/UCRC FRP: Physics-Based Compact Modeling of Gallium Nitride (GaN) Devices for Advanced Power Electronics
* ENG,EEC
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2018
* Homer Mantooth, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 07/31/2018
* USD 214,355.00

Advances in wide bandgap materials such as silicon carbide (SiC) and gallium
nitride (GaN) have led to substantial advances in power semiconductor devices
and are now positioned to dominate the next generation of power electronics
replacing silicon devices. This research focuses on the creation and validation
of analytical models for state-of-the-art GaN power devices. The market share of
GaN devices is expected to reach a staggering $15.6 billion by 2022, mainly due
to growing demands in the power and energy sector, the communication
infrastructure sector, and the power electronics market. GaN devices are
expected to reduce overall energy conversion losses down to 1%, resulting in an
annual savings of nearly $40 billion in US revenues. A high-efficiency and green
energy infrastructure is vital for reducing overall expenditures and reducing
the carbon footprint of the electronics industry on the environment. Silicon
power semiconductor device models have been estimated to have an annual economic
impact in excess of $40 million per year based on improved design productivity.
The expected outcome from this fundamental research effort focuses on developing
physics-based compact device models for circuit simulations that will help
electronics engineers rapidly develop circuit designs and prototypes based on
GaN devices. Impacts of this model will enable a side-by-side comparison of GaN
and silicon devices at the design analysis phase. This in turn will likely
promote increased usage of GaN semiconductor technology. The models generated by
this research will be open access and made publicly accessible on the NSF
Industry/University Cooperative Research Center on Grid-connected Advanced Power
Electronic Systems (GRAPES).

This research will develop and validate a physics-based compact device model for
GaN power devices. The model will be derived analytically, based on the physics
of carrier transport in the device layers as derived mathematically and observed
through finite element simulations of device structures. The model, once derived
and implemented, will be validated against experimentally measured data of
commercially available GaN devices taken at University of Arkansas research
laboratory facilities in collaboration with the industry partners of GRAPES.
Once validated, a model parameter extraction method will be created so that
users of the model can execute this procedure to obtain the parameters necessary
to tailor the model's behavior to specific devices they may choose to employ
from the various GaN power device suppliers in the world. The characterized
model, when used in circuit simulations, will help electronics engineers to
design and manufacture a wide range of GaN-based circuits that will increase the
penetration of GaN devices in the US power, energy, communications, and
transportation infrastructure.