* 1535696
* RUI: Accelerator Science at the California Polytechnic State University at San Luis Obispo
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2020
* Robert Holtzapple, California Polytechnic State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 07/31/2020
* USD 292,259.00

The advancement in science is closely connected to the capabilities of
instrumentation. Particle accelerators are the instruments of particle physics
and x-ray production. The next generations of particle accelerators are being
designed to explore the frontiers of high-energy physics and for xray beams for
research in biology, chemistry, physics, material science and medicine.
Accelerator science research is necessary to gain greater understanding of the
physical processes that can impact the performance of these accelerators and
develop new techniques of particle acceleration technology. The accelerator
science research will be conducted at two of the premier laboratories in the
United States in accelerator science, the Cornell Laboratory for Accelerator-
Based Sciences and Education (CLASSE) at Cornell University and the SLAC
National Accelerator Laboratory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will use the
Cornell Electron-Positron Storage Ring Test Accelerator (CesrTA), to examine
important beam physics, such as the electron cloud effect, emittance limitations
in storage rings, and the fast ion instability, for future lepton storage rings
and x-ray sources. One of the key goals of the CesrTA research program is to
improve our understanding of the interaction of the electron cloud with the
high-energy particle beam. The electron cloud constrains many of the operational
parameters of the storage ring such as beam current; bunch spacing, ring energy,
and these parameters can be measured experimentally on CesrTA. Beam dynamics
experiments using the CesrTA beam diagnostics capable of quantifying bunch-by-
bunch and turn-by-turn beam dynamics will be used to study important lepton
storage ring beam dynamics in the presence of the electron cloud. In addition,
we conduct basic accelerator science research on crystal channeling at the
Facility for Advanced Accelerator Experimental Tests (FACET) and the End Station
A Test Beam (ESTB) facility at SLAC. Channeling is the phenomenon that arises
when charged particles become trapped between the crystal planes due to the
electrostatic field of the crystal ions. There is strong interest in using bent
crystals as collimators and magnets for high-energy electron and positron beams
and well as using crystals as generators of gamma-rays as a positron crystal
undulator. The development of a crystal undulator opens the prospect of creation
of novel light sources that will find their application in technology, medicine
and basic sciences. Both accelerator science research projects provide Cal Poly
undergraduate students research opportunities at large accelerator facilities in
accelerator science. Cal Poly students will gain hands-on experience in all
facets of the physics research from designing an experiment, simulating the
physics, building the hardware, taking the data, analyzing the data, and
publishing the results.