* 1535142
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Use of Digital Technologies by Indigenous People for Communication Within and Beyond Communities
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2017
* Jason Young, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 07/31/2017
* USD 15,929.00

The use of information and communication technologies by indigenous people has
opened new opportunities for these marginalized groups to communicate across
geographic distances and to influence policy and decision making. This doctoral
dissertation research project will investigate the capacity of the Internet to
facilitate productive dialogue among indigenous peoples, scientists and
government agencies. The project will provide new insights into how digital
interactions produce empowerment as well as inequalities for the various
stakeholders involved. Project findings have the potential to provide new
insights regarding how vulnerable groups might better leverage digital
technologies to empower themselves as well as how different stakeholders might
collaborate with one another and with policymakers across cultural,
epistemological, and bureaucratic barriers in a search for solutions to changing
environmental conditions. The doctoral student will work with local Inuit
communities in northern Canada, but these issues affect marginalized populations
globally, and the project will provide insights into the Internet as a forum for
enabling international dialogue and decision making in a diverse set of locales
in the U.S. and elsewhere. As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement
award, this award also will provide support to enable a promising student to
establish a strong independent research career.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
will address three core questions: (1) How are environmental change issues
articulated online? (2) Are such digital discourses shaped and constrained by
current policies and do they affect the ways in which the Inuit engage with such
policies? (3) What are the technological and discursive attributes of the Web
that contribute to these constraints? The doctoral student will use a
combination of topic modeling and critical discourse analysis to explore these
questions and provide an understanding of the discursive framework with which
the Inuit must engage. He also will analyze the experiences of Inuit as they
engage with digital spaces as well as how cultural and epistemological aspects
of digital technologies may prevent them from being fully engaged. The research
has implications for the theoretical and policy-based understanding of digital
technologies, the engagement of technologies by indigenous and marginalized
peoples, and the communication of environmental information and knowledge.