* 1535011
* The Impact of Social Capital and Mentoring in Earth System Science Workforce Development
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Caitlin Callahan, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Earnestine Psalmonds
* 08/31/2020
* USD 481,795.00

Researchers at Michigan State University will investigate the relationship
between mentoring and career development in Earth System Science (ESS) with a
particular focus on diverse populations. The researchers argue that increasing
diversity in ESS can be addressed through 1) an exploration of how relationship
development during mentoring impacts career satisfaction and sense of belonging,
2) an analysis of how different groups respond to mentoring, and 3) a synthesis
of research findings into practical suggestions that can be disseminated
broadly. The rationale for the study is that ESS lags other STEM disciplines in
the recruitment, retention, and advancement of skilled workers, resulting in a
persistent workforce shortage. The researchers will reconsider the ESS workforce
shortage problem by analyzing the role of social capital in career development
and sense of belonging in ESS. They will focus on mentoring relationships as a
fundamental aspect of the training and education that students need to become
professionals, particularly relationship strength and trust built during
mentoring and their impact on career development and acculturation on
underrepresented groups. The project will contribute to the dialog about the
importance of social capital to career development and success.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using social capital as the theoretical framework for the
study, the researchers will use a mixed methods explanatory design to
investigate two questions: (1) How do social capital variables ? strength and
trust ? impact career satisfaction and sense of belonging for students
undergoing career development and professionals in ESS, and how do the impacts
differ across diverse groups? and (2) What are the benefits and costs to ESS
mentors, and do the impacts differ across diverse groups of mentors? The
research is expected to yield insights concerning the nature of social capital
development during mentoring, how diverse groups are impacted differently
through mentoring or being mentored, and how research can be distilled into
practical lessons to increase the retention of diverse groups in ESS. The data
will provide concrete evidence for steps mentors can take during mentoring to
facilitate the success of diverse protégés and steps mentors and students can
take to ensure their own satisfaction with the mentoring experience. These
insights will be synthesized into two workshops for ESS students and faculty
mentors. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is supported by the ECR program that
emphasizes fundamental STEM education research that generates foundational
knowledge in the field. Investments are made in critical areas that are
essential, broad and enduring: STEM learning and STEM learning environments,
broadening participation in STEM, and STEM workforce development. ECR supports
the accumulation of robust evidence to inform efforts to understand, build
theory to explain, and suggest intervention and innovations to address
persistent challenges in STEM interest, education, learning and participation.