* 1535755
* AitF: EXPL: Data Management in Domain Wall Memory-based Scratchpad for High Performance Mobile Devices
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2015,09/30/2021
* Kirk Pruhs, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 09/30/2021
* USD 399,910.00

To achieve scalable performance improvement in mobile devices such as smart
phones, it is important to integrate a larger and faster memory. The major
constraints on enlarging on-chip memory using traditional memory technologies
are size and energy efficiency. Size is an issue because devices must inherently
be small to be mobile. Energy efficiency is an issue because battery life is
often the limiting factor in the usefulness of mobile devices, and the memory
subsystem in mobile devices such as smart phones can consume about a third of
the total energy. Because of these limitations, the amount of memory per
processor in mobile devices such as smart phones has stayed relatively stable
over the last few generations of technologies. The incorporation of the emerging
technology of Domain Wall Memory in mobile devices is attractive as it can store
more information in less volume than any competing technologies, while
simultaneously using little energy, and being nearly as fast as traditional
memory technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;However, Domain Wall Memory has
physical properties that are different than traditional memory technologies, and
that can potentially impact performance. In particular, Domain Wall Memory is
divided into tracks, which like a tape, may only be accessed sequentially. Thus
accessing two data items stored far apart within the same track will be a
costly, time-consuming operation. Thus obtaining the best possible performance
of Domain Wall Memory will require algorithms/solutions that will smartly manage
the placement of data items into memory so that the sequential access properties
of Domain Wall Memory do not significantly degrade performance. The goal of the
project is to design, analyze, test and deploy algorithms/solutions for data
allocation problems that will arise with the adoption of Domain Wall Memory in
mobile devices. As these data management problems have unique features, the
development of algorithms for these problems will likely require the development
of new algorithmic design and analysis techniques. Developing a good practical
implementation of these algorithms, or implementations inspired by these
algorithms, will require the development of a significant understanding of both
implementation issues and common instance properties. The project will cross-
train students in the area of computer architecture and algorithms. Transfer of
technology to the industry will be&lt;br/&gt;pursued through collaborations and
visits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is promising to incorporate Domain Wall Memory
as a software-controlled scratchpad memory, which has been widely adopted in
embedded systems for achieving high performance and energy efficiency. For data
items allocated in the same Domain Wall Memory track, accesses start with
shifting the target domains below the head, which is similar to accesses to
sequential access memory such as tape and hard drives. The overhead to access a
data item includes both the read/write overhead and the shift overhead. While
the former is constant, the latter depends heavily on how the data items are
allocated within the track. Thus optimizing aggregate access time in DWM-SPM
largely involves minimizing shifts. The performance of DWM-SPM will be
significantly affected by the policies used for: (a) Track management: How the
data items are organized/ordered within a track, (b) Data layout: How the data
items are assigned to tracks, and (c) Data selection: How the data items that
will be stored in DWM-SPM are selected.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
design and formally analyze algorithms for track management, data layout, and
data selection in idealized models of Domain Wall Memory. The advantage of
formal algorithmics is that the formal objective can drive the discovery of non-
intuitive algorithms. Concurrent with this theoretical investigation, a
simulation environment will be created to test proposed solutions to managing
Domain Wall Memory. This includes the assembly of hardware modeling tools,
software simulators, and a collection of benchmark programs. The project will
develop and implement some simple policies to serve as a baseline to compare
against, and obtain test instances representative of those that would arise in
practice, and will transfer the theoretical insights into actual
implementations. These implementations would then be compared to the baseline
and greedy heuristic solutions.