* 1535008
* Conference: International Ciliate Molecular Biology Conference, July 10-16, 2015 in Camerino, Italy
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* James Forney, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Karen Cone
* 05/31/2016
* USD 10,000.00

This project will support attendance by postdoctoral fellows and graduate
students at the International Conference on Ciliate Molecular Biology, to be
held July 10-16, 2015 in Camerino, Italy. In keeping with a long-standing
priority for this conference, participation by young researchers and under-
represented minorities, including women, will be emphasized. The conference will
offer opportunities for sharing latest research results in both formal and
informal settings, and thus will provide an ideal environment for building
scientific networks and collaboration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This biannual
meeting is the major convocation of experimental biologists working with
ciliated protozoa, and plays a critical role in sustaining the vitality of this
important research community. The participants are members of an array of
discipline-specific fields, including cell biology, molecular evolution,
structural biology, cell signaling, and nucleic acid biochemistry. The
objectives of this meeting are to (i) disseminate new research information and
ideas, (ii) share technical innovations, (iii) organize further development of
community resources, and (iv) enhance graduate and undergraduate research and
education initiatives. This conference will contain workshops on Future
Directions and Ciliates in the Classroom, several platform sessions on the new
and exciting research areas in the field of Ciliate Molecular Biology, and two
poster sessions. Of note will be a session on genome evolution and adaptation,
which will emphasize the application of computational approaches to study gene
and genome evolution. Other sessions will feature additional examples of the
application of new technologies to unravel molecular and cellular details of
this fascinating group of organisms.