* 1535060
* Scholar Award: The Value of SEIN Research
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2015,02/28/2017
* Christopher Toumey, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 02/28/2017
* USD 250,105.00

General Audience Summary

This project will study the impact of research on the Social and Ethical
Implications of Nanotechnology (SEIN) over the last fifteen years. The goal is
to determine the extent to which the publications, insights, and conclusions of
that research has been useful to populations beyond academic disciplines in the
humanities and the social sciences, where SEIN research has been done. The PI
will interview stakeholders and decision-makers in four target populations:
business and industry; law, especially intellectual property law; science and
technology research and development; and science policy and regulation. The core
research questions of the project include the following. What is the extent to
which SEIN research is useful to these populations? Are there ways to improve on
the utility of this research for them? How can the results of this project, the
insights and recommendations that are generated from it, serve to inform STS
research on other forms of emerging science and technology? The PI will broadly
disseminate his research results to enhance understanding of science and
technology, especially in formats that reach policy makers in business,
industry, and law. He will also bring to light successful instances of
substantial benefits of SEIN research, and to recommend ways for other
researchers in STS to plan early to accomplish similar benefits in their
research.

Technical Summary

This project will interview 60 to 80 stakeholders in business, law, science, and
science policy to ascertain whether they are familiar with SEIN research in four
areas: ethics in nanotechnology, public engagement with nanotech, issues of
fairness and social justice, and the history and development of nanotechnology.
For those who are familiar with these features of SEIN research, the PI will
query the manner and the extent to which they use it in their decision-making.
For those who are not familiar with these elements of SEIN research, he will
inquire how this kind of research might be formatted and delivered to facilitate
their being used. There will be a second round of interviews to gather the
perspectives of leaders in SEIN research in the US, especially those whose work
was made possible by funding from US government agencies. A third round will
interview a sample of SEIN leaders in the EU and Canada to discern whether they
have been more successful than US researchers in disseminating their results to
populations outside of academic disciplines in the Humanities and Social
Sciences. It is intended that the results of this work will also be useful for
stakeholders in other topics of emerging science and technology, e.g., Synthetic
Biology or mapping the human brain.