* 1535431
* A Synthesis of Social Science Research About the Relationship of K-12 Race, SES, and Immigrant Status School Diversity to Two- and Four-Year College STEM Outcomes
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2018
* Martha Bottia, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Jolene Jesse
* 09/30/2018
* USD 260,480.00

This proposal was submitted in response to EHR Core Research (ECR) program
announcement NSF 15-509. As part of ECR, this project is funded by the Research
on Gender in Science and Engineering (GSE) program. GSE seeks to understand and
address gender-based differences in science, technology, engineering and
mathematics (STEM) education and workforce participation through education and
implementation research that will lead to a larger and more diverse domestic
STEM workforce. The proposed research will support the survey and synthesis of
the social, educational, and behavioral science literatures regarding the
relationship of K-12 diversity to STEM outcomes in two and four-year colleges.
Findings from the resulting narrative syntheses, vote-counting and meta-
regression analyses will contribute to enhancing the educational infrastructure
necessary to diminish gaps in US students' STEM performance and developing a
globally competitive STEM workforce. Gaining insight into trajectories to
college STEM success among underserved populations is particularly important
because youths from these backgrounds continue to lag in their participation in
STEM and they are growing as a percent of the US student population. The results
of these syntheses will promote learning in STEM, the narrowing of many extant
K-16 gaps in STEM outcomes, the improvement of articulation agreements between
community colleges and four-year institutions so that transfer students are more
likely to succeed in STEM once they matriculate to the latter, and the
preparation of students as productive workers in the globalizing economy. It
will also stimulate future research by developing a theoretical model of K-12
diversity's mechanisms with respect to two- and four-year college STEM
outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Most basic research and policy studies about
college STEM outcomes investigate the roles of student, family, and teacher
characteristics, or the influences of pedagogy and curricula on STEM outcomes.
This study will focus on the organizational characteristics of K-12 schools and
classrooms in conjunction with the former set of factors. The syntheses have the
potential to illuminate the relationship of variations in organizational
characteristics of K-12 schools on college STEM outcomes, especially among
underserved student populations. First, the syntheses will summarize the
relationship of race/ethnic, socio-economic status, and immigrant diversity in
K-12 schools and classrooms to STEM outcomes in higher education, paying
attention to variations in the relationships by student subpopulations. Second,
the researchers will investigate higher education outcomes at both two- and
four-year institutions, and the transitions to them, and thereby capture the
dynamics of the full STEM educational pipeline, particularly given the critical
role of community college transfer options for underserved college students. The
focus on two-year institutions is important due to the growing interest in how
community colleges can contribute to creating a larger pool of STEM workers.
Third, the study will identify and synthesize research about populations
currently insufficiently discussed in the literature: Latinos/as, Asians,
immigrants, and low-income students. Fourth, the syntheses will permit the
development of a much-needed testable theoretical model that accounts for school
and classroom compositional effects on STEM outcomes in two- and four-year
colleges for all student populations. Finally, the results of this project will
be a public resource that could contribute to the advancement of STEM teaching,
learning, and participation, through the Spivack Archive, an extant searchable
electronic database that presently holds abstracts of 550 research studies about
the relationship of K-12 socio-economic status and racial composition to K-12
outcomes. The award will enable the researchers to add studies of higher
education outcomes related to STEM to this archive.