* 1535262
* Collaborative Research: Initiating a Foundational Research Model for Secondary Mathematical Knowledge for Teaching (INFORMS MKT)
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2019
* Michael Tallman, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steele
* 08/31/2019
* USD 471,772.00

The goal of the project is to understand expert secondary mathematics teachers'
knowledge for teaching exponential functions. In particular, the study examines
how mathematics knowledge for teaching is used by teachers as they are teaching
students' and the factors that influence their interactions with students. The
project is recruiting teachers in order to observe their teaching of exponential
functions units in Algebra II, Pre-Calculus, and College Algebra courses in high
schools. They will conduct classroom observations throughout the teaching of the
unit and conduct interviews with the teachers before and after each unit. The
project builds on other frameworks for understanding mathematics knowledge for
teaching. Other studies have focused more frequently on elementary or middle
school teachers. The contribution of this work is to understand the mathematics
content teachers are using in high school in their work with students.
Exponential functions are a common topic in the three high school courses and a
foundational topic for students' learning of algebra and calculus. The ECR
program emphasizes fundamental STEM education research that generates
foundational knowledge in the field. Investments are made in critical areas that
are essential, broad and enduring: STEM learning and STEM learning environments,
broadening participation in STEM, and STEM workforce
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research questions for the study focus on
the decisions expert teachers draw on while making decisions related to teaching
exponential functions, the mathematics knowledge for teaching they use to make
decision, and the factors that influence the quality of those decisions and
students' opportunity to reason mathematically. They are recruiting expert
teachers who have taught the courses for at least two years and are recognized
as high quality teachers. The data collected include video data from classroom
observations and pre-observation and post-observation interviews. The questions
to be asked in interviews focus on teachers' decision-making and will probe for
their mathematics knowledge for teaching. Mathematics knowledge for teaching
includes how teachers' knowledge that supports their planning, instruction, and
assessment of students' mathematical reasoning. The study also provides a
research methodology that could be used to study mathematics knowledge for
teaching in other secondary mathematics topics.