* 1535897
* AitF: EXPL: Collaborative Research: Approximate Discrete Programming for Real-Time Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Christoph Studer, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 08/31/2019
* USD 200,000.00

Discrete programming (DP) deals with optimization problems involving variables
that range over a discrete (e.g., integer-valued) solution space. DP is an
important tool in a variety of practical applications including digital
communications, operations research, power grid optimization, and computer
vision. While discrete programs are typically solved offline by sophisticated
software using powerful computers, DP has recently emerged as an important tool
in applications requiring real-time processing in embedded systems with
stringent area, cost, and power constraints. Since existing DP solvers entail
prohibitive complexity and power consumption when implemented on existing
embedded hardware, novel algorithms and hardware architectures are necessary to
unlock the potential of DP in real-time applications. This project fuses
optimization theory, numerical methods, and circuit design to develop fast
algorithms and suitable hardware architectures for real-time DP in embedded
systems. Besides a thorough theoretical analysis of the proposed methods, the
project includes extensive software and hardware benchmarking to reveal the
efficacy of real-time DP in practice. To bridge the ever-growing gap between
recent advances in numerical optimization and hardware design, the project also
includes the development of undergraduate and graduate courses that build upon
the vertically-integrated research approach of this project, in addition to
offering summer research internships (REUs) to introduce young scientists to the
field of discrete programming.

The project develops a set of computationally efficient and hardware-aware
algorithms and corresponding dedicated very-large scale integration (VLSI)
architectures that enable DP for real-time embedded systems. The proposed DP
algorithms rely on a variety of algorithmic transformations, ranging from
semidefinite and infinity-norm-based relaxations to exact variable-splitting
methods and non-convex approximations. These disparate approaches offer a wide
range of tradeoffs between solution quality and hardware implementation
complexity. The project studies these fundamental tradeoffs, as well as the
effects of finite-precision arithmetic in VLSI, from both a theoretical and
practical perspective. To carry out this investigation, three dedicated VLSI
architectures will be developed that exploit the inherent parallelism of the
proposed algorithms. These architectures target (i) data detection in multi-
antenna (MIMO) wireless systems that is the key bottleneck in next-generation
communication systems, (ii) signal recovery problems in hyperspectral imaging,
and (iii) phase retrieval problems from x-ray crystallography. By investigating
the domain-specific performance and complexity of various numerical solvers in a
variety of conditions and hardware configurations, the project will reveal the
efficacy and limits of DP for a broad range of real-time applications beyond the
ones studied in this project.