* 1535219
* Examining the Career Trajectories of Urban Math Teachers from a Selective Alternative Certification Program
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2015,09/30/2020
* Laurel Cooley, CUNY Brooklyn College
* Standard Grant
* Earnestine Psalmonds
* 09/30/2020
* USD 949,123.00

The goal of the research project is to describe the features of selective
alternative teacher certification programs (ATCPs) that affect selective route
mathematics teachers' (SRMT) professional pathways and to make informed
recommendations to decrease the current high teacher turnover. While selective
ATCPs are intended to address issues of teacher staffing and quality by
recruiting high achieving graduates of the nation's most competitive colleges
and career changers with impressive resumes, there is little understanding about
the reasons for their mixed outcomes. Thus, the proposed project will utilize a
multi-methodological longitudinal design that incorporates cultural-mathematical
and sociological perspectives to 1) determine patterns of career trajectories of
a representative sample of SRMTs and 2) examine how variations in the features
of a selective ATCP affect SRMT retention. The results of the study will be
useful to various stakeholders, including policymakers, district and school
leaders, and directors of urban-specific teacher preparation programs by
clarifying patterns in the career trajectories of SRMTs while also revealing how
to retain them.. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study is framed by the literature on
teacher turnover, alternative teacher certification programs, and teachers'
professional life cycles. It is guided also by two theoretical perspectives,
namely a sociological careership perspective used to examine SRMTs' career
trajectories and a cultural-mathematical perspective that identifies the
features of selective ATCPs that influence SMRT retention. The researchers will
combine new survey and interview data with previously collected data on New York
City Teaching Fellows (NYCTF) to produce findings that could inform the
development of mathematics teacher preparation programs and interventions for an
improved urban mathematics teaching force. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is
supported by the ECR program that emphasizes fundamental STEM education research
that generates foundational knowledge in the field. Investments are made in
critical areas that are essential, broad and enduring: STEM learning and STEM
learning environments, broadening participation in STEM, and STEM workforce
development. ECR supports the accumulation of robust evidence to inform efforts
to understand, build theory to explain, and suggest intervention and innovations
to address persistent challenges in STEM interest, education, learning and
participation.