* 1535760
* I-Corps:  Smart Multi-Sensor Wireless Network System for Storm Load Monitoring
* TIP,TI
* 04/15/2015,09/30/2016
* Chelakara Subramanian, Florida Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 09/30/2016
* USD 50,000.00

Hurricanes are among the most destructive and costliest of all natural
disasters. As population continues to increase in coastal regions where the
threat is highest, so does the possibility for greater disasters, as
demonstrated by hurricanes Katrina, Ike, or Sandy. This risk can be devastating
for entire communities, for the insurance industry, which ultimately must pay
for a significant portion of the incurred losses, for local and state
governments who have to struggle with the impact on their populations and
economies, and for the nation as a whole. The implementation of affordable
solutions to mitigate damage requires a quantification of the wind forces
causing this destruction, and models that relate wind forces to the capacity of
man-made structures to resist them. Full-scale measurements are required in
order to calibrate and improve the models&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
wireless multi-sensors network system has the capability of measuring pressure
and temperature on a roof, collecting data (rate up to 1400 samples/s) and
sending it to a server to process and publish on the web in nearly real-time.
The focus of this proposal is to enhance the capabilities of prior innovation to
characterize wind loads on full-scale residential structures during actual
hurricanes. The deployment will leverage on the state-of-the-art in wireless
sensors networks, cloud computing and social media to seamlessly manage and
scale efficiently data streams as the velocity and volume of the source data
grows unabated. In this proposal the team plans to add a smart data acquisition
to the system which will allow faster data rates when the winds change fast and
slower data rate when winds change slowly. This will help to avoid unnecessary
data storage and economize the sensor duty cycle. The unique aspect of the
system is it has not only the wireless and networking capabilities, but it also
has several in-situ controls such as individual sensor remote control, self-
negotiating communication, and excellent data throughput, precision, and
accuracy; it is robust, reliable, and portable, and allows simultaneous
deployment on multiple residences in case of a hurricane landfall.