* 1535751
* Workshop on Enabling a Future Information Technology Revolution, March 30-31, 2015, IBM Conference Center, Washington, DC
* ENG,ECCS
* 04/01/2015,09/30/2015
* Victor Zhirnov, Semiconductor Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 09/30/2015
* USD 49,750.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal: ECCS-1535751&lt;br/&gt;PI: Victor
Zhirnov, Semiconductor Research Corporation&lt;br/&gt;Title: Workshop on
Enabling a Future Information Technology Revolution, March 30-31, 2015, IBM
Conference Center, Washington, DC&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Semiconductor
Research Corporation (SRC) is planning a workshop to define Grand Challenges
that will identify long-term research priorities for the semiconductor and
nanoelectronics community in support of a future Information Technology (IT)
revolution. This workshop will bring together strategic and knowledgeable
experts from academia, government agencies, and industry, including the
semiconductor and other information technology companies. The workshop will
include overview presentations and roundtable discussions directed toward
comprehending the barriers and approaches to enabling a future IT revolution.
Participants will be asked to identify Grand Challenges and key scientific
challenges related to nanoelectronic devices and future IT systems. By carefully
assessing the scientific/technological challenges for future information
technologies, the workshop will provide important documented inputs to the
research community and to industry and government agencies that invest in long-
term research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop will provide an excellent
opportunity for intellectual pursuit and discernment of important and limiting
scientific challenges related to new approaches for information processing.
Exploratory research indicates the potential for economically viable new
devices, circuit and system architectures, and algorithms to take computing far
beyond the limits of today's technology. Examples of IT topics to be explored
include: (i) Ultimate Connectivity and Internet of Things; (ii) Intelligent
?nano-nodes?; and (iii) Semiconductor technologies for big data, such as
exascale computing, and new data storage technologies. Some potential Grand
Challenges include: (i) Guaranteed data security, from the smallest sensor nodes
the largest data centers; (ii) Ubiquitous wireless communication for billions of
connected Nanosystems; (iii) Intelligent sensor nodes, powered solely by energy
harvested from the environment; and (iv) Continued exponential advances in
energy efficient high-performance computing. A technical report will be
generated based on the information gathered at the workshop and will be made
publicly available.