* 1535058
* Collaborative Research: EMBRACE: Evolvable Methods for Benchmarking Realism through Application and Community Engagement
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2017
* Edward Riedy, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Edward Walker
* 08/31/2017
* USD 125,000.00

High-performance computing opens new avenues in science, planning, health, and
defense that are not economically achievable by pure experimentation. New
progress areas require new evaluation methods, packaged in benchmarks, for
selecting computational hardware and systems. EMBRACE will guide selection of
computing technologies for different scientific areas with different needs.
Current approaches assume that one kind of platform addresses all problems, but
growing use in bioinformatics, urban planning, medicine, and more fields have
demonstrated new, uncovered system requirements. EMBRACE opens the process
through community competitions. These competitions will both build benchmarks
useful for multiple scientific areas as well as build a community around
benchmarking science. The evolving measurements will help scientists best match
their applications with computing platforms.

Despite the long-standing interest and important impacts of benchmarking, there
is no resolution on the most rational way to design, develop, and evolve
forward-looking benchmarks, and to correctly interpret their results. Over time,
the community has broadened, the platforms have changed dramatically, and the
applications have evolved, yet today's benchmarks have not necessarily evolved
with them. The primary objective of this proposal is to sustainably advance the
science of benchmarking based on current and future needs. A second objective is
to create sustainable incentives that drive research and innovation. A third
objective is to produce a select set of the most useful and evolving benchmarks,
benchmarking methods, or benchmarking analyses that can be accepted by the
community. The vision and objectives will be realized by establishing a new,
sustainable, and community-driven competition, the Evolvable Methods for
Benchmarking Realism through Application and Community Engagement (EMBRACE)
Workshop, in which teams compete in categories directly relevant to performance
measurement and benchmarking. Submissions to the contest will include code,
technical papers and presentations. In consultation with leaders in various
application domains and with vendor representatives, the EMBRACE team will be
responsible for defining the contest categories, framing the rules, recruiting
both the participants and the judges, and monitoring and managing the process as
it takes place. It will be an open forum to advance the broader scientific
community's understanding of fundamental questions in the area of benchmarking.