* 1535711
* Optical Scale Laser-Driven Electron Accelerators for Attosecond Radiation Sources
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Robert Byer, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 08/31/2018
* USD 450,000.00

Particle accelerators are a critical scientific and industrial tool in many
fields, from probing the structure of matter at its fundamental levels to
industrial radioisotope production, medical radiation therapy, and security
scanners. In the past two years, the first demonstrations have been conducted of
a revolutionary new approach that combines the fabrication methods of the
microchip industry with modern lasers to greatly shrink the size and cost of
particle accelerators. This opens the door to creating a future generation of
miniaturized "accelerator on a chip" devices that could be used to produce
pulses of radiation on unprecedentedly short time scales, shorter than one
millionth of a billionth of a second. Such accelerators of the future could open
new avenues of scientific research, including the potential for making
"molecular movies" that reveal the inner workings of some of nature's fastest
events. Students working in this program will receive an education of unrivaled
depth by interacting with faculties from multiple scientific fields as well as
the diverse communities of researchers at Stanford, UCLA, Tel-Aviv University,
and SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory where much of the experimental work
will take place.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is a three-year collaborative
program to advance the concept of a laser-powered nanofabricated dielectric
laser accelerator (DLA) with the ultimate goal of making compatible ultra-short
pulsed radiation sources. This approach has been colloquially referred to as an
"accelerator on a chip." The different essential components will be developed by
the collaborating groups, including theory, design, and laboratory
demonstrations at Stanford University, Tel-Aviv University, SLAC National
Accelerator Laboratory, and University of California Los Angeles. The
development of the particle source and low-energy accelerator for these tests
will occur in close collaboration with Erlangen University, Germany. The theory
of DLA radiation schemes will be developed for potential short-wavelength
coherent radiation sources based on high-harmonic (super-radiant) emission and
free electron laser amplification schemes with femtosecond to attosecond pulses.
The NSF program will support the research of one graduate student in this field,
working on design, fabrication, and testing of these concepts in conjunction
with faculty, scientific staff, and students at the collaborating institutions
to provide an unparalleled and multi-disciplinary educational experience.