* 1535456
* Why We Persist: An Intersectional Study to Characterize and Examine the Experiences of Women Tenure-Track Faculty in Engineering
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/2015,02/28/2017
* Monica Cox, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Celestine Pea
* 02/28/2017
* USD 1,131,464.00

The ECR program emphasizes fundamental STEM education research that will
generate foundational knowledge in the field. Investments are made in critical
areas that are essential, broad and enduring: STEM learning and STEM learning
environments, broadening participation in STEM, and STEM workforce development.
As part of ECR, this project is funded by the Research on Gender in Science and
Engineering (GSE) program. GSE seeks to understand and address gender-based
differences in science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) education
and workforce participation through education and implementation research that
will lead to a larger and more diverse domestic STEM workforce. This
collaborative project will add to fundamental research in the core area of
broadening participation for all women in engineering. It will address the lack
of a well-defined body of research methods, studies, and data on the
intersection of race, gender, and class among all women. The project will focus
on populations that include African American, Hispanic/Latina, Asian/Asian-
American, Native American, White, and multiracial women in tenured faculty
positions at higher education institutions within the United States. To do this
work, collaborative teams of engineering educators, engineers, and social
scientists at Purdue University and Vanderbilt University will study challenges
and barriers women encounter in engineering. The study will be guided by an
intersectional framework that seeks to uncover why engineering faculty from
these groups persist despite the challenges that face them based on race,
gender, and class.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed study is framed within the
institutional (systemic relationships of domination and subordination); symbolic
(stereotypical or controlling images); and individual (institutional and
symbolic) dimensions of oppression according to Hills Collins' intersectional
framework. The project will use mixed methods to identify longitudinal trends in
engineering for all women and investigate perspectives about persistence and
resilience among the targeted populations. The research will involve descriptive
and trend analyses of data collected from 350 institutions by the American
Society for Engineering Education, followed a national survey of women selected
from the same database. These steps will be augmented by data collected through
institutional analyses, a small pilot study, and face-to-face interviews.
Interpretation of data culled from these data sources will be triangulated to
collectively document unique characteristics, experiences, and factors about
oppressions faced by women who persist in engineering. If the outcomes show
specific reasons why some women persist, as well as identify barriers to their
persistence, the findings could serve as a launching pad for companion studies
and the development of interventions. These outcomes could then inform ways to
address institutional, symbolic, and individual changes that are fundamental to
broadening the participation of all women in engineering.