* 1535630
* Workshop: Test Beds for Smart Grids and Smart Cities: Means of Learning What Is and What Might Become in the Changing Electric Energy Industry. March 30-April 1, Carnegie-Mellon
* ENG,ECCS
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2016
* Marija Ilic, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Eyad Abed
* 03/31/2016
* USD 43,000.00

The Tenth Annual Carnegie Mellon University Conference on the Electricity
Industry will be held on March 30-April 1, 2015 at Carnegie Mellon University.
This will be followed by a hands-on smaller workshop on April 1-2, 2015. The
last two days will be an international&lt;br/&gt;workshop, co-funded by the
German DFG. The main goal of this 10th anniversary CMU Electricity Conference is
to discuss the state-of-the-art in testbeds for future electric power systems in
light of multi-disciplinary collaborations; and testbeds as a means for helping
the industry and academia to simulate and assess many unconventional hardware
and cyber solutions, as well as the effects of policy requirements. At the
Workshop, Carnegie Mellon researchers will also share with the community their
"Smart Grid in a Room Simulator" (SGRS) which is under development in
cooperation with NIST. Finally, the Workshop aims to nurture
international&lt;br/&gt;knowledge exchange in the area of testbeds for smart
grids.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The electric power industry is at a crossroads, and
it is essential to have well-designed testbeds for emulating likely dynamics
that will occur in the evolving power grid and help the industry asses
alternative proposed cyber solutions to ensure adequate performance in light of
the needs of industry and society. In the Workshop, on-going testbed
developments will be presented to the&lt;br/&gt;broader community followed by
discussion of challenges and opportunities for next steps. A panel of industry
practitioners will discuss the area from their perspective to stimulate research
in academia that is relevant to industry needs. The Workshop will help in
building a multi-disciplinary community of modelers, software and platform
developers for the changing electric energy industry. Developments from the
Workshop and follow-on research and collaborations are expected to contribute to
basic education in th eelectric power area and to a vision for its future
development. Developers of today's testbeds will present their state-of-the-art
testbeds, and will discuss their experience in testbed development and lessons
learned. Some on-going testbed developments are not readily accessible to the
broader community, and this Workshop will help to encourage broader access and
use of these facilities.