* 1535651
* SI2-SSE: yt: Reusable Components for Simulating, Analyzing and Visualizing Astrophysical Systems
* CSE,OAC
* 11/01/2014,09/30/2018
* Matthew Turk, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Stefan Robila
* 09/30/2018
* USD 511,989.00

Computational modeling of astrophysical phenomena has grown in sophistication
and realism, leading to a diversity of complex simulation platforms, each
utilizing its own mechanism and format for representing particles and fluids.
Similarly, most of the data analysis is conducted with tools developed in
isolation and targeted to a specific simulation platform or research domain;
very little systematic and direct technology transfer between astrophysical
researchers exists. The yt project is a parallel analysis and visualization
toolkit designed to support a collaborative community of researchers as they
focus on answering physical questions, rather than the technical mechanics of
reading, processing and visualizing data formats. This project will enable the
development of advanced, physics-based modules that apply universally across
simulation codes, advancing scientific inquiry and enabling more efficient
utilization of computational and human resources. In doing so, it will help
advance a myriad of research goals from the study of black hole binaries to the
growth of cosmic structure. In addition, the project will serve as a touchstone
for collaboration and cross-code utilization between many groups studying
diverse phenomena. Moreover, the project will be developed through a community-
oriented process, engaging a wide range of participants.

The infrastructure development in this research will enable these capabilities
by broadening the applicable simulation platforms within yt, enabling cross-code
utilization of microphysical solvers and physics modules and in situ analysis,
and developing collaborative platforms for the exploration of astrophysical
datasets. In particular, it will develop the capabilities of yt in three primary
mechanisms. The first is to enable support for additional, fundamentally
different simulation platforms such as smoothed particle hydrodynamics,
unstructured mesh, and non-Cartesian coordinate systems. The second is to
provide simulation instrumentation components to ease the process of developing
simulation codes, interfacing and exchanging technology between those simulation
codes, and to enable deeper, on-the-fly integration of astrophysical simulation
codes with yt and other analysis toolkits. The final focus is on developing
interface components to enable collaborative and interactive exploration of data
utilizing web-based platforms. An explicit goal of this SI2-SSE project is the
development of collaborative relationships between scientists, furthering the
development of the field as a whole. By conducting all business in the open with
a focus on developing and encouraging collaborative, welcoming environments for
contributors and researchers, this SSE will help to foster a level playing field
that is more accessible to all parties, particularly women and underrepresented
minorities. An explicit milestone of this project is to streamline the process
of conducting direct outreach through scientific visualization, greatly
expanding the domains and individuals engaged in STEM-based public outreach.