* 1535401
* Development of Ultra-cold Quantum-degenerate Relativistic Electron Beams for Research and Applications
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2020
* Bela Erdelyi, Northern Illinois University
* Continuing Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 07/31/2020
* USD 560,000.00

'Beaming' energy (i.e. matter) and information (i.e. data) in a most efficient
way has inspired science and science fiction equally. In 1960s, lasers were
invented allowing us to beam energy and information via light beams having its
internal constituents almost perfectly ordered and working as a team. Lasers are
intrinsically 'cool', made possible by clever tricks invented by atomic
scientists and engineers. To date this feat has not been achieved by beams of
charged particles such as electrons which are produced in a very hot, restless
state by the mechanisms used to extract them from materials. The electrons
embedded in most materials have to overcome a tremendous barrier and climb up
and beyond an energy hill which they remember and which they vent off literally
by being very unruly, restless and jittery upon their release. A typical
electron beam produced in today's laboratories is very hot indeed, comparable to
the surface of the sun. This research will develop special and precisely
patterned structured materials with features a thousand times smaller than the
width of human hair (e.g. carbon nanotube- or Graphene-based structures),
immersed in a very high electric field allowing the electrons inside the
material to 'tunnel through' the barrier hills effortlessly without climbing
them, thus making the released electrons colder and ordered, traveling together
in a single file so-to-speak, as a beam of electrons that is so 'cold' that it
will act like a particle laser beam. Complex theoretical and computational
modeling of 'designer' emitters will go hand-in-hand with state-of-the-art
fabrication of such delicate and precise structures and their subsequent testing
for performance in the laboratory. Once produced, special effort will have to be
made to allow the electrons to remain cold while gaining speed and energy as a
beam.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The particular research and development will depend
on a collaboration of Northern Illinois University (NIU) with major national and
international laboratories and their facilities such as the Fermi National
Accelerator Laboratory (FNAL), Argonne National Laboratory (ANL), Cambridge
Graphene Centre (CGC) and US industries. Specially designed samples will be
prepared in collaboration with ANL and CGC facilities and will be tested at
NIU/FNAL specially designed test facility. The research will open up new areas
of scientific investigation and their societal/industrial applications e.g.
compact x-ray lasers for 'ultra-fast' science, novel computational possibilities
based upon a single quantum of charge and 'spin', three dimensional rapid
electron-beam printing of complex unique structures of industrial and medical
interest, compact portable sources of light for lithography of novel nano-
structures for the electronic chip industry. The activity will inspire inclusive
collaboration between scientists, engineers and technologists in research and
education and integrate academia, national laboratory and industry for
knowledge-based economic wealth creation, integrating the local and national
education and outreach programs at NIU inclusive of diversity, minority
education and training goals.