* 1535082
* DMREF: Development of Fundamental Design Rules for Material-Liquid-Nanoparticulate Interfaces that Optimize Control of Friction, Adhesion, and Wear
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2021
* Jacqueline Krim, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* John Schlueter
* 09/30/2021
* USD 1,349,999.00

NON-TECHNICAL:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This effort brings together chemistry,
physics, engineering and statistics to develop a new class of lubricants
composed of exceedingly-fine particles in different liquids that will improve
upon the friction and wear reduction properties of traditional oil lubricants
while significantly reducing their environmental impact. Effective control of
friction, wear and adhesion has a vast range of applications that impact energy
efficiency, national security, manufacturing, and the environment. Total
frictional losses in a typical diesel engine, for example, exceed 10% of the
total fuel energy. Reducing the losses to 1% would save roughly a billion
gallons of diesel fuel in the U.S. alone. Furthermore, today's lubricants were
developed in an era that focused on wear elimination over energy losses from
friction, and did not consider environmental consequences. This effort also
includes two public outreach activities, the first of which targets middle
school students through job shadow opportunities and the second of which targets
the general public through an entertaining citizen science learning
module.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A new approach for
developing fundamental design rules for material-liquid-nanoparticulate
interfaces that optimize control of friction, adhesion and wear will be
developed that combines theory, simulation, statistics, material synthesis and
characterization. Rational design and effective control of these properties will
be transformative across many fields. The studies will pioneer new ground,
delving into the quantum and sub-nanoscale origins of everyday frictional
phenomena observed at macroscopic length scales. The approach is motivated by
the challenge of identifying correlations between combinations of highly
heterogeneous properties and processing conditions that correspond to
tribological performance. More specifically, the project combines synergetic
efforts of four groups: 1) multi-physics modelling of interfacial phenomena
including electrostatics; 2) statistical approaches for predicting tribological
performance of multi-component systems; 3) experimental studies of friction and
adhesion at both macroscopic and nanometer scale lengths; and (4) fabrication
and chemical functionalization of nanostructured materials and molecular
spectroscopy tailored to specific applications.