* 1535878
* AitF: FULL: Collaborative Research: Compact Data Structures for Traffic Measurement in Software-Defined Networks
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Shanmugavelayu Muthukrishnan, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 08/31/2019
* USD 360,000.00

Software-Defined Networking (SDN) is changing the way networks are designed and
managed, by separating the "control plane" (which decides how to handle the
traffic) from the "data plane" (which actually forwards each packet). Many large
companies---like Google, Microsoft, and Facebook---have already deployed SDN
technology, and many equipment vendors support open interfaces for programming
their switches. While most work on SDN focuses on how to control the network,
measuring the traffic in the network is equally important. Traffic measurement
is useful to identify congested links, denial-of-service attacks, performance
problems, and configuration mistakes, and also drives decisions of how the
network should forward traffic in the future. However, the support for traffic
measurement in today's commodity switches is quite primitive. In this proposal,
the PIs bring algorithmic research on so-called "compact data structures" to
bear on the problem of programmable traffic measurement in SDNs. Compact data
structures can give approximate answers to measurement questions with limited
overhead in terms of switch memory and processing resources.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is interdisciplinary, bringing together
researchers in computer networking and theoretical computer science to match
practical problems with novel solutions. The proposed research starts with
designing new query abstractions for collecting traffic statistics on existing
SDN switches, and then progresses to identifying new compact data structures so
that future switches can support much richer traffic measurement at reasonable
overhead. The researchers have close ties with network administrators and switch
vendors, allowing them to ground the project in a strong understanding of both
operational requirements and hardware constraints, and also influence future SDN
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to identify a switch data-
plane architecture for collecting diverse traffic statistics, as well as a small
set of programmable sketches and samples for variety of analyses to trade-off
accuracy and resources. The architecture will include a measurement control API
between the controller and the switch, and this needs a communication-efficient
interface, along with a high-level language for specifying traffic queries, and
with that, a run-time system on the controller that compiles these queries into
commands to the switches with suitable CDSs. These challenges will be addressed
using OpenFlow API that is widely popular for SDNs and in new redesigns. This is
a conversation between the networking and algorithmic communities, mutually
informing each other on what is possible, what is required, and ultimately what
is effective and useful.