* 1535130
* SI2-SSE: A Software Element for Neutrino Radiation Hydrodynamics in GenASiS
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Anthony Mezzacappa, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 08/31/2019
* USD 432,488.00

Multi-physics computational modeling is an integral part of the scientific study
of many complex natural phenomena. These phenomena often involve the physics of
radiation transport. For example, neutrino radiation hydrodynamics is a key
element of the physics governing environments with hot and dense nuclear matter.
Such extreme environments include the Early Universe, during primordial
nucleosynthesis of light nuclei such as hydrogen through lithium just after the
Big Bang; the merger through inspiraling of neutron star-neutron star or neutron
star-black hole binaries; and the death throes of massive stars, more than ten
times the mass of the Sun, in stellar explosions known as core-collapse
supernovae, which are responsible for elements such as oxygen and calcium
without which life as we know it would not exist. Radiation transport and
kinetic theory of particles besides neutrinos---photons, electrons, or neutrons
---are also relevant to many areas of astrophysics, as well as a broad range of
other science applications, including materials science, plasma physics, neutron
transport, multiphase flows, and high-energy-density physics. As such, the
availability of a software element to solve radiation transport problems is
highly valuable to researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will create
and deploy a software element to solve radiation hydrodynamics problems on
modern supercomputers featuring "hybrid" architectures that include traditional
CPUs plus "accelerators" or "coprocessors," such as GPUs or Intel Many
Integrated Core processors, respectively. This radiation hydrodynamics
functionality will be developed within GenASiS (General Astrophysical Simulation
System), a new framework being developed to facilitate the simulation of
astrophysical phenomena on the world's leading capability supercomputers. In
particular, the radiation transport solver will utilize the extant capabilities
of GenASiS for adaptive computational "mesh refinement," whereby the
representation of the natural continuum is captured adaptively on a mesh of
points foundational to any computational model in order to maximize the fidelity
of the computational model for a given computational cost. We will use the so-
called M1 approach, solving directly for the zeroth and first angular moments
(energy density and momentum) of the radiation field, with higher-order moments
given by "closure relations," expressing them in terms of the zeroth and first
moments. The energy dependence of the radiation field will be retained, with the
zeroth and first angular moments discretized into "energy bins." Our
computational approach to neutrino radiation transport will be an "implicit-
explicit" (IMEX) scheme. Interactions between radiation and matter will be
handled with a time-implicit subsolver, which will involve the inversion of
dense matrices local to each node of the machine to exploit all available
hardware in the node, including accelerators and coprocessors when available.
Algorithms and software resulting from this project will be made available to
the community. GenASiS, as an extensible, object-oriented simulation framework,
will be valuable to researchers seeking to experiment with and implement
different kinds of solvers for multi-physics problems. In particular, the
neutrino hydrodynamics solver developed in this project is of high interest to
astrophysics modelers.