* 1535312
* Six Dimensional Experimental Characterization of High Intensity Hadron Beam Dynamics in Front End Systems
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2015,01/31/2020
* Marie-Helene Cousineau, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Continuing Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 01/31/2020
* USD 600,000.00

Accelerators are used in many applications, from studies of the fundamental
components of matter to medical and industrial applications. The advancement of
accelerator technology relies on a deep and detailed understanding of the
behavior of the particle beam inside the accelerator. Sophisticated simulation
codes have been developed to model the particle beams in the accelerator in
order to aid in understanding particle beam behavior in current accelerators,
and in the design of future accelerators. To produce accurate results, the
simulations require an initial description of the beam that is beyond what has
yet been experimentally measured. The deficit of knowledge in this area places a
fundamental limitation on progress toward understanding the beam behavior in
accelerators, particularly in high power accelerators. The main difficulty in
acquiring this information is the extensive time associated with performing the
experimental measurement, which renders it impractical or impossible for
operational accelerators, and the necessity for developing the novel diagnostics
device capable of performing the full multi-parameter measurement. In this
project, the University of Tennessee will make use of the Integrated Test Stand
Facility (ITSF) at the Spallation Neutron Source accelerator in order to perform
the first comprehensive measurement of the initial beam properties. The ITSF is
a duplicate of the first piece of the SNS accelerator, and therefore provides a
realistic platform for this measurement but without the time limitations
associated with operational accelerators. This project will fund one postdoc,
one graduate student, and a few undergraduate students from the University of
Tennessee to design and implement the necessary equipment on the ITSF to perform
the measurement, under guidance from staff at UT and at SNS. The project will
enable these young scientists to gain hands-on experience in hardware design and
data analysis, while also making an important scientific contribution. Almost
all accelerators, from high-energy particle physics machines to future
accelerators for transmutation of nuclear waste and energy production, will
benefit from the results of this work.

For any linear accelerator, the quality of the beam in the front end limits what
can be achieved downstream; a poor quality beam early on results in unwanted
emittance growth and beam halo. One of the holy grails of accelerator physics is
quantitative modeling of the onset and evolution of beam halo and it?s
translation into beam loss during acceleration. Unfortunately, there is a
recurring failure of state-of-the art simulation codes to successfully benchmark
anything beyond RMS quantities of the beam. Since it is the extended beam tails
that cause beam loss in an accelerator, this is a performance-limiting issue.
The consensus in the community is that the problem is not a failure of the
codes, but rather a deficit in knowledge of the initial beam distribution. To
date, there has never been a full 6D measurement of the beam phase space exiting
the front-end radio frequency quadrupole (RFQ). The thrust of the work is a
modest expansion of the diagnostics to enable the first full 6D measurements of
the beam phase space, and small modifications to allow subsequent measurements
of the downstream evolution of beam. A final goal is to optimize the diagnostics
schemes in operational accelerators to improve the ability to reconstruct
initial beam phase space distributions. The extended ITFS will serve as a
community-wide resource for understanding halo formation and improving
measurement and modeling techniques; interested colleagues will be given the
data and invited to perform their own experiments.