* 1535193
* Postdoctoral Fellowship: Energy, Risk and Urgency - Emergent Public Perceptions of Unconventional Oil and Gas Extraction
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2015,10/31/2018
* Barbara Harthorn, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 10/31/2018
* USD 107,788.00

General Audience Summary &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This postdoctoral research
project proposes to examine public attitudes in the US and the UK on
unconventional oil and gas extraction technologies. Specifically, the project
will focus on ideas about urgency as they figure in emergent public views on the
risks, benefits and impacts of technologies used in hydraulic fracturing
(fracking) to access oil and gas in deep shale rock. The postdoc will engage in
a comparative analysis of existing qualitative data on how diverse groups of
everyday people in the US and the UK attach ideas about urgency to economic,
environmental, social, and political aspects of new unconventional oil and gas
technologies. The results of this project will be of interest to STS scholars,
environmental scientists and engineers, industry specialists, and policymakers
working in multiple fields including energy systems, climate change,
environmental justice; more broadly, they will be of interest to any who have a
stake in in the perceptions and anticipated behavior of diverse publics
regarding present and future energy extraction, production, and consumption.
Broad dissemination of research results will be achieved through publications,
and through the preparation of a white paper report and a policy brief.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
project is a cross-national comparative case analysis of the effects of fracking
technologies on diverse publics' social values, relationships, livelihoods and
practices in the two study countries through the lens of urgency. A detailed,
qualitative account of how urgency operates in emergent public attitudes on
unconventional extraction technologies will contribute new scholarly
understanding to key debates within both STS and risk perception literatures on
responsibility, equity, trust, and governance, and broader issues of energy and
society, all critical issues in the emerging field of Responsible Innovation.
The proposed focus on urgency will provide a new perspective for examining
technological controversies, and will systematize approaches for understanding
its effects on amplification of risk and benefit perception. The comparative
cross-national study will provide greater clarity about the processes in play in
each country and their historical specificities in approaches to energy futures.
The proposed analysis will be conducted using an existing set of extensive
qualitative data collected from four public deliberation workshops convened in
October 2014 by a collaborative team including the PI and co-PI of this project.