* 1535821
* AitF: FULL: Collaborative Research: Better Hashing for Applications: From Nuts &amp; Bolts to Asymptotics
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* David Andersen, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 08/31/2019
* USD 250,000.00

This project engages experts in systems and network algorithms from Carnegie
Mellon University and Harvard University to improve hashing-based data
structures for systems. Hashing is an approach that turns a variable length
string into a small, fixed-length value. Hashing provides a short, consistent
fingerprint used to identify larger pieces of data, for uses including storing
and locating data items quickly and effectively. Hashing provides a key building
block for sophisticated approaches to storing, measuring, and managing data.
Hashing-based data structures have correspondingly become widely accepted, often
key workhorses throughout systems and networking. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will create synergies between theory and systems in the area of hashing,
with various approaches for lasting broader impact. Prototype code will be
released for new algorithms and data structures created in the course of the
project. Curricular materials focused on project material will be developed and
distributed. The project will offer a wide range of research opportunities at
various levels of sophistication for graduate and undergraduate students at both
universities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The team unites expertise with theoretical
design and analysis with expertise in systems design and analysis, allowing
ideas and insights to flow between the two sides. The work starts from the
lowest level of what choice of what hash functions to use, through the design
and analysis of general data structures, to the development of applications that
utilize hashing-based data structures to provide top performance. Project goals
include both improving existing structures such as Bloom filters and cuckoo hash
tables in practical systems to developing new structures for related problems
such as maintaining small structures for fast function evaluation on key sets
and reconciliation of datasets.