* 1535876
* EAGER: Education through Innovative Research: Novel Plasmonic Semiconductors
* EHR,HRD
* 08/01/2015,01/31/2018
* Daniela Radu, Delaware State University
* Standard Grant
* Claudia Rankins
* 01/31/2018
* USD 98,588.00

The National Science Foundation uses the EArly-concept Grants for Exploratory
Research (EAGER) funding mechanism to support exploratory work in its early
stages on untested, but potentially transformative, research ideas or
approaches. The project at Delaware State University aims to integrate research
and education to establish the foundation for a new research direction in
plasmonic semiconductors, and for validating an educational approach by
promoting innovative research to undergraduate chemistry students. The research
will explore a paradigm shift in plasmonic materials by investigating ternary
and quaternary chalcogenide semiconductor nanostructures for their plasmonic
effects in the infrared region. The project's progress and methodology will be
captured in a course designed to train students in innovation and creative
thinking in research.

Recent research reports indicate that nanostructured semiconductor particles
could exhibit potent plasmonic effects in the near infrared region that could
impact dramatically their light-matter interaction. A plethora of semiconductor
materials, both oxides and chalcogenides, have been thoroughly investigated for
their photovoltaic properties and therefore their preparation methods are
readily available. The proposed project seeks to synthesize and explore
plasmonic effects in germanium chalchogenides, CuGeS2 and Cu2ZnGeS4, using the
previously reported CuInS2 nanorings as models for the synthetic approach. The
findings of these unprecedented studies will be applied to a large number of
chalcogenides. The knowledge generated in the area of chalcogenide
semiconductors could lead to developing novel devices in the field of infrared
detectors for applications in areas such as personal protection or food safety.