* 1535960
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Environmental Governance and the Emergence of Ecosystem-Based Fisheries Management
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2015,12/31/2017
* Cindi Katz, CUNY Graduate School University Center
* Standard Grant
* Antoinette WinklerPrins
* 12/31/2017
* USD 15,750.00

This project analyzes the governance of the New England groundfish fishery
through the emergence of Ecosystem-based Fisheries Management (EBFM), focusing
on how science and management function together in a network of ecological,
social, and economic relationships. Despite the application of the best science
available to guide management practices, stock assessments for several species
are at record lows and socioeconomic impacts are rippling through the sector. A
transition from management based on single stock assessments to EBFM, which
takes into account the biophysical dynamics of the marine environment and
incorporates socio-ecological dimensions into conceptualization of the
ecosystem, is an opportunity to address interrelated and underrepresented
fishery processes. Among supporters of EBFM, tensions exist about the best way
to move forward because stakeholders analyze the fishery in different ways
depending on their roles and their epistemological approaches to understanding
the fishery. Scientific uncertainty, rapidly changing environmental conditions,
and variable market dynamics require participatory and adaptive management
strategies that reconcile disciplinary and epistemological divisions. This
project will identify areas where conflicting epistemologies are straining
collaboration and action and determine ways to attenuate or resolve these
conflicts. It will provide insights into the contradictions that hinder
understanding and areas where economic, social, and conservation agendas
potentially converge. Although this research aims to capture the complexity of
the New England groundfish fishery specifically, it has potential to provide
insights for the management of similar fishery crises throughout the world.
Further, this work has implications for implementation of ecosystems based
management paradigms more generally.

This project addresses three overarching research questions: 1) How do ongoing
scientific and social processes, based on the emergence of EBFM, construct the
ecosystem as a category for governance? 2) How do place-specific ecological,
social, and economic relationships mediate and produce outcomes from the
processes and practices of fisheries science and management? 3) How can this
analysis advance our understanding of natural resource policy and management?
Through ethnography and discourse analysis, this research examines the spaces
where actors come together to produce management plans and will utilize
observations of management and research lab meetings, interviews with fisheries
scientists, and contextualized evaluation of popular media, industry
publications, management plans, and legislation. The analysis integrates methods
from political ecology and political economy, Socio-ecological Systems (SES)
theory and the Global Production Networks approach to analyze the coupling of
ecological and social-economic systems within the fisheries sector.