* 1536691
* Conference: The Multiple Dimensions of Biodiversity Science; Sao Paulo, Brazil, June 26-30, 2015
* BIO,DEB
* 04/15/2015,03/31/2018
* Ana Carnaval, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 03/31/2018
* USD 48,588.00

Understanding and predicting spatial patterns of biodiversity and turnover in
space and time is central to understanding the interplay between ecology and
evolution. Despite the appeal of broadly integrative research programs, advances
in biodiversity science have been constrained by the isolation of these fields
within biology, as well as between biology and related fields such as geology
and climate science. This symposium seeks to identify and broadcast new ways to
overcome the challenge of effectively uniting the fields of earth sciences,
evolution and ecology through research, teaching, and outreach. Participants
will include graduate students, postdocs, and principle investigators associated
with the NSF Dimensions of Biodiversity program from the US, and from partner
funding agencies in Brazil and China. This meeting will provide a unique
opportunity to disseminate new and promising integrative approaches to
biodiversity studies, and to brainstorm and discuss the best strategies to
educate and train the next generation of integrative scientists. This research
is of high priority for developing viable approaches to conservation and
sustainability in the neotropics that can be applied in diverse geographic
regions.

This funding will support the participation of US-based graduate students and
postdocs from diverse backgrounds who are conducting cutting-edge research in
integrative approaches to biodiversity studies, as well as four undergraduate
minority students involved with or interested in similar topics. All student
awardees will attend the symposium and be invited to actively participate in the
symposium discussions and a joint publication emerging from it. Student posters
will be advertised to the symposium audience to maximize their attendance. The
poster session will use the scientific networks of our speakers to foster new
connections and collaborations between attendees from South America and those
from other continents, thereby fostering new scientific links across countries.
Local outreach efforts in Brazil will feature new integrative studies that
either focus on or encompass tropical biotas, or that develop novel frameworks
that can be readily applied to these regions.