* 1536242
* Serpentinization processes in the subsurface of a seafloor ultramafic-hosted hydrothermal system
* GEO,OCE
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2020
* Jeffrey Alt, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Deborah K. Smith
* 07/31/2020
* USD 259,929.00

Beneath Earth's crust lies the mantle, composed of an ultramafic rock called
peridotite. Peridotites are exposed on the seafloor by faulting at mid-ocean
ridges where they react with fluids to form serpentinites. The reacting fluids
can be cold seawater or hot (350 degrees Celsius) hydrothermal fluids derived
from seawater and driven by heat generated by intrusions of basaltic magma at
depth. The hydration of peridotite to form serpentinite generates hydrogen,
which supports microbial communities around hydrothermal vents at the seafloor.
These seafloor hydrothermal environments are likely sites for the origin of life
on Earth and the microbial communities found there are analogues for life on
other planets. Major questions remain, however, about the extent of this
subsurface biosphere, such as how far away from seafloor vents this biosphere
extends and how far microbes live below the seafloor. In addition to life, metal
deposits form where hot hydrothermal fluids vent into the ocean from peridotite
on the seafloor. Although these deposits and their associated fluids are well
studied, our understanding of the fluid flow pathways in underlying basement and
the controls on fluid penetration and serpentinization of the host peridotite
and their relationship to microbial activity in the subsurface is not. This
research examines the geochemistry of fluid penetration and reaction with
peridotite to form serpentinite and the impact of the resulting water-rock
interactions on the deep biosphere. Two major goals of the project are: (1)
understanding the relative roles of cold seawater versus hot hydrothermal fluids
that circulate through the seafloor and (2) determining the controls on the
subsurface biosphere and its lateral and depth extent in seafloor peridotites.
Broader impacts of the work include improving understanding of the generation of
marine massive sulfide ore deposits and processes of interest to the geothermal
energy industry. The work also includes integration of research and education by
training a student who is interested in a career in the mining industry.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research involves understanding fluid pathways,
serpentinization, and the distribution and extent of microbial sulfate reduction
in the subsurface of seafloor ultramafic-hosted hydrothermal systems. Work
involves an intensive field and laboratory study of an analog of these seafloor
systems that is exposed in an ophiolite in the northern Apennines (Italy). The
effects of hydrothermal fluids in the rocks will be distinguished from those of
seawater through analyses of major and trace elements and sulfur isotopes.
Combined with petrography, micro-scale spot analyses by laser inductively
coupled mass spectrometry of trace elements in serpentine, and the sulfur
isotope compositions of individual sulfide grains, it will be possible to map
the fluid flow pathways; determine how they developed; and understand how
microbial processes affect and/or catalyze reactions in high-temperature
ultramafic-hosted seafloor hydrothermal systems. Bulk rock analyses will enable
evaluation of the overall effects of hydrothermal fluids and seawater and of
microbial sulfate reduction in the basement.