* 1536346
* Redox Cycling of Phosphorus in the Western North Atlantic Ocean
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2018
* Benjamin Van Mooy, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 09/30/2018
* USD 689,502.00

Redox Cycling of Phosphorus in the Western North Atlantic
Ocean&lt;br/&gt;Benjamin Van Mooy&lt;br/&gt;ID:
1536346&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding controls on the growth of plankton in
the upper ocean, which plays an essential role in the sequestration of carbon
dioxide, is an important endeavor for chemical oceanography. Phosphorus is an
essential element for marine plankton, and has been a research focus of chemical
oceanography for nearly a century. Yet, phosphorus redox cycling rates are
almost completely unknown throughout the ocean, and the specific molecular
identities of the phosphonates, a form of phosphate, in seawater have defied
elucidation. This project will explore and refine entirely new pathways for the
biological cycling of phosphorus. This project will support teaching and
learning by funding the PhD research of a graduate student, and through the
continuation of conducting K-12 classroom laboratory modules and hosting 6-8th
grade science fair participants in the investigator's
lab.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Phosphorus has never been viewed by oceanographers as
an element that actively undergoes chemical redox reactions in the water column,
and it was believed to occur only in the +5 valence state, in compounds such as
phosphate. However, over the last 17 years, numerous lines of geochemical and
genomic information have emerged to show that phosphorus in the +3 valence state
(P(+3)), particularly dissolved phosphonate compounds, may play a very important
role within open ocean planktonic communities. This is particularly true in
oligotrophic gyres such as the Sargasso Sea, where growth of phytoplankton can
be limited by the scarcity of phosphate. To better understand these new data,
the investigators will design and execute a research program that spans at-sea
chemical oceanographic experimentation, state-of-the-art chromatography and mass
spectrometry, and novel organic synthesis of 33P-labeled P(+3) compounds.
Specifically, they will answer questions about rates of production and
consumption of low molecular weight P(+3) compounds, the impact of phosphate
availability on the production and consumption of P(+3) compounds, and the
groups of phytoplankton that utilize low molecular weight P(+3) compounds.
Results of this project have the potential to contribute to the transformation
of our understanding of the marine phosphorus cycle.