* 1536928
* Soc Developmental Biology Annual Meetings 2015-2017
* BIO,IOS
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2018
* Robb Krumlauf, Society For Developmental Biol
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Krieg
* 09/30/2018
* USD 90,000.00

There is a long-standing scientific interest in the field of developmental
biology, as development is a central biological problem, as well as an
increasing public interest in issues such as evolution, stem cells and
regenerative biology, highlighting the importance of the discipline both in
terms of scientific advancement and public education. The Society for
Developmental Biology (SDB) annual meetings provide a forum to address these
broader aspects, and to foster young scientists coming into the field,
especially the under-represented and underserved populations. The scientific
sessions contribute to furthering our understanding of the processes used by a
single fertilized cell to reach adult form with many cell types, in all
organisms. The education sessions offer opportunities for bench researchers to
find out about more effective ways to teach and mentor the next generation. The
meetings also provide an informed discussion forum on topics that are relevant
to establishing national policies for research and public understanding of
science. The advances in developmental biology have contributed to beneficial
practices in agriculture and animal (including human) health, to understanding
evolution and preservation of species, and to the well-being of our planet and
its biodiversity.

The SDB is the largest society devoted to the field of developmental biology,
with over 2,000 members worldwide, including undergraduate and graduate
students, postdoctoral fellows, junior and established investigators, many of
whom hold NSF grants or fellowships. Participants present their latest, mostly
unpublished findings at these annual meetings. Thus, the meeting contributes to
the advancement of knowledge in the discipline and cross-fertilization of ideas.
In recent years, other national societies have joined SDB in our annual
meetings, confirming the leadership SDB has in the field worldwide. The proposed
meetings will continue the tradition of mixing poster presentations, plenary and
concurrent sessions, a postdoctoral symposium, an education symposium and
workshops on new technologies, publishing, teaching and outreach, as well as on
current issues. In all sessions, a special effort is made to have a diversity of
speakers in terms of: model organisms, experimental approaches, career stages,
gender and racial/ethnic background. The 2015 meeting, to be held in Snowbird,
Utah, will cover a variety of themes and approaches, including: Epigenetic
Mechanisms of Development; Imaging: Seeing is Believing; Gene Networks; Tissue
Patterning/ Organogenesis; Evo-Devo Mechanisms; Quantitative Biology;
Biomechanical Influences in Development; Signal Integration and Timing in
Development; Growth and Metabolism.