* 1536454
* Collaborative Research: An Ocean Tale of Two Climates: Modern and Last Glacial Maximum
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2018
* Malte Jansen, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 09/30/2018
* USD 281,601.00

The paleoclimate record shows that the climatic changes between glacial and
interglacial periods were associated with large swings in atmospheric carbon
dioxide concentrations. It is reasonably well established that the ocean was a
major sink for the carbon lost by the atmosphere during the cold glacial spells.
Furthermore observations suggest that the ocean water masses underwent major
rearrangements during these periods. The chain of events by which the ocean
state and circulation changed, however, is still unknown and represents a
roadblock in our understanding of the great redistributions of carbon that
occurred during glacial cycles. Our lack of a quantitative understanding of the
changes in ocean circulation and atmospheric carbon dioxide during glacial
climates represents a serious deficiency in our understanding of the climate
system and shakes our confidence in projections of future climate. The goal of
our project is to make progress towards a more quantitative understanding of
glacial climates by combining emerging theories of the deep ocean circulation
and observations. The project will also provide ideal training for a student and
a postdoc.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project attempts to draw a quantitative
picture of the differences in the ocean state and circulation between the
present and the Last Glacial Maximum, which is consistent both with our current
theoretical understanding of the deep ocean circulation, as well as with
available modern and paleo observations. To achieve this goal, the scientists
will use a combination of forward and inverse modeling. The forward models will
develop a mechanistic understanding of the circulation, with a focus on the
changes between the present and the Last Glacial Maximum, while the inverse
models will test the consistency of the emerging picture with observations. The
study builds on a hypothesis that argues that the permanent (summer) sea ice
extent around Antarctica exerts a strong control on the Southern Ocean buoyancy
fluxes and in turn on the deep ocean circulation. This qualitative hypothesis
will be developed into a quantitative "diagnostic theory" of the deep ocean
circulation and carbon storage during the Last Glacial Maximum. The research has
three main parts: (1) Improving the mechanistic understanding of the present-day
deep ocean circulation and stratification, (2) Analyzing the impact of increased
permanent sea ice extent on the deep circulation while establishing the
consistency of the emerging picture with available observational data. (3)
Investigating the connection between the modified ocean
circulation/stratification and the changes in ocean carbon storage.