* 1536551
* Collaborative Research: Laboratory Investigations of Particle-Organic Vapor Interactions: Effects on Particle Formation, Growth, and Properties
* GEO,AGS
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2018
* Jesse Kroll, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 06/30/2018
* USD 119,945.00

This project is a collaborative effort among four institutions to improve
understanding of the fundamental life cycle of atmospheric aerosol. The effort
focuses on processes for the formation of very small particles in the atmosphere
over a range of conditions. The goal of the proposed studies is to facilitate
more accurate predictions of the influence of these particles on climate by
conducting laboratory measurements that reduce uncertainties related to modeling
their formation, growth and atmospherically important
properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Together the project team has extensive
capabilities that include the ability to produce primary aerosol particles such
as soot and secondary organic aerosol (SOA), measure and control the particle
size and mass distributions, control oxidative aging of such particles via
hydroxyl radical and ozone reactions over equivalent atmospheric lifetimes
ranging from hours to multiple days, control production of both inorganic and
organic particle coatings, measure the chemical composition of gas- and
condensed-phase organic compounds, measure the cloud condensation nuclei (CCN)
activity of generated particles, and measure particle optical
properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed three-year laboratory research
program will provide detailed information on relevant physiochemical properties
of SOA as a function of oxidative processing, including interactions of gas-
phase precursors with the condensed SOA. The SOA particles will be generated in
conventional environmental chambers as well as in a more recently developed flow
reactor that can produce SOA with high throughput over a wide range of simulated
atmospheric conditions. The flow reactor enables controlled hydroxyl radical
(OH) oxidation of atmospherically relevant gas phase and condensed-phase organic
compounds. The residence time in the reactor is about two orders of magnitude
shorter (minutes rather than days) and the OH concentration is two to three
orders of magnitude higher than is attainable in environmental chambers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will provide a more reliable database for
modeling and predicting the role of aerosols in climate change and lead to a
detailed understanding of how the chemical, physical and optical properties of
carbonaceous aerosols are interconnected and how they change as a function of
oxidative aging.