* 1536208
* I-Corps Teams: A Cyber Infrastructure Medical Visual Interface Technology
* TIP,TI
* 04/15/2015,09/30/2016
* Luciano Castillo, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 09/30/2016
* USD 50,000.00

Patients visiting health care providers have to repeat their medical history
several times and have to wait for extended periods of time before they get
service even if their records are stored in electronic medical records (EMR). In
the case of elderly or disabled patients, or trauma patients; unless they have
their medication written, it is hard to know about all their prescriptions and
preexisting conditions. For patients facing trauma the medical care providers do
not know the existing conditions, allergies of the patient or other underline
critical conditions e.g. diabetes, cancer etc. In current EMR, it is difficult
to grasp all the crucial issues in a short time (3-5 minutes. While most states
require electronic communication of this data to their state repositories, the
communication between the pre-hospital environment remains a significant
challenge. There are currently no other standard solutions in the market that
provide effective integration of existing data within the hospital environment
and different institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This team has developed the
proof of concept of the Cyber Infrastructure Medical Visual Interface (CI-MVI)
technology that would directly reduce the response time during clinical visit,
and save lives of trauma patients. The Cyber Infrastructure Medical Visual
Interface (CI-MVI) is a tool that enables health care providers with rapidly
comprehensible, easy to read/access (via touch screen), crucial health
parameters so that treatment plans could be designed in a timely manner.
Repetitive processes, especially with regards to information collection have
been identified and tasked to the cyber infrastructure, while providing an
interactive graphical visual interface (GUI) to the health care providers.
Ultimately the goal is to form an extensive cloud database that is accessible
from any smart phone, I-Pad or computers. The CI-MVI will be further augmented
with the capability of communicating with various health monitoring systems
including Electronic Medical Records (EMR) to give the instantaneous state of
health including locations outside of the USA since information is stored and
accessed on a cloud based computing system.