* 1536554
* Sea-surface dynamics diagnosed from satellite data and coupled models
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Thomas Haine, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 08/31/2019
* USD 434,412.00

A central question in oceanography and climate dynamics concerns the evolution
of surface anomalies of a wide range of properties. Sea surface temperature
anomalies regulate the exchange of heat between the upper ocean and the
atmosphere, profoundly influencing ocean circulation, weather, the seasonal
cycle, low-frequency climate variability, and climate change. In high latitudes,
sea surface salinity anomalies have been associated with such variability, and
with variability in ecosystems. It is unclear how to interpret the development
and propagation of sea surface temperature anomalies, however, which are often
analyzed in terms of spatiotemporally-lagged correlations. This ambiguity makes
it difficult to constrain the underlying mechanisms, both in observations and in
models. The main goal of this project is to diagnose, quantify, and understand
the mechanisms controlling the propagation of ocean surface anomalies in
temperature and salinity. This study will train one graduate student and its
results will be disseminated broadly to scientists and the general
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project applies a new framework developed by
the investigators to understand how and why surface anomalies propagate and
evolve. In particular, this new method to infers sea surface temperature
transport fields greatly improves on earlier approaches by decomposing sea
surface temperature evolution into advective, diffusive and relaxation
components. Preliminary results applying this new method to historical North
Atlantic sea surface temperature data and coupled climate model output motivate
this study. The researchers intend to continue the sea surface temperature
analysis to quantify anomaly dynamics using global observations, especially
satellite imagery, as well as numerical models. The new framework also applies
to other surface property fields, such as sea surface salinity. Three questions
emerge from this work: Why do sea surface temperature anomalies apparently
propagate at different speeds to the underlying currents? Why do sea surface
temperature and sea surface salinity anomalies behave differently? and What
determines the variations in the lateral diffusivity inferred from them? The
researchers will use a hierarchy of models, including coupled climate models, to
identify the mechanisms controlling anomaly evolution in these fields.