* 1536076
* Support for Participation in the 2015 Canadian-American-Mexican Gradudate Student Physics Conference in Oaxaca, Mexico, September 10-12, 2015.
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2016
* Amy Flatten, American Physical Society
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 06/30/2016
* USD 33,820.00

This award provides support to the American Physical Society (APS) for
conference planning and student travel to participate in the joint Canadian, US,
and Mexican physical societies' graduate student conference (CAM2015), to be
hosted in Oaxaca, Mexico on September 10-12, 2015. By bringing together
scientists and students in an informal setting, the conference will enable
students to explore and discuss career options available to young physicists.
Through special topical and technical sessions, students will have the
opportunity to gain a broader view of physics beyond their own classrooms and
research laboratories. The meeting will generate scientific exchange among the
student participants, promote international collaborations among young
scientists within the North American continent, expose graduate students to sub-
disciplines in physics beyond their individual research areas, and promote
interdisciplinary research within the sub-disciplines. The meeting's
organization is carried out by the students. Overall, it will provide excellent
training for the next generation of researchers in the
U.S.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scientific program will include plenary talks by
invited scientists in physics sub-disciplines such as Quantum Computing,
Particle and Accelerator Physics, Theoretical Physics, Earth and Atmospheric
Physics, Atomic/Molecular Physics and Material Physics. The plenary sessions
will be followed by contributed talks from the students. A student poster
session will round out the scientific program. All student participants will
present their research in either a contributed talk or poster session.