* 1536450
* Collaborative Research: Energetically consistent, resolution aware, parameterization of meso-scale eddies in the ocean
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2015,06/30/2020
* Malte Jansen, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 06/30/2020
* USD 329,821.00

The aim of this project is to develop a framework to parameterize eddy effects,
which can be applied at both high and low model resolutions. While modeling
groups put significant effort into increasing the spatial resolution of ocean
climate models, longer-term global climate simulations are only starting to
enter the "eddy-permitting" regime. Many idealized studies, as well as
paleoclimate simulations, will continue to rely on models with even coarser
resolutions for the foreseeable future. Adequate parameterizations representing
sub-grid eddy effects at both "non-eddying" and "eddy-permitting" resolutions
are thus crucial for our ability to produce adequate ocean climate simulations.
Moreover, idealized modeling studies, performed in this project, will provide
valuable insight about properties of mesoscale eddies and the turbulent energy
cycle. This work further provides valuable training for an undergraduate intern,
a graduate student and a postdoctoral researcher. They will be exposed to the
theory of ocean turbulence, numerical model development and simulation, as well
as analysis of big data sets, including both numerical model output and
observational data. Finally, the project supports an early career PI, who is
(re-)establishing physical oceanography research and education at The University
of Chicago.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To achieve a broadly applicable
parameterization, this study will make use of an explicit budget for the sub-
grid eddy kinetic energy, which combines ideas of Eden and Greatbatch (2008) and
Jansen and Held (2014). This allows for a closure of sub-grid eddy effects that
is consistent with the current understanding of the turbulent eddy energy cycle,
while being simple and general enough to be readily implemented in a range of
ocean climate models without adding significant computational cost. The sub-grid
scales exchange energy with the resolved flow via parameterizations of
baroclinic instability, as well as the turbulent cascade of kinetic energy and
enstrophy. As discussed in Jansen and Held (2014), an adequate representation of
the turbulent energy and enstrophy cascade requires the inclusion of energy
"backscatter" from the subgrid-scales to the resolved flow, which so far has
never been included in a realistic ocean model. This research is organized along
three main thrusts: (1) Develop an EKE-budget-based eddy parameterization for
non-eddying models, where baroclinic instability remains entirely unresolved.
(2) Develop an EKE-budget-based eddy parameterization for "eddy-permitting"
resolutions, where reasonable eddy-like disturbances can be simulated
explicitly, but the resolution remains insufficient to fully resolve mesoscale
eddies. (3) Combine the two limit cases into a generalized framework, which is
applicable over a wide range of resolutions. The last step is crucial in light
of the fact that models of a given resolution may be "eddy-permitting" in some
parts of the ocean, while they are "non-eddying" in other parts of the ocean
(Hallberg, 2013). The EKE-budget based approach naturally offers itself to the
formulation of a parameterization that can adequately transition between these
two regimes. The project goal will be achieved using a hierarchy of models,
ranging from idealized process studies, to realistic global ocean models. This
hierarchy will allow the team to develop a parameterization that is based in a
fundamental understanding of the relevant physical processes, while also being
applicable in complex state-of-the-art climate models. Success will be gauged by
comparing the idealized numerical simulations to much higher resolution
reference simulations, and ultimately by showing the global ocean models'
improved ability to reproduce ocean observations.