* 1536444
* Optimal Design of Biomarker-Based Screening Strategies for Early Detection of Chronic Diseases
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* John Wei, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 08/31/2018
* USD 205,000.00

Chronic diseases are the leading cause of death in the United States. Early
detection of diseases like cancer can extend life and improve quality of life as
well as reduce cost to health systems, freeing resources for other purposes.
Recent discoveries of many new biomarkers are helping physicians identify early
signs of chronic diseases, such as cancer. At the same time, these advances have
made clinical decision making difficult because the available tests are not 100
percent reliable and sometimes cause false positive or false negative results.
False positives lead to anxiety and unnecessary referral of patients for
expensive and invasive tests, such as biopsies and radiological imaging; false
negatives cause a disease to go undetected and potentially progress to a life
threatening stage. Since no single biomarker on its own is considered
satisfactory, attention is turning to ways to combine biomarkers into composite
tests with better predictive characteristics. This project will develop
mathematical models for investigating which tests to use, when to use them, and
how to combine them to screen for diseases in a way that balances the benefits
of early detection with the harms of false negative test results.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The aim of this project is to create stochastic programming models
and partially observable Markov decision processes that integrate screening,
diagnosis, and treatment decisions over the complete lifecycle of a chronic
disease to optimize population screening. New data-driven models will be created
for optimal design of (a) one-time composite screening tests; (b) personalized
dynamic protocols for screening over a patient's lifetime to optimally balance
the competing goals of early disease detection and minimal cost and harm from
screening. These problems are challenging because of their stochastic and
combinatorial nature, the partially observable nature of early stage chronic
diseases, and the fact that there are multiple stakeholders (patients,
physicians, insurers) and therefore multiple criteria. Theoretical properties
that provide insight into optimal screening strategies will be analyzed and used
to design efficient algorithms and approximation methods for solving these
problems using a combination of stochastic optimization and machine learning.
The discoveries from this project will be used to investigate the optimal design
of screening strategies that weigh the benefits of early detection with the
potential harms of screening. Finally, these models will be used to determine
ideal characteristics of new biomarkers that make them worthy of costly clinical
investigation.