* 1536747
* Collaborative Research: Numerical Modeling of the Internal-Wave Cascade and Submesoscale Lateral Dispersion in the Ocean
* GEO,OCE
* 12/01/2015,11/30/2020
* Marie-Pascale Lelong, NorthWest Research Associates, Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 11/30/2020
* USD 658,990.00

Lateral stirring is among the fundamental processes, along with advection and
diapycnal (vertical) mixing that determines the distribution and fate of water-
mass properties, nutrients and dissolved gases in the ocean. Ocean general
circulation models (OGCMs) resolve stirring on scales larger than ~30 km, and
regional models on scales ~1 km, but isopycnal (lateral) stirring by
submesoscale (1 to 10 km) and finescale (10 m to 1 km) processes must be
parameterized. Tracer-release experiments consistently find isopycnal
diffusivities at scales of 1-10 km to be an order of magnitude larger than
predictions for internal-wave shear dispersion. This project will provide a more
complete and accurate assessment of the roles of internal waves and vortical
mode in lateral stirring at the submesoscale of order 10 m to 10 km), and the
cascade of energy to dissipative vertical scales, to resolve this paradox.
Internal waves and vortical mode are difficult to distinguish observationally.
However, judicious use of a numerical model can tease apart their influences by
isolating different physics. A major advantage of the approach of this project
is that all of the above processes/dynamics can be explored in the context of a
single model, allowing us to seamlessly explore the internal-wave cascade and
lateral dispersion by the different mechanisms across a wide range of parameter
regimes and forcing conditions. The proposed simulations will elucidate the
underlying physics and inform our understanding of how these processes work in
the ocean so as to provide an order-one parameterization of submesoscale
isopycnal diffusivities for OGCMs. Parameterizations developed in this study
will be made available through peer-reviewed publications and conference
presentations. Two graduate students will be trained in high resolution
numerical modeling and data analysis techniques. A public project website will
also be maintained, with initial conditions and parameters for our simulations
archived and shared on request with other investigators interested in
collaboration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed approach will use a Boussinesq
pseudo-spectral model to investigate lateral dispersion and the internal-wave
energy cascade. Specific goals are to determine the roles of (1) wave/wave and
wave/vortex interactions in the internal-wave cascade to small vertical scales
and turbulence production, (2) wave/wave and wave/vortex de-phasing of the
internal wave field in isopycnal stirring, (3) turbulent intermittency in
internal-wave shear dispersion, and (4) vortical-mode shear dispersion and
stirring. Model results will also be used to examine (5) the physics of the
finescale roll-off and (6) the statistics of unstable shear events (Richardson
number less than a quarter). Simulations with and without finescale potential
vorticity production by internal-wave breaking will be used to isolate the roles
of the vortical-mode inverse cascade. Passive tracers subject to diapycnal
mixing and non-diffusive Lagrangian particles will be used to distinguish
between shear dispersion and stirring. The simulations will be run with varying
buoyancy frequency, Coriolis frequency, internal-wave spectral energy level and
frequency spectral shapes to explore fundamental parameter dependences of the
cascade, finescale roll-off, Richardson Number statistics, diapycnal diffusion
and isopycnal diffusion. First-order submesoscale horizontal diffusivities for
OGCMs and regional models will result. Different forcings (surface wind, tidal)
for maintaining the internal-wave field in a statistically steady state will be
tested. Profiling float and dye data collected in the Sargasso Sea during summer
will be used to guide model initialization and assess the realism of the
results. Where possible, differences in modelled dispersion characteristics will
be identified and used to identify stirring mechanisms in the observational data
sets.