* 1536188
* Optimizing the Control of Powered Prostheses with the Human Body in the Loop
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Deanna Gates, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Landers
* 08/31/2019
* USD 358,245.00

State-of-the-art lower-limb prostheses are generally passive devices that do not
provide any active power to their user. As a consequence, people with
amputations must expend substantially more energy when walking. Recent advances
in prostheses have addressed these shortcomings by including batteries and
motors to provide active power. Unlike traditional prostheses, the software of
these active devices needs to be "tuned" to each person. This project will
investigate ways to improve this tuning process and thus enhance the performance
of people using powered prostheses. To this end, the study team will
systematically change device settings while measuring the energy needed to walk
and the symmetry of the resulting walking motion. Additionally, the researchers
will investigate the use of a computer program that will automate this process.
That is, the computer will take repeated measurements of walking performance and
will automatically change device settings until optimal values are determined.
All this happens while the user is walking with the prosthesis. The result can
positively affect the lives of about 1.6 million people that are living with
limb loss. With a well working powered prosthesis, amputees can walk longer and
in a more natural fashion. This may also have secondary health benefits, such as
a smaller risk of heart disease, or a reduction in
pain.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project establishes objectivity in the
determination of device settings for powered prostheses. It will carefully
quantify the influence of controller parameters, such as power magnitude and the
time at which power is supplied, onto the performance of powered prostheses. It
will determine measures of metabolic effort, muscle activity, kinematics,
kinetics, and subjective feedback. All studies will be conducted with
individuals with transtibial amputation. In addition, the researchers will
investigate the potential of an optimization algorithm that automatically finds
controller parameters through the minimization of metabolic effort. To achieve
this in real time with the human body being "in the loop," the researchers will
investigate advanced methods for signal processing and optimization. One of the
key innovations in this context is to explicitly take into account the metabolic
dynamics of each individual subject. This allows making use of all the metabolic
measurements -- even those taken before steady-state is reached. This technique
greatly accelerates the process of indirect calorimetry and enables the
automated tuning process. From the result, one will be able to determine how to
appropriately identify optimal parameter settings of powered prostheses and how
much improvement they provide compared to manual tuning.