* 1536045
* Collaborative research: Deep eastern ocean boundary currents from local submesoscale potential vorticity dynamics to global climate implications
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Kevin Speer, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 08/31/2020
* USD 334,826.00

Evidence for substantial deep eastern boundary currents emerges repeatedly from
observational studies in all southern hemisphere ocean basins. The core of these
poleward flows carries a significant component of the meridional overturning
circulation. These deep poleward flows occur in some areas well beneath
upwelling systems characterized by an equatorward surface current and a poleward
undercurrent. These flows affect the Southern Ocean water mass configuration and
are an important part of the deep general circulation. Yet their dynamics are
not well understood, and they are either poorly represented or not represented
at all in climate models. This study will be the first attempt to understand the
dynamics of deep eastern boundary currents and their consequences to climate
simulation and projections. The project includes training of two graduate
students, one postdoctoral researcher, and outreach to the public via the World
Wide Web.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project studies deep eastern boundary
currents using an analysis of varied observations, a Bayesian inverse model, and
a high resolution regional ocean model. The high resolution ocean model can
resolve mesoscale and submesoscale eddy processes that may participate in the
potential vorticity dynamics of these deep boundary currents. The results of the
inverse model and high resolution regional ocean model will be used to develop
an idealized theoretical model and understanding of deep eastern boundary
currents. The proposed study will also examine the simulation of deep eastern
boundary currents in global coupled models, and the consequences of their poor
simulation on the climate models? large scale dynamics and future climate
projections. While deep eastern boundary currents are completely distinct from
upper-ocean undercurrents in upwelling systems, this study will benefit from
work done on such undercurrents, helping identify relevant dynamical processes.
These include: beta effect, wind curl, bottom slope, submesoscale eddies
generating and dissipating Rossby waves, eddy-topography interactions, up-
gradient eddy momentum fluxes, potential vorticity inflow conditions, potential
vorticity transport and mixing by submesoscale eddies and by vertical mixing
processes, submesoscale and quasi-geostrophic mesoscale eddy effects on the deep
stratification, and interior topography-related zonal ocean flows feeding deep
eastern boundary currents.