* 1536671
* Student Support: 2015 Annual International Solid Freeform Fabrication Symposium; 2015 Annual International Solid Freeform Fabrication Symposium; Austin, Texas; August 10-12, 2015
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2016
* David Bourell, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Steve Schmid
* 04/30/2016
* USD 24,400.00

The objective of this award is to enhance student participation in the 2015
Solid Freeform Fabrication Symposium by providing student support for the
meeting. The conference theme is research in additive manufacturing. Additive
manufacturing, known colloquially as "3D Printing", has in the last few years
become a topic of interest nationally and internationally. It has become
recognized as a significant advanced manufacturing technology that will create
new industries and concomitant domestic jobs for an educated workforce. The 2015
Solid Freeform Fabrication Symposium will be held at the AT&amp;T Executive
Education and Conference Center on the campus of The University of Texas at
Austin from August 10 to12, 2015. It is anticipated that 220 presentations will
be made, 192 oral presentations and 28 poster presentations. Students will have
full access to participation in the general organized oral presentations as well
as the poster event. The strong international participation will provide
domestic participants an excellent opportunity to gain valuable information on
research in the field. There is ample time allotted for informal interactions of
world-class researchers and students in formal meeting settings and also in
informal social events during the meeting. Information on the Solid Freeform
Fabrication Symposium, as well as the full conference proceedings, will be made
available through the worldwide web at http://sffsymposium.engr.utexas.edu/.
Students will have the opportunity to present their work in a world-class
setting and will network with international leading senior researchers and other
students in their field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This NSF award is to provide
partial participant support for up to 80 domestic students to attend the
meeting. Selection of students will be made by the chair of the conference
organizing committee based on the following criteria: domestic student status,
underrepresented groups, engagement in additive manufacturing, co-author or
presenter on an oral presentation or poster. Each student awardee will pay a
reduced registration fee, approximately $300 less than the cost of
participation. If fewer than 80 domestic students attend the meeting in 2015, a
one-year, no-cost extension will be requested with the intent to use the
residual funds for identical student support for the 2016 Solid Freeform
Fabrication Symposium.