* 1536800
* Collaborative Research: Understanding the Formation and Separation of Nanoscale Contacts
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Tevis Jacobs, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Alexis Lewis
* 08/31/2019
* USD 318,834.00

As the size of electronic devices shrinks to the nanometer scale, new
technologies are required to manufacture and characterize them. Many of these
new approaches rely on a nano-sized stylus selectively making contact with a
surface, and then modifying or measuring the contacted region. The function,
reliability, and precision of these techniques are determined by the properties
of the contact, especially the adhesion force, the area of contact, and the
deformation of the underlying material. This award supports fundamental research
to understand the physics, chemistry, and materials science that govern the
formation and separation of contacts at these length scales. The new insights
into nanoscale contacts will guide the optimization of existing techniques and
the development of novel approaches, helping to keep the U.S. at the forefront
of advanced manufacturing and technology. The investigation is being conducted
by an interdisciplinary team of researchers, and incorporates specific programs
to include participation by people from underrepresented groups.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nanocontact behavior will be investigated for chemically
and structurally diverse materials, with scientific and technological relevance.
Nanocontact experiments will be conducted with in situ transmission electron
microscopy that will provide nanonewton force resolution and Angstrom-scale
structural information. The experiments will be complemented by molecular
dynamics simulations of the same nanocontacts that provide atomic-scale detail
about phenomena occurring within the materials and inside the perimeter of the
contact, which cannot be viewed directly in experiment. These techniques will be
used to characterize adhesion, deformation under load, and load-dependent
contact area for a variety of contacts. Taken together, the data will enable
evaluation of competing hypotheses that describe nanoscale contact. These
insights will have direct impact on probe-based nanomanufacturing and on probe-
based microscopy, both of which require precise understanding and control of the
tip/sample contact. More generally, the in situ nanoscale testing in this
program will yield insights that are relevant to larger-scale applications in
which interfaces between materials consist of many nanoscale asperity contacts.