* 1536198
* Probabilistic Assessment of Tsunami Forces on Coastal Structures
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Randall LeVeque, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 08/31/2019
* USD 299,995.00

In the last decade, tsunamis have caused hundreds of thousands of deaths and
hundreds of billions of dollars in damage to coastal communities around the
world. While a major tsunami has not impacted the United States in some time,
there is significant risk to the Pacific Coast and recent storm surge events
have shown a potential for damage to domestic infrastructure similar to what was
seen in East Asia and the Pacific. Interest in tsunami load predictions for
structural design has grown, but it is difficult to develop models that
accurately predict the tsunami load response of an individual structure, much
less the tsunami risk for multiple structures within a specific region. The
framework presented here is designed to improve the safety and sustainability of
coastal structures and, consequently, improve tsunami hazard assessments, post-
event response, and recovery efforts. Ultimately, this work will result in safer
communities through increased public awareness of the risks posed by these types
of hazards and enhanced tools to develop resilient infrastructure systems.

Increased computing power has prompted the development of novel numerical
approaches to tsunami-structure interaction modeling tailored to capture
specific physical phenomena with high-levels of resolution and accuracy,
including coupled multiphysics models to simulate complex system interactions.
If community-specific assessments of structural vulnerabilities are to be
achieved, they must be based on a fundamental understanding of these
interactions and an ability to efficiently model the associated physical
processes in a probabilistic framework that accounts for the uncertain nature of
these events. The primary goals of this research project are to establish an
open-source modeling framework where 3D computational fluid dynamics solvers can
be used efficiently to inform the development of load-prediction capabilities
for existing, widely used inundation models and to develop a probabilistic
framework for predicting the fluid loading and structural response of coastal
structures at a community level. The research team will validate this framework
against existing experimental data, assess the effects of bathymetry and
community layout on flow, refine the models to include force predictions, and
extend probabilistic tsunami hazard assessment methods to include fluid loading
criteria. This work will provide users both the framework and the software tools
necessary to develop site-specific numerical models to increase the safety and
sustainability of coastal structure by improving our understanding of the
probabilistic risk posed by tsunami events on these structures.