* 1536670
* Collaborative Research: Emergency Funding for Repair of the Bermuda Institute of Ocean Sciences Tudor Hill Marine Atmospheric Observatory
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2016
* William Keene, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 06/30/2016
* USD 89,428.00

The marine troposphere plays important roles in the global geochemical cycles of
many elements, in the global distribution of organic compounds, nutrients,
microbes and pollutants, and in the global radiation budget. The ability to
observe and sample gases, aerosol and precipitation in the marine boundary layer
is central to providing a better understanding of these processes. By virtue of
its location in the western North Atlantic Ocean, Bermuda has been a key
location for numerous field studies of the marine troposphere. A marine
atmospheric observatory, consisting of a 23-m high atmospheric sampling tower
and site laboratories, was first established at Tudor Hill, Bermuda, in 1987 as
part of the NSF-funded Atmosphere Ocean Chemistry Experiment. NSF support, the
Tudor Hill tower and site laboratories were repaired and refitted in 2003, and
have since been operated and maintained as a community research facility.
Unfortunately, during the passage of Hurricane Gonzalo, a category 2 storm when
it made landfall over Bermuda on 17-18 October 2014, the tower was damaged
beyond repair. This award will enable the tower to be replaced to ensure that
the research activities at the facility will continue.

This project is expected to make significant educational contributions at a
number of levels, including undergraduate education opportunities through the
NSF-funded Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) program at the Bermuda
Institute of Ocean Sciences (BIOS), through other courses taught at BIOS, and by
the inclusion of postgraduate students in external scientific research
activities. The Tudor Hill facility will continue to feature in BIOS public
outreach activities, public lectures, weekly tours, and the annual open-house
day.

The Tudor Hill Atmospheric Observatory is currently funded to operate through to
August, 2017. Through this award, the destroyed tower will be replaced so that
these operations can continue. Presently the facility hosts long-term
measurement activities in support of research and monitoring being conducted by
a number of federal agencies and universities. Additionally, sampling activities
for one NSF-funded project are due to commence later in 2015 and four additional
prospective projects which would make use of the facility are currently awaiting
funding decisions. Since NSF support commenced in 2003, research conducted at
the facility to date has substantively contributed to at least 25 published
peer-reviewed papers and to numerous presentations at US and international
conferences. The facility has also been utilized as a critical mid-oceanic
location for monitoring greenhouse gases, ozone and air column properties
through the activities of NOAA and NASA. Collectively, these efforts have
contributed to a better understanding of the biogeochemical and physical
processes in the marine atmosphere. The continued operation and maintenance of
the Tudor Hill site will facilitate research concerning the chemistry and
physics of the marine troposphere and ocean-atmosphere exchange processes -
topics that are central to international research initiatives such as IGAC,
SOLAS and GEOTRACES. Findings from such studies can be expected to improve
prediction and mitigation of the effects of anticipated future climatic and
environmental change. In a regional context, the Tudor Hill facility will
complement ongoing time-series research in the Sargasso Sea, including
Hydrostation S and the Bermuda Atlantic Time Series Station..