* 1536038
* Student Support to Attend the 2015 Gaseous Electronics Conference October 12-16, 2015 in Honolulu, Hawaii
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2016
* Don Madison, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 08/31/2016
* USD 10,000.00

The Gaseous Electronics Conference (GEC) is an annual topical meeting of the
American Physical Society sponsored under the auspices of the Division of
Atomic, Molecular and Optical Physics. It is the leading international
conference in the science and technology of Low Temperature Plasmas (LTP)
combined with collision physics (CP). The GEC combines aspects of atomic,
molecular, and optical physics with low-temperature plasma physics, electric
discharges, and plasma chemistry, as well as their technological applications.
Fundamental topics addressed at the GEC include atomic and molecular collision
cross sections, plasma diagnostics, ion and electron distribution functions, as
well as kinetic, particle-in-cell (PIC), and fluid plasma modeling. The
conference has been the venue of the first presentations on world leading
developments in investigations of LTP and CP topics including advanced
combustion systems, lighting and lasers, plasma materials processing of
relevance to the semiconductor and photovoltaics industry, and plasma
application in biomedicine. The invited speakers represent the world's leading
scientists in these fields. The future of any field depends upon attracting
bright young people. The GEC has a strong tradition of encouraging and promoting
student participation, and has an enviable reputation of being the first
conference where many of the leading members of the community presented their
first research results as graduate students.

This award will pay partial travel support for 13 PhD students to attend and
present the results of their work at the 68th Annual GEC meeting to be held
Monday, October 12 - Friday, October 16, 2015 in Honolulu, Hawaii. This will be
a joint meeting with the International Conference on Reactive Plasmas normally
held in Japan. Hawaii was chosen as the venue since it is located roughly in the
middle between the US mainland and Japan. These two distinct meetings are
expected to attract more than 600 plasma scientists, collision physicists, and
engineers to the same convention center. This award will provide the opportunity
for PhD students to establish peer to peer collaboration with researchers from
around the world. The GEC, being a moderate size conference, presents an
environment where collaborate research efforts and future endeavors are often
initiated. The students will have the opportunity to observe first-hand the
scientific and cultural diversity of the field, and establish what will
hopefully be career long collaborations with their international counterparts.
The GEC makes a special effort to support graduate students who are women and
underrepresented minorities.