* 1536269
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Environmental Agencies and their Effective Monitoring of the Hydrocarbon Sector
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2015,10/31/2016
* Anthony Bebbington, Clark University
* Standard Grant
* sunil narumalani
* 10/31/2016
* USD 15,721.00

In order to control the risk of severe socioecological impacts related to
hydrocarbon extraction, enforcement of environmental laws on the part of state
agencies is needed. This doctoral dissertation research project will investigate
the role of the state in the governance of natural resource extraction by
examining the practices of environmental law enforcement in the hydrocarbon
sector. The project will contribute to a better understanding of environmental
law implementation across time and space as well as the role of the state in
influencing the socioecological consequences of resource extraction. It will
generate new insights in resource and legal geography by empirically assessing
the complex relationships of environmental law enforcement and the role played
by the state in the extractive sector. The doctoral student will work with
national and regional government agencies, social organizations, and
international nongovernment organizations to disseminate project findings. The
project will inform policy-makers, government officials, academics, and
environmental advocacy groups globally who seek to minimize the negative impacts
of hydrocarbon extraction. As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement
award, this award also will provide support to enable a promising student to
establish a strong independent research career.

The doctoral student will investigate empirically the relationship between
institutional capacity, autonomy and the enforcement of environmental laws
related to the hydrocarbon sector by taking into account the interplay among the
different actors and agencies involved. She will address three core questions:
(1) How have increased budgets and regulatory competence led to enhanced
autonomy and capacity in the practice of environmental monitoring? (2) What are
the conditions under which such institutional changes have translated into
successful monitoring of the hydrocarbon sector? (3) How do these processes and
patterns vary across space? The student will analyze databases on the
institutional capacity and monitoring as well as conflictive and cooperative
inter-agency relationships within Ecuador. The analyses should yield a better
understanding of the patterns of autonomy, capacity, and monitoring functions of
the state agencies as well as enable a comparison of their effectiveness across
jurisdictional units.