* 1536339
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Black Geographies and Industrial Toxicity in North Carolina
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2015,01/31/2017
* Sara Smith, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Antoinette WinklerPrins
* 01/31/2017
* USD 15,975.00

Across the U.S., Black communities live in environments burdened by toxic
wastes. This research project investigates the relationship between race and
waste in industrialized societies, through a case study of aluminum production
in North Carolina. The study examines how race and waste have allowed aluminum
to become a vital and valuable material in the modern U.S. The investigators
will analyze how racism has shaped work, social life and politics in an aluminum
company town, drawing on the insights and supporting the efforts of impacted
underprivileged residents. This detailed empirical and historical study of a
small town in the American South will contribute theoretical understanding to a
wide range of disciplines, including critical and feminist geopolitics,
historical geography, environmental studies, American Studies, and critical race
studies. Collaborative and arts-based methods will make research accessible and
engage broader audiences in environmental justice education.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In scholarship on toxic exposure and hazardous
environments, race is frequently taken for granted, included as one variable
among many or an unintended by-product of larger structural issues. This
research centralizes structural racism in 20th century capitalism, a period in
which aluminum played a key role in establishing the U.S. as a global military
and economic power. The case study focuses on Badin, North Carolina, one of the
first aluminum smelters in the U.S and a segregated company town that is the
site of a contemporary environmental justice struggle. Using a combination of
archival and ethnographic methods to examine 100 years of Badin?s history
(1915-2015), this research investigates and contributes to scholarship on waste,
structural racism, and environmental justice politics. The investigators examine
multiple wastes in Badin, from the chemical by-products of aluminum smelting and
the unmarked toxic dumps, to the bodies of workers and environmental resources
that are ?wasted? in order to make usable aluminum. They trace how different
actors over the course of Badin?s history negotiated, defined and challenged
what was considered valuable and what was marginalized as waste. The study
explores how segregation and anti-Black racism have impacted the social life and
the physical environment in Badin over time and what it means for affected
communities to build political participation through suffering and illness
caused by toxic exposure. Through participant-observation of Badin community
negotiations to redress contamination, and drawing on interviews with key
stakeholders in regional environmental justice politics, the study examines the
potential for racial and environmental justice in the U.S. today.