* 1536095
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award: Identity Formation Within The Contexts Of Indenture And Slavery
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2015,01/31/2017
* Julia Haines, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 01/31/2017
* USD 21,920.00

Under the European colonial institutions of slavery and indenture, hundreds of
thousands of migrant laborers were displaced across the globe. The expansion of
plantation agriculture and such massive labor migrations were critical to the
development of global economic networks, while on the local level labor
diasporas resulted in the emergence of new creolized cultures. Since major
movements of people across the globe for economic reasons continue today
understanding long term processes involved is of contemporary relevance. This
comparative study contextualizes slave and post-slave experiences within an
indentured labor regime that overlapped and replaced it. Archaeology's material
and spatial nature is well suited to investigate both the daily practices and
experiences of laborers, as well as the larger regional networks of which
plantations were a part. This project will extend the scope of current research
on and among migrant and diaspora populations, considering how choice in
migration and perceptions of one's mobility influence ongoing identity
practices. Engaging with transnational studies will provide a new model for
archaeologists examining such populations, contribute to our understanding of
the historical and material implications of labor migrations, and illuminate
where and how global capitalism developed in the Indian Ocean region. This
research will take place in Bras d'Eau National Park, an 18th-19th-century sugar
plantation on the island of Mauritius. As part of the first large-scale
investigation into an Indian Ocean plantation site, this project will add
tangible heritage value to the Bras d'Eau National Park, and introduce
archaeology to the Mauritian public. Mauritian students studying history and
heritage and park personnel will participate in fieldwork and artifact analysis
as a means to build local infrastructure and knowledge. Such exposure will
increase public scientific literacy and engagement by educating about the
archaeological process, and the potential of archaeological sites on Mauritius
to shed light on hidden aspects of the island's past.

Julia Jong Haines, under supervision of Dr. Adria LaViolette, University of
Virginia, will investigate how enslaved and indentured laborers' materials and
spaces reflect different social organizations and practices and how they changed
over time. Were the daily lives of enslaved (mostly SE African) and indentured
(mostly South Asian) laborers markedly different? What difference did laborers'
homelands make in diaspora cultural practices? How were laborers engaged in
local and global trade and exchange networks, and did they maintain ties to
their homelands? Data and materials collected through archaeological survey,
excavations, and documentary archival and oral historical research will be used
to compare laborers' daily life consumption patterns that indicate foodways,
personal and religious practices, domestic architecture and spatial
arrangements, and participation in domestic and international economies.
Engaging with both well-established creolization models and recent transnational
labor migration studies, this study will determine to what degree different
laborers practiced creolized identities and maintained ties to homelands while
also creating new creolized practices. Untangling the complexities of creation
and expression in daily life among Bras d'Eau's diverse population, this project
will contribute to Mauritian heritage, and comparative archaeologies of diaspora
contexts.