* 1536130
* Conference: From Stars to Massive Stars; University of Florida; April 6-9, 2016
* MPS,AST
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2016
* Jonathan Tan, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* James Neff
* 09/30/2016
* USD 25,000.00

This proposal requests financial support for the international conference "From
Stars to Massive Stars - Connecting our understanding of massive star and star
cluster formation through the universe" to be hosted by the University of
Florida on April 6 - 9, 2016. The funding will provide travel grants for
graduate students and invited speakers. Overall, about 150 participants are
expected. The presentations will be posted on the conference web site, so
results presented at the conference will be immediately available to the wider
astronomical community. As part of the conference program, there will be a
public event, "Starry Night: Birth of the Giants" featuring a few public
lectures by selected conference participants and star
viewing&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This conference will bring together researchers
from star formation, star cluster, massive star, starburst, and Population III
research communities to share recent research results and to motivate future
collaborations and projects that will improve our understanding of these
phenomena. The meeting comes at a time when many exciting results are appearing
from large, high resolution surveys of our Galaxy's star-forming regions along
with detailed follow-up from facilities such as ALMA. With increasing
computational resources and more sophisticated numerical modeling, theoretical
insight is beginning to catch up with these observations. This meeting should
lead to a more complete understanding of galaxy formation and evolution, as well
as the nature of the star forming environments in which most stellar and
planetary systems are created.