* 1536386
* Seafloor Geodesy Using Sidescan Sonar:  Analysis of the NGDC Archive
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* C. David Chadwell, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Candace Major
* 08/31/2018
* USD 200,215.00

The main objective of the project is to develop a method to use existing
multibeam sonars, available on NSF-sponsored research vessels, to measure small
displacements of the seafloor associated with rapid events such as earthquakes
and landslides. The seafloor displacements are measured by comparing the
location of a patch of seafloor surveyed at two times spanning an event. The
published accuracy of this approach is currently tens of meters which severely
limits the utility of the method. The planned work would greatly improve the
accuracy to better than 1 m by collecting data at a slow ship speed and
navigating the repeat track to closely follow the reference track. This order of
magnitude improvement in displacement accuracy would provide a valuable tool for
assessing and understanding large and sometimes-destructive seafloor events.
Broader impacts include improvements to the system software that will be freely
available to others. Funding includes the training of a graduate student in the
methods of high-resolution sonar and seafloor
geodesy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will develop a method to
use existing multibeam sonars, available on NSF-sponsored research vessels, to
measure small displacements of the seafloor associated with rapid events such as
earthquakes and landslides. The seafloor displacements are measured by
differencing the location of a patch of seafloor surveyed at two times spanning
an event. The published accuracy of this approach is currently tens of meters
which severely limits the utility of the method. This work would greatly improve
the accuracy to better than 1 m by collecting data at a slow ship speed and
navigating the repeat track to closely follow the reference track. This order of
magnitude improvement in displacement accuracy would provide a valuable tool for
assessing and understanding large and sometimes-destructive seafloor events. The
proposal addresses one of the eight high-level science questions posed in the
recent National Research Cpuncil Decadal Report (NRC, 2015), i.e., how can risk
be better characterized and the ability to forecast geohazards like mega-
earthquakes, tsunamis, undersea landslides, and volcanic eruptions be improved?
The tools of GPS and InSAR are used to monitor the crustal deformation onshore
of the Cascadia Subduction Zone but most of the locked part of the megathrust
interface lies offshore. While the PI?s method does not have sufficient accuracy
to monitor interseismic motions, it can serve as a pre-event survey of the
surface trace similar to the San Andreas Fault B-4 lidar survey.