* 1536319
* Collaborative Research: Online Hazard Communication in the Terse Regime: Measurement, Modeling, and Dynamics
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Carter Butts, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Walter Peacock
* 08/31/2020
* USD 443,584.00

Social media use by emergency management organizations has surged in the past
five years, reflecting both the increasing use of social media technologies by
the general population and the potential for social media to facilitate key
emergency response tasks. These tasks include diffusion of emergency warnings
and alerts; establishing and maintaining networks of communication among
responding organizations; and collecting information on public needs as the
crisis unfolds. While social media encompasses a diverse array of technologies
and practices, particular interest has converged on the practices and processes
of short text message exchange under time constrained and dynamic conditions - a
communication context known as the "terse regime." Though social media are an
increasingly important fixture of the emergency management landscape, the study
of online communication in response to extreme events is still quite young and
theory development has lagged. This research will fill this gap by advancing our
ability to measure and model the processes governing terse-regime communication
in emergency settings, and by linking these to the tasks required of emergency
management organizations. This research has the potential to fundamentally
transform our understanding of and theoretical orientation to terse hazard
communication processes at a particularly critical time in the disaster life
cycle. Importantly, the findings from this research will provide the empirical
basis necessary to inform future decision making strategies to utilize social
media for warnings and public risk communication across all hazards and will be
transferable to multiple channels; will lead to greater understanding of the
networked patterns of communication among the public; and will enable the
prediction of how organizations themselves will act in a distributed, online
environment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To accomplish this, this research will
develop novel measurement techniques and formal theoretical models for
understanding the dynamics of online communicative behavior in the terse regime.
The research will address the following questions: What governs the allocation
of attention of the online public to specific organizations and messages during
disaster, and how does this affect retransmission of terse messages? What
governs the dynamics of organizations' online terse-regime communications and
how does their behavior evolve in response to hazard stimuli, public behavior,
or their own interactions? How does informal online response vary across time
and space in terms of both message production and message transmission? And how
can we better recognize, detect, and measure online communicative processes in
response to hazard events? To answer these questions, the research will pursue
several linked activities including the collection of a systematic, baseline
controlled longitudinal backbone sample of hazard-related communication from a
prominent micro-blogging site over a three year period, supplemented by
demographic and other information on hazards, online warnings and alerts, and
the impacted populations; collection of detailed data on online communication by
and interactions among organizations involved in emergency response activities
in a major U.S. metropolitan area; development of agent-based and other theory-
driven models for terse message transmission, organizational interaction and
communication behavior, and allocation of attention to official communications
online; and development of novel techniques for measuring the public's online
response to hazard events and for distinguishing between responses generation by
specific social processes or by particular sub-populations.