* 1536171
* The Dark Energy Survey Data Management Operations
* MPS,AST
* 03/15/2016,02/29/2024
* Donald Petravick, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 02/29/2024
* USD 11,266,490.00

1536171/Petravick&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Dark Energy Survey (DES) project is a
major step forward in probing the physical origin of cosmic acceleration and the
nature of dark energy. It consists of two pieces: a deep, multi-band map
covering 5000 square degrees, and a "cosmic movie" of a thirty square-degree
region obtained by revisiting that area at least once every six nights. The
wide-area survey will measure positions, shapes, fluxes, and approximate
(photometric) redshifts for around 300 million galaxies, and the time-domain
survey will discover and measure light curves for several thousand supernovae
and other transients. Data collection began in August 2013 and is planned to run
for five annual, six-month observing seasons. Wide community and public access
to the DES data are a vital component of the DES Data Management system, and
will make the survey valuable in the long run to groups far beyond those
actually carrying out the survey. DES uses the Dark Energy Camera (DECam), a new
wide-field, facility instrument built by the DES collaboration and installed at
the prime focus of the Blanco 4-meter telescope at Cerro Tololo Inter-American
Observatory in Chile.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports continued
operation of the DES Data Management (DM) system at the National Center for
Supercomputing Applications (NCSA) from January 2016 to August 2021, that is,
through the end of DES survey science operations. A fully calibrated and
completely re-reduced public dataset covering the entire survey will be issued
around the end of FY 2020. DESDM processes raw images into science-ready data
products. This involves: (1) nightly processing of DES images, (2) annual
processing of all images at the end of each observing season and release of a
database to the Collaboration; (3) improvements in reduction algorithms, in
close concert with the science working groups; (4) production of calibrated,
single-epoch images released via the Science Archive at the National Optical
Astronomy Observatory; (5) production and dissemination of two major public
releases of data products, one based on the first two DES observing seasons
(DR1), and the second based on the full DES survey
(DR2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to their use for the primary science
goals, the public release of DES images and catalogs stimulates a wide variety
of research by the astronomy community, as well as significant engagement in
citizen science by the general public. These archival research projects will go
well beyond the scientific goals of the DES. DESDM staff are also involved with
outreach to dual language elementary school students in Urbana, and the
promotion of math- and science-oriented careers among middle school girls in
east-central Illinois. DESDM software codes are all open source and their
distribution encourages broader community use.