* 1536302
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Incentives, Livelihoods, and Forest Ecology Related to Payments for Ecosystems Services
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2015,01/31/2018
* Tracey Osborne, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 01/31/2018
* USD 15,994.00

This doctoral dissertation research project will investigate the ability of
conservation payments to achieve their intended goals of both improving
ecosystem health and enhancing rural livelihoods. Payments for ecosystem
services (PES) are thought to influence conservation via payments to those who
own or manage land. Many programs pay for services provided by forests, such as
water filtration or carbon sequestration, or for management practices assumed to
provide these services. Despite the rapid growth of hundreds of PES programs
across the globe, there is little consensus regarding their development or
conservation successes, leading many scholars, conservationists, and development
practitioners to call for interdisciplinary investigations into these
initiatives. This project will provide new insights regarding how PES
initiatives affect forest and agricultural ecosystem health and also the lives
and governance structures of rural participants. The project will test
assumptions that incentivized activities or increased forest cover necessarily
equate to improved ecosystem services and benefits to land users, because it
will employ a quasi-experimental design that compares the actions of
participants and non-participants to examine what might have occurred if PES
interventions had not taken place. Project results will contribute new
information and insights to discussions about the world's largest PES program,
the United Nations' Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and Forest Degradation
(REDD+) initiative, which is being implemented in developing nations across the
globe, because studies of existing PES programs can inform the choices of
potential participants and shape REDD+'s currently contested design. As a
Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award also will provide
support to enable a promising student to establish a strong independent research
career.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The doctoral student will undertake a political
ecological analysis of a PES program by exploring the connections between social
and ecological systems in Guatemala and by linking local practices to
international calls for conservation. She will use a mixed methods approach of
semi-structured interviews, livelihood surveys, and forestry plots to determine
how payments affect who makes forest management decisions; what decisions are
made; benefits and costs associated with different forest uses; and impacts on
ecosystem services. Comparisons across land tenure patterns, socioeconomic
situations, and deforestation rates will illustrate what factors influence the
ability of PES programs to achieve their goals. Focusing on the measureable
ecosystem services of carbon capture and agrobiodiversity in conjunction with
interviews and surveys, the student will examine assumptions that incentivized
activities necessarily equate to improved ecosystem services and benefits to
land users. She also will investigate the capacity for these programs to empower
or dispossess rural communities by changing existing systems of governance and
access to the benefits of land.