* 1536623
* Collaborative Research: Completing North Pond Borehole Experiments to Elucidate the Hydrology of Young, Slow-Spread Crust
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2015,04/30/2016
* Charles Wheat, University of Mississippi
* Standard Grant
* Barbara Ransom
* 04/30/2016
* USD 410,471.00

Seawater circulates through the upper part of the oceanic crust much like
groundwater flows through continental aquifers. However, in the ocean this
seawater circulation, many times heated by buried magmatic bodies, transports
and releases 25% of the Earth's heat. The rate of fluid flow through ocean crust
is estimated to be equal to the amount of water delivered by rivers to the
ocean. Much of what we know of this subseafloor fluid flow comes from studies in
the eastern Pacific Ocean on ocean crust created by medium and fast spreading
mid-ocean ridges. These studies indicate that seawater and its circulation
through the seafloor significantly impact crustal evolution and biogeochemical
cycles in the ocean and affect the biosphere in ways that are just now beginning
to be quantified and understood. To expand this understanding, this research
focuses on fluid flow of seafloor generated by slow spreading ridges, like those
in the Atlantic, Indian and Arctic Oceans because it is significantly different
in structure, mineralogy, and morphology than that formed at fast and
intermediate spreading ridges. This research returns to North Pond, a long-term;
seafloor; fluid flow monitoring site, drilled and instumented by the Ocean
Drilling Program in the Atlantic Ocean. This research site was punctured by
boreholes in which fluid flow and geochemical and biological samplers have been
deployed for a number of years to collect data and samples. It also provides
resources for shipboard and on-shore geochemical and biological analysis.
Broader impacts of the work include sensor and technology development, which
increases infrastructure for science and has commercial applications. It also
provides training for students and the integration of education and research at
three US academic institutions, one of which is an EPSCoR state (Mississippi),
and supports a PI whose gender is under-represented in sciences and engineering.
Public outreach will be carried out in conjunction with the Center for Dark
Energy Biosphere Investigations.

This project completes a long-term biogeochemical and hydrologic study of ridge
flank hydrothermal processes on slow-spreading, 8 million year old crust on the
western flank of the Mid-Atlantic Ridge. The site, North Pond, is an isolated
northeast-trending sediment pond, bounded by undersea mountains that have been
studied since the 1970s. During Integrated Ocean Drilling Program Expedition 336
in 2011 and an expedition five months later (2012), sensors, samplers, and
experiments were deployed in four borehole observatories drilled into the
seafloor that penetrated into volcanic crust, with the purpose of monitoring
changes in hydrologic properties, crustal fluid composition and mineral
alteration, among other objectives. Wellhead sampling in 2012 and 2014 already
revealed changes in crustal fluid compositions; and associated pressure data
confirm that the boreholes are sealed and overpressured, reflecting a change in
the formation as the boreholes recover from drilling disturbances. This research
includes a 13-day oceanographic expedition and use of on-site robotically
operated vehicles to recover downhole instrument packages at North Pond. It will
allow the sampling of crustal fluids, recovering pressure data, and measuring
fluid flow rates. Ship- and shore-based analyses will be used to address
fundamental questions related to the hydrogeology of hydrothermal processes on
slow-spread crust.