* 1536365
* Rip Currents: Coupling and Feedback between Waves, Flows, and Morphology
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Steve Elgar, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 08/31/2018
* USD 542,392.00

Rip currents transport biota, pollutants, and sediment from the shoreline to the
continental shelf, and are a hazard to swimmers with over 100 fatalities per
year. These narrow, transient, offshore-directed jets are difficult to observe,
and thus there are few field tests of hypotheses for their generation,
evolution, three-dimensional structure, and feedback with evolving seafloor
morphology. Rip currents can be driven by alongshore variations in wave
breaking, often associated with gaps in sandbars or depressions in the surf zone
seafloor. Existing field observations near channels dredged across the surf zone
and a numerical model tested with the field observations will be used to
investigate the coupling and feedback between waves, currents, and morphology in
and near rip channels. Although the main focus of the project is on the
fundamental physics of hydrodynamics and morphodynamics near large perturbations
to the surfzone seafloor, the project investigators will be collaborating with
colleagues from federal agencies with more applied interests in nearshore
processes. In particular, the post-doctoral fellow will work closely with the
USGS colleagues who developed the model and other federal agency scientists to
perform model simulations designed to provide results in line with their
missions. The model will be a useful tool for these agencies to predict waves,
flows, and beach changes, including responses to storms and engineering
projects. In addition, the project investigators will collaborate with National
Weather Service and National Ocean Service scientists to improve forecasts and
warnings of rip currents and other hazardous beach
conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In 2012 large shore-perpendicular channels were
dredged in the surf zone with the underlying hypothesis that alongshore changes
in wave breaking over the channels would drive strong rip current circulation
cells (shore-parallel feeder currents converging and turning seaward at an
offshore-directed rip jet). The three-dimensional circulation and evolving
morphology was measured for a range of wave conditions and channel sizes, and
included transitions from rip currents flowing offshore through the channels to
alongshore currents flowing across the channels, and channels that migrated and
filled. The field observations of waves, currents, and bathymetry in the
presence of dredged shore-perpendicular channels will be used to ground truth
and calibrate the numerical model. The numerical model will be used to
investigate the hydrodynamic and morphologic response for a range of wave
forcing and bathymetric perturbations. Although this study will focus on the rip
channels we excavated, the results will be applicable to a wide range of
nearshore systems, with or without complex bathymetric features. Specifically,
the following questions will be addressed: (i) How does the three-dimensional
nearshore circulation respond to different wave conditions and bathymetries, and
what forces control transitions between alongshore flows and rip currents? (ii)
What are the couplings and feedbacks between waves, currents, sediment
transport, and morphological evolution that lead to channel migration, growth,
or decay?