* 1536120
* PipeCyte: An instrument to continuously and autonomously measure algal cells
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2020
* E. Virginia Armbrust, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 08/31/2020
* USD 922,824.00

Microscopic phytoplankton generate about half the oxygen produced on the planet
each year. Flow cytometers are essential oceanographic instruments that rapidly
and accurately measure the abundance, size and fluorescent characteristics of
individual phytoplankton cells. The goal of this project is to develop a
miniaturized, low-power, continuous flow cytometer that operates underwater. The
targeted deployment platform is a standard ship-deployed water sampler (CTD
rosette), although design features will ultimately allow installation into a
variety of other oceanographic underwater instruments. Named PipeCyte, this
cytometer will continuously measure abundance, cell size and fluorescence
characteristics of phytoplankton cells (0.5-20 Âµm) during the down- and up-casts
of the CTD and will transmit data in real time to CTD operators. PipeCyte will
radically alter the view of the lit portion of the ocean currently afforded with
CTD-based measures of chlorophyll fluorescence ? in addition to chlorophyll
fluorescence peaks, operators will see the abundance of different types of
phytoplankton within the peaks. Development of underway instrumentation that
maps microbial distributions in real time is essential for understanding
biogeochemical and ecological processes in the ocean. The instrument proposed
here will provide an unprecedented view of the relation between environmental
features and phytoplankton communities in the
ocean.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current underwater flow cytometer systems depend on
a supply of clean water for instrument operation and are vulnerable to clogging
and biofouling. PipeCyte relies upon an optical technology that enables direct
cytometric measurements on a flow of raw seawater. The primary optic (lens) is
immersed in a large diameter flow of the sample fluid, sidestepping the usual
clogging and maintenance issues associated with the small orifices present in
all flow cytometers. This immersed primary optic can be easily cleaned or
replaced. The design is robust, compact, and will consume 15 watts or less while
under full operation. The instrument is designed to require no more maintenance
than a standard fluorometer. Instrument development will be divided into three
phases. First, the current PipeCyte prototype will be iterated in two more
prototypes to optimize the sensitivity of the optical system by differing focal
lengths. Second, power reduction and miniaturization will be achieved by
transitioning from current SeaFlow data acquisition and control electronics to a
microcontroller-based system. This design path will dramatically reduce the
power consumption and dimensions of the instrument so it can fit within the
target volume. Finally, in-lab validation against a benchmark flow cytometer
system will be performed, followed by field-testing at sea.