* 1536925
* Interactions of Multiple Phase Transformations and Dislocations: Modeling and Simulation from Atomistic to Microscale
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,09/30/2020
* Valery Levitas, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 09/30/2020
* USD 426,616.00

This award supports fundamental research to provide knowledge toward
understanding phase transformations, plasticity, and their interactions. The
research under this award will focus on phase transformation and plasticity in
silicon and germanium. Predicting the deformation response in these materials is
important for semiconductor engineering. This research will lead to a
multifaceted computational tool for quantitative predictions of properties of
these materials. The computer simulations enabled by the computational tool
would reveal the main mechanisms during the interaction between phase
transformation and plasticity from the atomic to the macroscopic level. As an
extension, the computational tool can also find applications to other material
processes and technologies, including the thermomechanical treatment of steel,
the behavior of shape memory alloys, and the synthesis of superhard ceramics.
The software developed under this award will be shared with the research
community on the team's webpages and high performance computing clusters. The
research team will also participate the Freshman Honor Program that connects
undergraduates with research activities at Iowa State University. Two new
graduate courses on phase transformations and plasticity, and atomistic-
continuum modeling will be developed. This research will also promote active
participation from under-represented groups through the Program for Women and
Science in Engineering in the College of Engineering at Iowa State University.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research is to establish a
predictive multiscale modeling framework by linking a reactive concurrent
atomistic-continuum method and a continuum phase field approach. The reactive
concurrent atomistic-continuum method will be based on a finite element
implementation of an atomistic field formalism. Simultaneous phase
transformations and dislocation-mediated plasticity as a consequence of chemical
bond breaking and reforming, changes of the crystal structures and slip will be
simulated for micron-sized domains of silicon and germanium. The phase field
approach will be based on a new multiphase thermodynamic potential for large
strains and will enable large-scale simulations of coupled phase transformation
and plasticity in materials. Formations of multiple phases and evolutions of
dislocation microstructures in silicon and germanium will be simulated at the
macroscale. The research team will validate the predictive capability of the
multiscale computational tool through fully atomistic simulations and also
experimental measurements. Lastly, the team will apply the multiscale simulation
tools to find methods for promoting or suppressing dislocation activities and
phase transformations through tailoring the microstructures of materials and
controlling applied loading conditions.