* 1536897
* EAGER: Collaborative: A Research Agenda to Explore Privacy in Small Data Applications
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2017
* Deborah Estrin, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 08/31/2017
* USD 53,984.00

One of the crucial ideas behind Privacy by Design (PbD) is that privacy should
be taken into consideration in the process of design, not merely after-the-fact,
as so often happens. Yet, this ideal has failed to gain widespread practical
traction, challenged, in part, by the lack of developed methodologies and also
because of privacy's conceptual complexity, which hampers its
operationalization. This project addresses both challenges simultaneously,
seeking (i) to demonstrate how a robust operationalization of privacy can lead
to meaningful PbD and (ii) to contribute methodological insight by engaging with
ongoing research and development in the area of small data applications, namely,
systems that advance wellness and personal productivity by utilizing digital
traces from individuals' day-to-day activities, such as e-mail, grocery
shopping, TV watching, transportation, mobile devices, and so forth. Adopting
the definition of privacy as contextual integrity, the project will focus on
selected small-data applications currently "on the drawing board" in PI Deborah
Estrin's Small Data lab. With these design cases, the project rises to one of
the PbD challenges, namely consideration of privacy early on in development and,
as a research enterprise, its primary aim is to uncover more and less productive
methodological approaches for doing so, resulting in system characteristics well
correlated with privacy requirements. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At the same time,
the project will provide invaluable insight into how to operationalize
contextual integrity, which conceives of privacy as appropriate flow of personal
information, modeling appropriate flow as conformance with context-specific
informational norms, which, prescribe (and prohibit) information flows according
to three parameters: actors (subject, sender, recipient), information types, and
transmission principles (functional constraints on flow). Adopting contextual
integrity as an operational definition means that researchers will assess
privacy properties by carefully mapping data flows, and evaluating these flows
in terms of the context of application and use. The project also extends past
work on formal representations of informational norms by demonstrating how they
may be integrated into design practices. In addition to its substantive
contributions this project embodies an innovative collaborative model -- a novel
pairing of a computer scientist, Deborah Estrin (Cornell), with a philosopher,
Helen Nissenbaum (NYU), in an equal partnership to forge technologies that
embody meaningful privacy.