* 1536097
* Workshop:  Bilateral Photonics Workshop of the National Science Foundation (NSF) and Ministry of Science and Technology (MOST), Taiwan, May 29-June 1, 2015
* ENG,ECCS
* 04/15/2015,09/30/2015
* Mo Li, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Mahmoud Fallahi
* 09/30/2015
* USD 10,000.00

Year 2015 is designated as the "International Year of Light and Light-based
Technologies" by the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization (UNESCO). This bilateral workshop brings together leading
researchers in the science of light (optics and photonics), from US and Taiwan.
Via talks, discussions and planned lab visits, the event provides a platform for
scientists from both sides to share latest research results, to have face-to-
face discussions and to instigate collaboration. The event is organized by the
US National Science Foundation (NSF) and the Ministry of Science and Technology
(MOST) of Taiwan. The workshop takes place in Taipei, Taiwan from May 31 to June
1. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Optics and photonics is one of the most active and fast
developing fields in engineering and science. Technological advances in optics
and photonics have significantly advanced a broad range of areas from
communication, medicine, aerospace to advanced manufacturing. Both US and Taiwan
governments and industry have invested significantly in optics and photonics
research. In particular, with the world largest foundries like Taiwan
Semiconductor Manufacturing Corporation (TSMC), Taiwan is a powerhouse of
semiconductor industry, which has long been the engine of optics and photonics
research. As technological breakthroughs continues to be achieved and new topics
of optics and photonics, such as silicon photonics, plasmonics, new lasers and
2D materials, continue to emerge, multilateral collaborations between nations
are becoming more and more important to the development and dissemination of
research. This workshop and event will stimulate bilateral collaboration in
photonics research between researchers in Taiwan and United States. Through face
to face discussion and laboratory tours, information of the latest development
in photonics research, research infrastructures and facility will be exchanged.
Potential bilateral outreach possibility will also be discussed.