* 1536313
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Geopolitical Shifts in the Geographies of Extractive Economies
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* John O'Loughlin, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 08/31/2018
* USD 15,999.00

This doctoral dissertation research project will analyze how recent geopolitical
shifts are affecting national-level resource governance debates and subnational
politics in developing nations. The doctoral student will investigate the
interplay between national and subnational resource politics and two broader
trends in extractive economies. The first of those trends are the growing
involvement from resource extraction entities based in Brazil, Russia, India,
China, and South Africa, the so-called BRICS states that are characterized as
having large, fast-growing economies. The second of the trends is the increasing
involvement by national governments in resource extraction. Natural resource
ownership, governance, and revenue distribution often are contentious topics,
and extraction-related tensions can aggravate or catalyze political unrest in
the countries of extraction, particularly in those with poor governance
structures. Increasing involvement in extraction by African states and by BRICS
actors have raised anew the geopolitical and political economic implications of
tensions among foreign investment actors, governments, and citizens with respect
to natural resource extraction. These dynamics have significant implications for
extraction-related social relations at a variety of scales, but there has been
little scholarly attention to how these developments are being understood by
residents of the countries and localities where extraction is occurring. This
project's findings will advance interdisciplinary social science knowledge
regarding resource politics and the increasing global prominence of BRICS states
by extending and testing studies of the individual-level factors that shape
citizens' perceptions of resource governance and geopolitics. By providing data
regarding the factors that shape perceptions of resource extraction and
governance, the project will enhance capabilities to understand, predict, and
address political tensions, including violence, in resource-rich states and
improve resource governance, especially in Africa. This enhanced knowledge is of
critical value to the United States as it seeks to redefine its relationships
with developing nations and the rapidly growing states that are playing a
growing role in global economic activity. As a Doctoral Dissertation Research
Improvement award, this award also will provide support to enable a promising
student to establish a strong independent research career.

The doctoral student will undertake an analysis of the politics of natural
resource ownership, extraction, and governance through a geographic approach and
multiple methods research design. She will seek answers to two sets of focal
questions: (1) How have entities based in BRICS nations interacted with national
and subnational politics of resource extraction? (2) How are ordinary citizens
interpreting and responding to these shifting extractive geopolitics and
politics, and which factors shape those interpretations and responses? The
student will employ a multi-scalar theoretical framing to explore the
interactions between individuals and a range of subnational, national, and
international entities. The student will focus her research in Namibia, one of
Africa's largest mineral exporters, conducting an in-depth analysis of resource
politics and geopolitics at a national level and in two subnational sites with
divergent extractive contexts. Integrating quantitative and qualitative methods,
she will investigate how local perceptions of resource governance differ between
the two primary study sites and in comparison with national-level portrayals by
state and private actors.