* 1536480
* Quantifying Partitioning of Trace Elements into Seafloor Hydrothermal Deposits Using Paired Vent Fluids and Solids
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Margaret Tivey, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Candace Major
* 08/31/2018
* USD 189,006.00

Hydrothermal vents are an important source of sulfide mineral deposits to the
ocean floor, but the processes of how trace elements get incorporated into the
hot fluids and their corresponding sulfide chimneys is poorly understood. This
project will measure trace element concentrations in fluid-chimney pairs from a
natural hydrothermal vent system. The data from this project will enhance our
understanding of how trace elements transition between the fluid and
corresponding mineral, as well as be included into studies that aim to quantify
trace element fluxes from hydrothermal vents to the deep ocean and modeling
studies focused on formation of massive sulfides and metal remobilization. This
project will support the training of undergraduate and graduate students, and
results will be shared broadly through the creation of educational
videos.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Use of vent fluids and corresponding chimney
linings to test hypotheses of partitioning has been hampered in the past by a
lack of trace element data for both vent fluids and solids due to the very low
concentrations. Recent efforts using improved analytical techniques now make
investigations of trace element partitioning possible. This project will use a
natural hydrothermal vent system to investigate trace element partitioning from
fluids into sulfide minerals that precipitate along the linings of the chimney
conduits, in contact with the hot vent fluids, at conditions difficult to
reproduce in the laboratory. Analyses will be done on a set of fluid-chimney
pairs (fluid and chimney sampled at the same time). Data and analyses from this
project will be used to test the following two hypotheses: 1) Minerals
precipitating from vent fluids along linings of chimneys incorporate some trace
elements in a characteristic manner, with partitioning dominantly a function of
element concentrations, and with pH, temperature, redox, and ligand
concentration affecting free versus total concentrations; and 2) Seafloor
sulfide deposits record critical information about both the trace element
compositions of the fluids from which they formed, and about environmental
conditions at the time of precipitation; thus, trace element distributions could
be used as proxies for environmental conditions such as pH, redox, temperature,
and/or metal concentrations.