* 1536298
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Youth: Race, Citizenship, and School-to-Military Pipelines
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2015,04/30/2017
* Lise Nelson, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Antoinette WinklerPrins
* 04/30/2017
* USD 14,820.00

This research project examines military programming, recruitment, and enlistment
decisions among youth in public high schools serving largely low-income Black
and Latino/a communities. Amid growing public concern about the opportunities
and obstacles youth of color face in their schools and communities, the project
investigates how young people of color experience and make meaning of military
enlistment and interrogates what the military accomplishes in their lives. It
closely examines the relationship between youth pathways, or "pipelines", into
the military and pervasive yet often routine forms of economic, social, and
political marginalization experienced by many potential recruits in their homes,
schools, and communities. The project responds directly to recent calls by
education scholars to examine the way that family, community, school policy, and
military recruiting and military educational programing, like the Junior Reserve
Officer Training Corps, work to produce a pipeline for youth into the military.
In doing so, the project contributes to educational knowledge about the military
in schools and also fosters a rare interdisciplinary conversation between
geography and education about youth and education as subjects of geopolitical
inquiry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through a case study of a public high school in
Houston, Texas, the project investigates the following research questions: What
educational, state, and military practices produce a school-to-military
pipeline? How are recruitment practices and enlistment decisions shaped by race,
gender, and class? How does a school-to-military pipeline relate to the
production and operation of the school-to-prison pipeline? How do young people
experience, actively navigate, and make meaning of the military among the
futures that are available and desirable to them? The research employs multiple
ethnographic methods: 1) participant observation of JROTC classes, school
activities, and community events; 2) semi-structured interviews with each set of
respondents; 3) youth working groups to discuss topics related to the military
and collaboratively analyze data; 4) the shadowing of student volunteers in
their daily lives to learn more about the everyday spaces and relationships that
shape their ideas and feelings about military futures; and 5) analysis of
secondary texts and news media. By drawing together the institutional and
everyday factors shaping enlistment, the study elucidates the relationship
between the military and the daily opportunities and obstacles in youth lives.
Moreover, this project contributes to public and academic knowledge about
relationships between youth and the military so as to foster a necessary
discussion across the academy, the military, youth, educators, parents, policy
makers, and activists about the meaning of diversity in the military, the role
of the military in public schools, and the implications of military service for
the futures of youth of color.