* 1536530
* Toxin expression and function by an estuarine model species in a dynamic seasonal community
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2020
* Adam Reitzel, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Michael Sieracki
* 07/31/2020
* USD 533,378.00

Venomous animals such as cnidarians, scorpions, and snakes utilize their toxins
for a diversity of functions including defense from predators and for capturing
prey. Thus, venom plays a pivotal and central role in the ecology of the animal
producing it. There are several major hypotheses regarding the ecological
factors that shape the diversity and expression of these molecules. A central
hypothesis is that these toxins evolve rapidly due to their involvement in an
evolutionary "arms race" between the organism and its potential predators and
prey. Moreover, toxins are energetically expensive to produce so it is also
hypothesized that their production is tightly regulated ("venom optimization
hypothesis"), where individuals can module the amount and composition of their
venom dependent on changes in diet and shifts in environmental factors such as
temperature. Currently, there is a paucity of data to discern between these
hypotheses. This research will provide an integrative approach to identify
mechanisms that determine shifts in the quantity and composition of the venom
essential for the feeding ecology of a model cnidarian specializing in estuarine
habitats that are vulnerable to the ongoing climate change. This project will
provide a synergistic international collaboration with Dr. Yehu Moran (The
Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Israel) to connect environmental variation with
the expression and potency of venom proteins. This research will provide
mentoring and training for a postdoctoral fellow, graduate and undergraduate
students at the University of North Carolina at Charlotte, and undergraduate
students at Mitchell Community College in Statesville, NC. Additional research
and educational opportunities will be provided for underrepresented students
using PRODUCE, funded by the NSF through the NC Louis Stokes Alliance for
Minority Participation to recruit, retain, and graduate students in STEM
education. The PI will continue to involve high-school students in research
through individual training, UNC Charlotte's outreach programs and the Burroughs
Wellcome Science Enrichment program with the Olympic High School Biotechnology
School.

Knowledge of the environmental, genetic, and molecular factors involved in
modulating expression of toxin proteins is essential to understand and predict
how venomous species will respond to changes in the composition of biological
communities. The research team will rigorously test hypotheses in the expression
of toxin peptides by studying the starlet sea anemone, Nematostella vectensis, a
predator of ecological importance that lives in estuaries along the eastern
coast of North America. N. vectensis has emerged as a model cnidarian for
ecological genomics due to the availability of a genome, its central position in
estuarine food webs, and the ease of field collection and laboratory
manipulation; a combination rarely available for venomous animals. Expression of
venom genes in field collected anemones will be correlated with ingested prey
identified using microscopy and DNA barcodes. This analysis will be compared in
three different seasons to identify impacts of seasonal changes in abiotic
variables as well as prey availability. Differences in expression of these toxin
genes in the field could be related to tuning of the toxin composition to the
prey available, presence of predators, and/or the physiological condition of the
individual determined by degree of abiotic stress. The research team will
differentiate between these potential causal factors through controlled
laboratory experiments where anemones are exposed to two common stressors
(temperature, UV), individual prey items, and a predator. In order to better
understand the selectivity of these toxins to particular prey, behavioral and in
vitro assays test toxicity of each genetic variant will be compared when exposed
to distinct animal prey groups to determine the relative potency. Finally,
sequence analyses will be used to investigate the molecular targets of the
toxins in the prey animals to determine if these targets are potentially adapted
to toxin alleles restricted to different geographic locations. These data will
help determine a potential causative link between toxin evolution of a venomous
animal and its prey and whether toxins and their targets are involved in an
"arms race". This project is expected to have a significant impact on the
understanding of the evolution of toxins in the context of ecological
interactions in natural environments and contribute to our knowledge about toxin
pharmacology for future design of novel insecticides.