* 1536186
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Floodplain Carbon Storage in Mountain Rivers
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2015,01/31/2017
* Ellen Wohl, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* sunil narumalani
* 01/31/2017
* USD 15,749.00

A better understanding of the linkages between geology, river processes,
floodplain sediment, and river ecosystems that influence carbon storage in
mountainous landscapes has implications for land use and environmental change.
This doctoral dissertation research project will investigate the natural ability
of freshwater ecosystems in unmanaged rivers to effectively filter dissolved
organic carbon content. New insights into the natural ability of freshwater
ecosystems in unmanaged rivers to effectively filter dissolved organic carbon
content will be valuable to society and communities that source their drinking
water from surface waters. The doctoral student will provide new information
regarding of how organic carbon is stored in upland fluvial versus lowland
environments and how natural processes in mountainous rivers facilitate
conditions for long-term storage and sequestration of organic carbon. The
sustainability of freshwater systems focus of this study has important
implications for water resource managers globally as they develop regional plans
for future water allocations. The student will work closely with natural
resource offices and government agencies to inform land resources and wildlife
management. As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award
also will provide support to enable a promising student to establish a strong
independent research career.

Research on carbon storage in montane regions is critically important because
these regions are globally impacted by environmental and land use modifications
causing changes to river network systems and consequently affecting surface
water quality and supply. This project will address four core questions: (1) How
long is carbon stored in floodplain reservoirs? (2) What is the role of episodic
extreme disturbances in turnover time? (3) Does turnover time vary
systematically above and below the hydroclimatic boundary of 2,300-m elevation?
(4) How does carbon storage in valley bottoms change when biotic drivers are
removed and multithread channels metamorphose to a single-thread planform? The
student will use in situ sampling, field survey, and existent map and elevation
data coupled with laboratory analysis to longitudinally determine organic carbon
at 24 study sites along the headwater streams in the Colorado Rocky Mountains.
The analyses will provide a quantitative assessment of the mechanisms of fluvial
complexity of larger river networks that influence carbon retention and
microbial processing.