* 1536738
* Turbulent Ion Heating in the Magnetosheath
* GEO,AGS
* 05/15/2016,04/30/2021
* Christopher Chaston, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Lisa Winter
* 04/30/2021
* USD 426,050.00

Earth's magnetic field encloses it in a protective cocoon, called the
magnetosphere, deflecting most of the solar wind around it. The solar wind is a
stream of charged particles, approximately equal numbers of ions and electrons,
and magnetic fields blowing outward from the Sun, which varies in intensity with
solar activity. The solar wind moves so fast that when it encounters the
magnetosphere a shock forms upstream from it. As solar wind plasma passes
through the shock it is slowed down and then flows around the magnetosphere in a
sheath region, called the magnetosheath. In this region the magnetic field is
erratic or turbulent and evidence suggests that magnetosheath ions are heated as
this turbulence is dissipated. The topic is compelling because the potential
importance of turbulence and associated ion heating has only recently been
recognized. Ions in the magnetosheath eventually cross the magnetopause to
provide the dominant source of magnetospheric plasmas, thus changes in their
temperature and other properties can have a profound effect on the stability of
the magnetosphere itself, which can lead to explosive releases of energy during
geomagnetic storms and substorms. The methodology for this study is creative and
an important advance over previous studies because it is the first self-
consistent comprehensive treatment of this turbulence and its dissipation. As
such, the potential for new discoveries is high. Advances in understanding will
have benefit to society because, in the longer term, they will contribute to the
development of an improved predictive capability that can be used to minimize
the impacts of such events. This research contributes to the development of a
scientific workforce by training a postdoctoral student and a graduate student.
Research results will be disseminated through publications, conferences, and
community outreach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order to fulfill its objectives,
this study investigate how Alfvenic turbulence heats magnetosheath ions, how the
heating process saturates, the rate at which energy is transferred to the ions,
how electromagnetic energy is transported to support the heating process, how
secondary wave emissions develop during the heating, and how the heating process
influences the bulk characteristics of the magnetosheath plasma. The primary
tool is a 3D hybrid particle in cell model. The proposal uses wave/ion heating
events observed by the THEMIS satellites to both specify initial conditions and
to validate simulation results. An innovative aspect is the coupled treatment of
both the cascade processes associated with plasma turbulence and the additional
instabilities that arise from the anisotropies that develop in the ion
distributions.