* 1536862
* Robust Design of Compliant DNA Origami Mechanisms
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Hai-Jun Su, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Jablokow
* 08/31/2019
* USD 419,522.00

DNA origami mechanisms are nanometer scale mechanical devices that are made of
deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) biological materials. For comparison, a human hair
is approximately 80,000 to 100,000 nanometers wide. Self-assembled via the so
called DNA base-pairing process, the motion of these tiny mechanisms can be
controlled to accomplish a task similar to machines and robots in the macro
world. This technique has the potential to revolutionize medicine or reduce
resource consumption and environmental pollution in manufacturing processes. For
example, DNA nano-robots could potentially be used for nano-manufacturing, for
molecular transport in bioreactors, for targeting cancer cells for drug
delivery, or even for repairing damaged tissue. However, the motion of these
nano-mechanisms is extremely difficult to control due to significant thermal
fluctuation in solution, random errors in the molecular self-assembly process,
and variation in material and structure properties. This award supports the
fundamental research to address these challenges by developing a novel robust-
design methodology borrowed from macroscopic compliant-mechanism design. The
computational design tools resulting from this research will enable us to
effectively design DNA nano-machines that are more accurately controllable, and
that can be used in medicine for improving public
health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent success in applying kinematic mechanism
principles in design of DNA origami nano-mechanisms has now opened new
significant challenges in quantifying and managing the mechanical behavior of
these mechanisms. The goal of this award is to develop a robust design framework
for compliant DNA origami mechanisms to improve motion control and enable a
wider range of mechanical behavior of DNA nano-structures. This design framework
incorporates synthesis of commonly used compliant joints, pseudo-rigid-body
models, kinetostatic analysis, synthesis algorithms and statistical theory based
method for uncertainty quantification and management. The computational tools
and experimental processes resulting from this research will enable: (a) design
of DNA origami mechanisms with broader scope of mechanical behavior, (b)
characterization of the properties of these nano-mechanisms, and (c) uncertainty
quantification and management of DNA origami structures.