* 1536026
* AitF: EXPL: Algorithmic Fluid Concentration Management for Programmable Microfluidics
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2021
* Marek Chrobak, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 09/30/2021
* USD 377,801.00

The miniaturization of technology has produced not only programmable
microprocessor circuits, but also programmable lab-on-a-chip (PLoC) systems for
microfluidics. These systems control tiny fluid droplets, allowing precise
mixing and testing, that can be developed into environmental monitors, malaria
diagnostics, or blood tests for cancer cells. As with microprocessors,
programming a lab on a chip takes knowledge of what the chip can and cannot do,
and a suitable language in which to express the commands. This project 1)
develops a theory of computational complexity for designing microfluidic devices
that produce fluid mixtures with desired concentrations, 2) creates a domain-
specific language (including an Application Program Interface, or API and a
compiler) for these devices, 3) fabricates and tests devices, and 4) explores
the broader impacts of the ability to program complex biochemical reactions that
include fluid concentration steps. The project results will make PLoC systems
much easier to use, which the PIs will first demonstrate with students,
including those from underrepresented groups, and then through tutorials
presented at scientific meetings to promote the use of PLoC technologies among
the broader scientific community. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
investigates the complexity and approximability of algorithms to generate one or
more discrete fluid droplets having a desired concentration, e.g., a sample
diluted to 10%, 15%, etc., with objectives such as minimizing the number of
dilution steps, minimizing waste, minimizing reactant usage, etc. These
algorithms will be generalized to produce of a stream of droplets having desired
time-dependent concentrations. Meanwhile, a collection of representative PLoCs
will be designed and fabricated on-site, along with a domain-specific language
and compiler, which will allow the PLoCs to be programmed using high-level
software. The algorithms developed in the course of this project will be
integrated into an API that can be called from the domain-specific language.
This will enable users to specify biochemical reactions that include fluid
concentration generation subroutines (which are performed automatically). The
system will be validated by executing these biochemical reactions using the
PLoCs that have been fabricated on-site. Upon successful completion of the
project, PLoC design files along with the domain-specific language specification
and compiler, documentation, and tutorial material, will be released publicly to
encourage other scientists to use this platform and approach to increase
productivity and reduce human error in their respective laboratories.