* 1536599
* Vehicular Traffic Modeling and Control in Mixed Manual and Automated Environments
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Soyoung Ahn, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Yueyue Fan
* 08/31/2019
* USD 393,883.00

Cutting-edge vehicle technologies such as Connected Vehicles and Automated
Vehicles present unprecedented opportunities to drastically improve traffic
operations and safety. These technologies can fundamentally change driver
interactions and have enormous potential to remedy traffic phenomena known to be
detrimental to traffic efficiency and stability. Among different types of
Automated Vehicles technologies, Cooperative Adaptive Cruise Control is
particularly advantageous due to its unique ability to foster high performance,
doubling (or more) roadway capacity and significantly improving flow stability.
This research project seeks to shed light on the traffic congestion mechanisms
in mixed streams of manual and high performance automated vehicles. It also aims
to develop mitigation strategies to reduce traffic congestion by unprecedented
levels, contributing to the nation's economic competitiveness and sustainable
urban development. This project will engage in a range of integrated research,
educational and outreach activities that will expand the knowledge obtained from
this research to a broader audience. The activities include (i) developing
simulation-based educational modules, (ii) disseminating results using driving
simulator, and (iii) engaging undergraduate and graduate students in the
research and education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Traffic breakdown (onset of wide-
spread congestion) is often triggered at freeway bottlenecks near merges and
weaves. This phenomenon is characterized by high flow prior to breakdown,
succeeded by a significant reduction in bottleneck discharge rate (known as
"capacity drop"). The objectives of this research are to: (1) shed light on the
behavioral mechanisms underlying traffic breakdown at bottlenecks in mixed
manual and Cooperative Adaptive Cruise Control enabled vehicular environments
and (2) develop theoretically-grounded control strategies to mitigate traffic
breakdown and capacity drop. To better understand these mechanisms and enable
vehicle-based control, this research will perform multi-scale analysis and
modeling by linking microscopic features (driver characteristics, lane changes)
to mesoscopic features (vehicle platooning) and eventually to macroscopic
features (breakdown flow). This research will push the frontier of traffic flow
research in the era of automated vehicles. Results from this research will
advance our knowledge of congestion mechanisms, particularly around extended
merge and weave bottlenecks. Moreover, control strategies will be developed
based on the fundamental understanding of driving behavior to effectively
mitigate traffic breakdown via vehicle-based control. Both proactive and
reactive strategies will be developed at different levels of sophistication to
enable implementation of robust control for select automation levels.