* 1536406
* Collaborative Research: Dynamics and Propagation of Surface Instabilities in Soft Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,03/31/2019
* Nicholas Boechler, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Irina Dolinskaya
* 03/31/2019
* USD 279,192.00

When soft materials are compressed, their surface often spontaneously forms
wrinkles, creases, ridges, or folds with periodic patterns. These patterns are
called 'surface instabilities'. Over the past several years, there has been
significant interest in understanding how surface instabilities form, as they
are ubiquitous in biological systems and have found wide use in engineering
applications ranging from microfabrication to soft robotics. However, nearly all
of the past studies have focused on understanding how surface instabilities form
under very slow compression, or have neglected the dynamics leading to this
event. This award will investigate how surface instabilities form and propagate
across the surface of the material as a result of fast compression or impacts.
The speed of the event causing the instability is critical as it yields
fundamentally unique phenomena, which are prevalent in most physical systems,
but still not well understood. The improved understanding gained as part of this
fundamental research will impact a broad range of applications. For example,
because of the role of surface instabilities in friction, this research will
positively affect engineering applications with moving soft materials in
contact. It will also lead to improved understanding of the dynamics of sandwich
beam composites, and to improved impact absorbers, shock protective systems, and
novel soft electronics devices. In addition to the research goals, this project
has a significant education and outreach component that will positively affect
students from K-12 through graduate levels, and will increase the involvement of
underrepresented students in STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
objective of this multidisciplinary, collaborative project is to investigate the
initiation and propagation of surface instabilities in soft materials under
dynamic loading, using a combined theoretical, computational, and experimental
approach. Experimental characterization will be conducted using a combination of
drop tower, high-speed video, and laser ultrasonic test methods. Dynamic surface
instability propagation will be modeled analytically, and computationally using
nonlinear finite element techniques. This project will provide significant
intellectual contribution by answering open questions including: What are the
conditions for initiating the propagation of surface instabilities, and how do
they propagate? How does the propagation of surface instabilities lead to
material failure? And how can the propagation of surface instabilities be
manipulated? More generally, as there have been almost no investigations into
the dynamics of propagating surface instabilities, this investigation will open
a new class of instability-based surface waves and provide an improved
understanding of dynamic phenomena in soft materials.