* 1536574
* Collaborative Research: Experimental calibration of the isotopic content of marine sulfate
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2017
* David Johnston, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 08/31/2017
* USD 74,015.00

Collaborative Research: Experimental Calibration of the Isotopic Content of
Marine Sulfate Alexander Bradley ID: 1536559

Sulfur is an essential element to life, and its biogeochemical cycle is of
interest to a broad range of scientific disciplines. A requirement for
understanding the sulfur cycle involves revealing and quantifying the mechanisms
by which microbes oxidize and reduce sulfur species. This can be done by tracing
stable sulfur and oxygen isotopes. Enzymes play a key role in the cycling of
sulfur, but the degree to which individual enzymes preferentially use specific
oxygen isotopes (fractionation) is not known and prevents complete understanding
of observed oxygen isotopes patterns in marine sulfate. This project will
investigate isotope fractionation (oxygen and sulfur) associated with two key
enzymes, which are involved in the metabolism of both sulfate reducing microbes
and some sulfur oxidizing microbes. Resolving the influence of these enzymes on
the isotopic composition of marine sulfate is important to stable isotope
biogeochemistry and chemical oceanography. The project will serve as a vehicle
to educate and train a postdoctoral researcher and undergraduate students, and
will provide a teacher training opportunity in the investigators' labs to aid
teachers in the design of student field trips and hands-on exercises for their
students.

The cycling of sulfur between its oxidized and reduced forms is a major
determinant of the oxidation of organic matter in the oceans and underlying
sediments, and microbes play a key role in the biogeochemical cycling of sulfur.
One of the key tracers of microbial sulfur cycling involves measuring the
distribution of stable isotopes among sulfur phases. A number of studies have
shown that the stable oxygen isotope composition of sulfate is an informative
way to investigate the sulfur cycle. Despite its utility, there are few direct
constraints on how biology impacts the oxygen isotopes of sulfate. The goal of
this project is to place quantitative constraints on the enzymatic oxygen
isotope fractionation associated with microbial sulfate reduction. This project
will involve in vitro investigations of the kinetic isotope fractionations
associated with ATP sulfurylase and APS reductase, and incorporate the resulting
data into an existing model for understanding isotope fractionation during
sulfate reduction and its resulting influence on the isotopic composition of
marine sulfate. These models will provide critical insight into the behavior of
the sulfur cycle and evolution of marine chemistry over key timescales.