* 1536506
* Development and application of a high sensitivity, ultra low volume method to measure biomarkers of terrigenous organic matter in the open ocean
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2018
* Rainer Amon, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 12/31/2018
* USD 256,841.00

Development and application of a high sensitivity, ultra low volume method to
measure biomarkers of terrigenous organic matter in the open ocean Karl Kaiser
ID: 1536506

The distribution and fate of land-derived, or terrigenous, organic matter in the
ocean has long been of interest to oceanographers, but that interest has grown
considerably as research on the marine and global carbon cycle intensifies.
Lignin is a major structural polymer found only in vascular plants, making
lignin a unique tracer of terrigenous organic matter input to the marine
environment. The current analytical tool for analyzing lignin, breaking it into
a suite of identifiable phenolic compounds, is complex, time consuming and
requires 10 to 30 liters of water. Given these limitations, applications of
lignin phenols as tracers of terrestrial organic carbon in the ocean have been
sparse. Through this project, the researchers aim to redesign existing chemical
methodology together with modified instrumental detection for even 3 times
greater sensitivity using a sample of less than 200 milliliters. Outfitting the
scientific community with new methodology to sensitively trace this marker of
terrigenous organic carbon will provide a clearer understanding of organic
matter fluxes between and within terrestrial and oceanic reservoirs, and
potentially establish lignin phenols as a robust oceanographic tracer. This
project will support the development of the next generation of scientists,
including an early career investigator, and graduate and undergraduate students.

Lignin phenol measurements have been used to study general distribution patterns
and mechanisms of decomposition of terrigenous dissolved organic carbon (tDOC)
in the global ocean. The distribution pattern of tDOC among ocean basins is
generally consistent with the global pattern of riverine discharge to the ocean
basins. However, large scale generalizations required and more fully resolved
distributions of lignin as a tracer of tDOC are hampered by the difficulties and
limitations associated with the present lignin phenol method. The main
objectives of this project are to (1) develop methodology for measuring
dissolved lignin in ultra-low volumes at high sensitivity in open ocean seawater
and (2) apply the new method to study terrigenous tDOC processing and transport
in the Eurasian Basin of the Arctic Ocean, where large Siberian rivers deliver
the bulk of tDOC to the shelf areas. Results from this research will help
evaluate lignin phenols as robust oceanographic tracers, useful to study
physical mixing in the Arctic Ocean and potentially improve our understanding of
the fate and removal of terrigenous organic carbon in the oceans. Addressing the
second objective would provide well-constrained decay constants for lignin and
tDOC in the Arctic Ocean and provide novel information on halocline formation.
Integration of tDOC budgets, freshwater budgets, and circulation and atmospheric
patterns will ultimately improve understanding of biogeochemical cycles in the
Arctic Ocean and its role in global climate.