* 1536005
* Drawing on Concepts in Finance for Construction Schedule Performance Measurement
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2018
* Gunnar Lucko, Catholic University of America
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Chen
* 08/31/2018
* USD 175,002.00

The research objective of this project is to investigate how performance can be
made comparable across a wide range of construction project sizes and types.
Performance is at the core of all managerial functions of decision makers;
planning how projects should progress, controlling how they perform, and, if
necessary, deploying remedies to bring lagging ones back on track. Yet despite,
or perhaps because of the size of the construction industry as being a major
contributor to the overall economy, its enormous number of projects, and their
variety, no single measure has emerged that provides such a desired snapshot
assessment. Existing attempts, which simply provide the percentage of total work
or cite the 'value' that a schedule or budget has achieved, conceptually suffer
from the problem that they converge to 'one' (work completed) or 'zero' (work
remaining) at the project end, so that the mere fact that it was eventually
finished makes a project appear successful and any problems that occurred are
forgotten. This gives an overly optimistic, incomplete, and non-predictive view.
This research will therefore glean inspiration from finance, where
notwithstanding the diverse nature of publicly traded companies, investors have
long quantified stock performance with universal metrics. Specifically, the
proven concept of 'beta', which expresses volatility of a stock compared to its
market, will be explored for adaptation as a schedule performance metric. If
successful, this research will enhance transparency of construction projects in
light of still-too-common schedule delays and productivity shortfalls, enable
identification and targeted improvements of underperforming activities,
projects, or firms, and support the competitiveness of participants within the
U.S. construction economy. Educational outreach at the after-school ACE mentor
program, which serves many minority high school students, will build a group
activity that playfully embodies insights from the research.

The research methodology is a process of knowledge transfer, from concept
extraction via adaptation to verification and validation steps. The research
team will collate analogies by mapping and matching them in a concept matrix
with their equivalents of project management. Criteria for inclusion and any
adjustment, assumption, or limitation will be proximity in meaning and
predictiveness toward creating a functioning model that can reflect schedule
performance. Validating the new approach will employ statistical analysis of
artificial and real-world schedules from corporate partners.