* 1536653
* Collaborative Research: Ecosystem dynamics of Western Pacific hydrothermal vent communities associated with polymetallic sulfide deposits
* GEO,OCE
* 12/01/2015,11/30/2017
* Peter Girguis, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 11/30/2017
* USD 367,017.00

Hydrothermal vents are common in the Western Pacific, and are markedly different
in many geological, geochemical, and biological aspects from the much better
known hydrothermal vents on mid-ocean ridges. The processes that structure
western Pacific vent communities, such as the extent to which physical and
chemical conditions change over time, the dispersal of organisms among
hydrothermal vent fields, and the physiological capacities of the symbionts and
their animal host are poorly understood. And yet, large-scale industrial mining
of polymetallic sulfide deposits at active hydrothermal vents is imminent in the
Western Pacific. In 2005 and 2006, 19 long term study sites were established on
the Eastern Lau Spreading Center by generating high resolution photomosaics of
animal communities in both active and inactive flow areas and on both sulfide
chimneys and on lavas, and mapping spatially discrete physical and chemical
environmental measurements on to these photomosaics. Revisiting these study
sites and acquiring data of comparable resolution in the coming year, combined
with detailed studies of the physiology of key species, will significantly
increase our understanding of the physiology of the fauna and how these
communities respond to change. The resulting data will provide crucial
information on the fauna and communities endemic to this region that is critical
for predicting and mitigating the effects of mining activities on these
ecosystems, and for informing plans for monitoring potential recovery post-
mining. To ensure that Western Pacific Islanders are engaged throughout the
duration of our program, local scientists will be included in the fieldwork, in-
country presentations to students and the general public will be given in
association with port stops, and findings will be communicated to local resource
managers through the Geoscience Division of the Secretariat of the Pacific
Community (SPC). The principal investigators are also proponents of fostering
greater "open access and collaboration" among oceanographers, and telepresence
will be used during this expedition to experiment on two different models of
collaboration, which - along with the resulting scientific insights - will be
published to disseminate the results of this effort. Finally, in collaboration
with the Harvard Museum of Natural History (HMNH), an exhibit module and course
curricula will be developed presenting the effects of both natural and
anthropogenic disturbance on biodiversity. It will feature high-resolution
imagery, animal and mineralogical samples, and deep-sea research technologies.
Web-enabled kiosks will allow visitors to delve deeper into the subject
material. The HMNH attracts 200,000 visitors each year, including 33,000
students (K-12) and their teachers, as well as visitors from around the world.

The funded interlinked studies of holobiont (symbionts and their animal host)
physiology and distribution, community structure and change over time, genetic
connectivity, and holobiont ecosystem engineering will significantly increase
our understanding of the processes structuring hydrothermal vent ecosystems in
general, and those of the Western Pacific in particular. Vent fields in the
proposed study area within the Lau Basin are located in relative proximity to
one another with no known barriers to biological dispersal and span a pronounced
regional gradient in both geological setting and physico-chemical conditions.
This natural laboratory, that is home to a significant diversity of vent fauna
and where long-term study sites were established a decade ago, presents an
opportunity to gain broad new insights into the ecological and physiological
characteristics of the vent fauna and the processes that structure these
communities. Accordingly, the project will A) determine the rates and patterns
of natural physical, chemical, and biological changes at vents in the Lau Basin
over a decadal time period by acquiring new high-resolution, co-registered
geological, chemical and biological maps and comparing these with data of
comparable resolution acquired in 2005, 2006, and 2009; B) evaluate the role of
symbiont physiology -in particular their use of key energy sources not
previously measured- in the realized distribution of the holobionts by coupling
genetic characterization of host and symbionts with shipboard physiological
measurements and gene expression studies, and physico-chemical microhabitat
characterization; C) quantify the effects of different holobionts on the
surrounding environment by coupling repeated spatially integrated measurements
of physico-chemical conditions to all collections and; D) assess the influence
of genetic connectivity of populations in the Lau Basin on the distribution of
holobionts across regional gradients in geology and geochemistry. They will
provide new and generally applicable insights on the role of multiple symbionts
in both the distribution of their animal hosts and in structuring associated
communities. These efforts will also constrain the roles of genetic
connectivity, environmental chemistry, and holobiont capabilities in structuring
communities along this spreading center. Moreover, through co-registered animal
collections and in situ geochemical measurements, the investigators will develop
first-order estimates of the extent to which holobiont aggregations affect
geochemical flux from diffuse flows, which accounts for ~50% of all vent
geochemical flux. Ultimately, this effort will provide critical and robust data
on the dynamics of vent fields and communities in the western Pacific
biogeographic province, as well as on the underlying physiological and
ecological factors governing these patterns.