* 1536175
* Arctic Observing and Science for Sustainability
* GEO,RISE
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2022
* Ka-Kit Tung, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Uhle
* 06/30/2022
* USD 451,007.00

This award provides support to U.S. researchers participating in a project
competitively selected by a 14-country initiative on global change research
through the Belmont Forum. The Belmont Forum is a high level group of the
world?s major and emerging funders of global environmental change research and
international science councils. It aims to accelerate delivery of the
international environmental research most urgently needed to remove critical
barriers to sustainability by aligning and mobilizing international resources.
Each partner country provides funding for their researchers within a consortium
to alleviate the need for funds to cross international borders. This approach
facilitates effective leveraging of national resources to support excellent
research on topics of global relevance best tackled through a multinational
approach, recognizing that global challenges need global
solutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Working together in this Collaborative Research
Action, the partner agencies have provided support for research projects that
utilize existing Arctic observing systems, datasets and models to evaluate key
sustainability challenges and opportunities in the Arctic region, to innovate
new sustainability science theory and approaches to these challenges and
opportunities, and support decision-making towards a sustainable Arctic
environment. This award provides support for the U.S. researchers to cooperate
in consortia that consist of partners from at least three of the participating
countries and that bring together natural scientists, social scientists and end
users (e.g., policy makers, regulators, NGOs, communities and industry).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Arctic Fog Variability collaborative research effort
will study the spatiotemporal variability of fog in light of recent sea ice
variability and in the context of increasing interest in alternative commercial
shipping routes that would transit the Arctic. This partnership between Chinese,
US, Canadian, and Italian investigators will utilize available in situ and
satellite environmental information and navigational and economic data as well
as conduct shore-based and ship-based sampling of fog variables during the peak
of fog occurrence in mid-summer. A series of modeling experiments will be
conducted to determine future radiative and meteorological conditions that would
induce fog and determine the potential routes of vessels through the Arctic
given certain Representative Concentration Pathway scenarios. Finally, the
envelope of economic impact will be determined based on a suite of variables
using real-life case studies for container vessels traveling between Europe and
Asia. This project unites observationalists, modelers, and end-users, including
shipping companies, towards a better understanding of changing operational
conditions for more informed activity in Arctic waters.