* 1536087
* Biomechanical Phenotyping of Circulating Tumor Cells: A Window to Study Cancer Metastasis
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Wei Lu, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Michele Grimm
* 08/31/2018
* USD 419,993.00

Blood-borne cancerous tumor cells are shed by both primary and metastatic tumors
and they are thought to contribute to the spread of cancer to distant sites in
the body. There is, therefore, a great interest in using a blood sample to
capture and measure the properties of circulating tumor cells in order to
predict the response of the tumor to therapy. Despite their importance, the
current understanding of circulating tumor cells is extremely poor. This project
will build a novel device that will separate these cells from the blood and
rapidly measure their biological and biomechanical properties. The developed
device will be useful beyond the isolation and measurement of tumor cell
properties, as the other cellular components of blood could also be separated
and mechanically measured using the device. The research will have broad impacts
on students from different educational levels and genders and ethnicities, by
exposing them to exciting challenges in science and engineering that have
relevance to our society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It still remains a major
challenge in understanding the biology of circulating tumor cells, and
ultimately, improving the systems level understanding of blood-borne metastasis
in cancer. This research will address the challenge in understanding the
biological nature of circulating tumor cells by establishing a cell sorting
device that can efficiently capture and isolate the circulating tumor cells
without using any capture antibody. A microfluidic deformability microcytometer
array will also be developed for high-throughput multiparametric single-cell
biochemical and biomechanical phenotyping of live single circulating tumor
cells. Experimental results from the deformability microcytometer will be
further used to guide developments of a contact element / cohesive zone model
and finite element simulation for quantifications of cell stiffness and
expression levels of surface antigens of circulating tumor cells. The research
team will further integrate the technological platforms with preclinical murine
xenograft models to investigate the timing of circulating tumor cell release
from primary tumors and their heterogeneity and biomechanical and biochemical
properties.