* 1536323
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Identifying and Increasing Landscape Connectivity for Endangered Species
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2015,03/31/2018
* Erin Poor, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 03/31/2018
* USD 15,876.00

This doctoral dissertation research project will examine how human development
and activities affect carnivore populations and their persistence at multiple
scales by identifying movement corridors for tiger populations in a human-
modified landscape. The decline in the global tiger population, the world's most
endangered wild cat species, affects nearly every nation. Activities that affect
tigers are the trade and consumption of tiger-based products, tiger poaching,
illegal logging, consumption of agricultural products grown on land that was
previously tiger habitat, negligent and corrupt law enforcement, and inadequate
funding to support law enforcement. The rate of development is increasing
globally, thus increasing the rate of habitat deforestation and fragmentation.
As wildlife is restricted to smaller habitat fragments movement corridors
between these fragments need to be maintained in order to permit continued
dispersal of animals, thereby enhancing the persistence of wildlife populations.
This project will provide new insights regarding how movement corridors can be
identified that connect different subpopulations of a specific species, thereby
facilitating exchanges of genes among the different subpopulations and help
preserve the genetic vitality of the species. The project will demonstrate the
utility of using graph theory and connectivity analyses to ascertain the extent
of habitat connectivity for a species. Although this project will focus on
habitat connectivity of tigers in Sumatra, project approaches and findings will
be applicable to wildlife in other habitats, such as pronghorn antelope, Florida
panther, and Eastern gray wolf. The project will help to identify habitat
corridors needed to maintain robust metapopulations of endangered species,
thereby assisting land managers and others to develop effective strategies that
can preserve species while helping advance economically beneficial land uses. As
a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award also will provide
support to enable a promising student to establish a strong independent research
career.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The doctoral student will employ analytic tools
from genetics, ecology, and geography to advance understanding of human
development impacts on tiger populations by pairing genetic-relatedness data
with landscape ecological data and modeling. Tiger DNA that was non-invasively
gathered by collecting tiger fecal samples throughout a Sumatran landscape will
be identified. Genetic material will be analyzed to determine whether tigers in
seemingly unconnected protected areas can breed together, thus indicating
whether tigers cross multiuse landscapes between protected areas. Landscape
modeling will be used to identify potential wildlife corridors, which are then
validated by genetics to determine whether tigers actually use these corridors
for movement, and especially if they breed after movement. The student will
identify which human-modified areas tigers can traverse using data provided from
satellite collars, further validating how tigers navigate multiuse landscapes
and also identifying "tiger-friendly" areas. She will identify predicted future
tiger movement corridors using landscape change modeling to identify threatened
corridors in need of protection to ensure tiger persistence into the future.