* 1536721
* Collaborative Research: Adaptive and Reconfigurable Tiles for Building Surfaces
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Dale Clifford, California Polytechnic State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Caglar Oskay
* 08/31/2019
* USD 144,582.00

The environment continually changes at many different scales and with many
different impact levels, and yet, the current U.S. building stock, in general,
does not. Current practice for architects and engineers is to isolate the
internal space of a building from the external environment with static barriers.
Alternatively, substantially greater levels of energy efficiency can be realized
by structures that interact with and respond to their environment. This project
pursues fundamental research to utilize smart materials to design and optimize
exterior building panels that operate as selective filters capable of adapting
to environmental stimuli, such as solar insolation. Smart materials provide the
unique ability to comprise structures that respond to external stimuli and
transform into optimized geometric configurations. Such a morphing façade system
will significantly alter the total sustainability of a building envelope and
take advantage of available environmental energy sources. Beyond direct
application to building technology, this work provides core concepts that can
accelerate the implementation of novel adaptive structure concepts in fields
such as aeronautics, astronautics, and the automotive industry. This research
integrates multiple disciplines, including mechanics, materials engineering,
architecture, and computer-aided engineering, as well as a geographically
diverse team, and will facilitate mentorship and education of a diverse group of
students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The smart material exterior building panels will
be realized as modular building tiles comprised of shape memory polymer with
controllable local activation and actuation. The technical approach involves
three major thrusts: 1) Establishing a computational framework for the
development of smart material tile morphing mechanisms; 2) Prototyping the tile
concept to evaluate the feasibility of materials and morphing mechanisms and
validating the computational methods; and 3) Numerical investigation of building
case studies to evaluate the potential benefits of the smart material tile
concept to overall building envelope efficiency. In addition to establishing a
new concept in responsive building technologies, the computational efforts
represent a substantial contribution to the field of computational methods for
inverse problems, particularly the formulation of uniquely tractable and
generalizable shape-based design objectives that could be used to facilitate
accurate and efficient computational inverse solution procedures in a variety of
shape-based applications. This work will further establish the concept of smart
material morphing structures with controllable local actuation and activation.