* 1536296
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Using Cosmogenic Nuclides to Understand the Interrelationship between Erosion Rates, Environmental Factors, and Landscape Response
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2015,01/31/2018
* Kerry Riley, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* sunil narumalani
* 01/31/2018
* USD 16,000.00

A better understanding of erosion rates and their influence on sediment loads in
streams is important for assessing the impacts on water availability and
agricultural land productivity. This doctoral dissertation research project will
investigate the abrupt incision of streams into their floodplains caused by
extreme temperature and precipitation events in the southwestern U.S. that led
to increased sediment loads and impacted the water resources of many
communities. The doctoral student will provide new insights into how erosion
rates and sediment yields and the effects of sediment supply on these streams
will help predict future channel adjustments and manage societal impacts. The
student will work closely with local communities and government agencies to
assess the vulnerability of water and agricultural land to these changes. The
impact on water resources has important policy implications for land and
resource managers as well as for stakeholders. As a Doctoral Dissertation
Research Improvement award, this award also will provide support to enable a
promising student to establish a strong independent research
career.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Because variability in erosion rates influences the
sediment content of a stream, rapid changes in those rates may damage productive
agricultural land and impact water resources availability. This project will
address the core question regarding how erosion rates vary as a function of
climatic variables, lithology, and topography, and how such variability
influences resource variability in the region. The doctoral student will collect
sediment samples from two catchment areas in the Grand Staircase-Escalante
National Monument area in Utah. She will analyze the terrestrial cosmogenic-
nuclide Beryllium-10 (TCN 10Be) concentrations in fluvial sediment. The analyses
will provide a quantitative assessment of the landscape's response to bedrock
and environmentally related changes in erosion rates and sediment supply. The
research outcomes will influence resource and landscape management of the large
tracts of public lands in a region that is both shaped and impaired by high
sediment loads.