* 1536336
* Collaborative research: Understanding the effects of acidification and hypoxia within and across generations in a coastal marine fish
* GEO,OCE
* 12/01/2015,11/30/2020
* Janet Nye, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 11/30/2020
* USD 132,194.00

Coastal marine ecosystems provide a number of important services and resources
for humans, and at the same time, coastal waters are subject to environmental
stressors such as increases in ocean acidification and reductions in dissolved
oxygen. The effects of these stressors on coastal marine organisms remain poorly
understood because most research to date has examined the sensitivity of species
to one factor, but not to more than one in combination. This project will
determine how a model fish species, the Atlantic silverside, will respond to
observed and predicted levels of dissolved carbon dioxide (CO2) and oxygen (O2).
Shorter-term experiments will measure embryo and larval survival, growth, and
metabolism, and determine whether parents experiencing stressful conditions
produce more robust offspring. Longer-term experiments will study the
consequences of ocean acidification over the entire life span by quantifying the
effects of high-CO2 conditions on the ratio of males to females, lifetime
growth, and reproductive investment. These studies will provide a more
comprehensive view of how multiple stressors may impact populations of Atlantic
silversides and potentially other important forage fish species. This
collaborative project will support and train three graduate students at the
University of Connecticut and the Stony Brook University (NY), two institutions
that attract students from minority groups. It will also provide a variety of
opportunities for undergraduates to participate in research and the public to
learn about the study, through summer research projects, incorporation in the
"Women in Science and Engineering" program, and interactive displays of
environmental data from monitoring buoys. The two early-career investigators are
committed to increasing ocean literacy and awareness of NSF-funded research
through public talks and presentations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
responds to the recognized need for multi-stressor assessments of species
sensitivities to anthropogenic environmental change. It will combine
environmental monitoring with advanced experimental approaches to characterize
early and whole life consequences of acidification and hypoxia in the Atlantic
silverside (Menidia menidia), a valued model species and important forage fish
along most of the US east coast. Experiments will employ a newly constructed,
computer-controlled fish rearing system to allow independent and combined
manipulation of seawater pCO2 and dissolved oxygen (DO) content and the
application of static and fluctuating pCO2 and DO levels that were chosen to
represent contemporary and potential future scenarios in productive coastal
habitats. First CO2, DO, and CO2 × DO dependent reaction norms will be
quantified for fitness-relevant early life history (ELH) traits including pre-
and post-hatch survival, time to hatch, post-hatch growth, by rearing offspring
collected from wild adults from fertilization to 20 days post hatch (dph) using
a full factorial design of 3 CO2 × 3 DO levels. Second, the effects of tidal and
diel CO2 × DO fluctuations of different amplitudes on silverside ELH traits will
be quantified. To address knowledge gaps regarding the CO2-sensitivity in this
species, laboratory manipulations of adult spawner environments and reciprocal
offspring exposure experiments will elucidate the role of transgenerational
plasticity as a potential short-term mechanism to cope with changing
environments. To better understand the mechanisms of fish early life
CO2-sensitivity, the effects of temperature × CO2 on pre- and post-hatch
metabolism will be robustly quantified. The final objective is to rear
silversides from fertilization to maturity under different CO2 levels and assess
potential CO2-effects on sex ratio and whole life growth and fecundity.