* 1536440
* Assessing the Viability of Pristine Fossil Corals from the Dominican Republic as Indicators of ENSO at the Miocene/Pliocene Boundary
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2017
* Rhawn Denniston, Cornell College
* Standard Grant
* Candace Major
* 05/31/2017
* USD 21,531.00

The El Nino-Southern Oscillation (ENSO) represents the single largest source of
interannual climate variability on Earth, and because numerous studies have
suggested that ENSO is sensitive to greenhouse warming of the atmosphere and
surface ocean, it is critical that we better understand how ENSO may respond
over coming decades and centuries. Studies of marine sediments have examined
centennial- to millennial-scale dynamics of the mean state of the tropical
Pacific, but these results have mostly lacked the temporal resolution necessary
to identify variability within the ENSO band (2-7 yr). Corals preserve records
of sea surface temperature and upwelling in their annually-banded aragonite
skeletons, and thus can be used for spectral frequencies consistent with ENSO.
The results of this study will contribute broadly to our understanding of the
nature of ENSO during a time period considered the most recent analog for an
anthropogenically-warmed world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research project will
generate a roughly half-century-long record of monthly-resolved oxygen and
carbon isotopic ratios from a pristine fossil coral from the Gurabo Formation of
the Dominican Republic as a test of ENSO variability in the latest Miocene. The
record will allow the researchers to test three proposed states of the Pacific
during the Miocene: entrenched El Nino conditions, entrenched La Nina
conditions, or a modern ENSO pattern. The results may also have implications for
modeling of flow through the Central American Seaway (CAS) prior to its final
closure. Complete formation of the Central American Isthmus (and closure of the
CAS) around 3.5 ma led to pulses of extinction and speciation in both the
eastern Pacific and the Caribbean, and may have contributed to Northern
Hemisphere glaciation through changes to ocean circulation. However, modeling
these effects are limited by the still considerable uncertainties in the nature
of flow through the CAS, largely owing to ambiguities surrounding the width of
the opening(s) and depth of the sill. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An undergraduate
student from Cornell College (a small, four-year liberal arts school with no
graduate programs) will receive advanced training in paleoclimatology research
methods by actively participate in all aspects of this project, including
presentation of results at a national meeting.