* 1536110
* 3D Imaging and Characterization of Fractures in Rock
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Bojan Guzina, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 08/31/2019
* USD 355,694.00

Geometric and interfacial properties of the fractures and faults in rock are the
subject of critical importance to many facets of our society including mining,
seismology, earthquake engineering, environmental protection, hydrogeology, and
utilization of geothermal energy. One particular parameter embodying the
fracture's interfacial condition is the so-called specific stiffness,
quantifying for instance its rigidity under shearing or compression. Beyond its
immediate relevance to the stability analyses in rock masses (e.g. during mining
operations), the fracture specific stiffness has been found to: i) bear an
intimate connection to the fracture's hydraulic properties (governing for
example the performance of enhanced geothermal systems), ii) serve as a
precursor of shear failure along rock discontinuities, and iii) help understand
the mechanism of shallow earthquakes. In general, however, the fracture's
response to given activation is equally driven by its geometry, which is
inherently not limited to the planar condition. Thus a holistic characterization
of subterranean fractures, that unveils both their geometric and mechanical
characteristics, is a paramount. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To help meet the
challenge, this research aims to establish a comprehensive analytical,
computational, and experimental platform for the geometric reconstruction and
mechanical characterization of arbitrarily-shaped discontinuities in rock by way
of seismic waves. The focus is on developing and validating a robust framework
for the waveform tomography of fractures that is capable of resolving their
three-dimensional geometry and spatial distribution of specific stiffness
without iterations. Typically, approaches to the waveform tomography entail
recursions owing to a highly nonlinear relationship between the fracture
characteristics and seismic observations. Recently, however, the research in
applied mathematics has produced a suite of non-iterative approaches to the
waveform tomography such as the method of Topological Sensitivity. By building
on such advancements, this research will cater for the imaging and
characterization of curved fractures while allowing for significant flexibility
in terms of the sensing arrangement. This is made possible by an innovative
3-step approach where the seismic waveforms are used to sequentially - and non-
iteratively - reconstruct: i) fracture geometry, ii) fracture opening
displacement profile, and iii) heterogeneous specific stiffness. The
developments will be verified in a laboratory setting, making use of the
recently acquired Scanning Laser Doppler Vibrometer that is capable of remotely
monitoring triaxial waveforms on the surface of rock specimens with exceptional
resolution and accuracy.