* 1536043
* CI-P: Toward Unified Tool Support for Linguistic Corpus Annotation
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2015
* Mark Finlayson, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 08/31/2015
* USD 31,286.00

Development of the computer processing of language is a key scientific and
technological capability that is funded by the NSF. In support of these efforts,
thousands of texts, comprising hundreds of thousands of words, are hand-
processed every year to provide data to train computer algorithms. This
annotation is time-consuming, expensive, and difficult, and it is hampered by a
long-standing problem: the lack of unified, specialized software tools to assist
in annotation and annotation management. Researchers at MIT envision creating a
new software infrastructure, called a Unified Annotation Workbench (UAW), that
is an off-the-shelf solution to this problem. A UAW will significantly the
effectiveness of every dollar spent on annotation. Importantly, a UAW will be
useful not only to linguistic annotation community: it will also benefit many
scientific and engineering fields that depend on people to annotation-like work.
As a small selection, this includes human-computer interaction, cognitive
science, cognitive psychology, sociology, psychiatry, and any field related to
the digital humanities.

Computational linguistics and statistical natural language processing (NLP) are
important areas of study, both scientifically and technologically. Advances in
these fields are fed by a universal hunger for the analysis of language data for
information processing tasks. Large annotated corpora are a key resource that
enables these advances. But despite the widely-recognized importance of
annotated corpora, the field has a major lack: there is no off-the-shelf,
general, unified tool for performing text annotation. Faced with this lack, many
language researchers create their own tools from scratch, at significant cost.
These tools are usually hastily designed, not released for general use, not
maintained, and often redundant with capabilities implemented by others. This
leads to lost opportunities, as researchers forego projects that present too
many difficulties in tool design; it reduces the ability of researchers to build
upon and replicate other?s work, as a critical part of the infrastructure is not
available; and this duplication of effort represents a significant waste of
resources. In this infrastructure planning project, the MIT team will take three
steps toward a Unified Annotation Workbench (UAW): a general, unified, off-the-
shelf infrastructure to support corpus annotation. First, they will
comprehensively review the state-of-the-art of annotation tools. Second, they
will identify potential implementation technologies for a UAW and create
software mockups. Third, they will organize a workshop to engage the annotation
community as to the best form of a UAW.