* 1536811
* Atomic-Scale Observation of Deformation in Nanoscale Body Center Cubic (BCC) Crystals
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2019
* Scott Mao, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 09/30/2019
* USD 340,000.00

The metals used in mechanical components for small-scale devices at room
temperature are normally of face center cubic character. Their mechanical
behavior is generally well-known. However, at high temperature, these FCC metals
become soft. Therefore, they are not suitable for high temperature application.
In that case, body center cubic (BCC) nanostructured metals offer an
alternative. These metals possess potentially desired high temperature strength.
They are expected to serve in components in future high temperature device such
as micro/nano electro-mechanical systems (MEMS/NMMS). Although the mechanical
behavior of large-sized BCC metals is well-known, these macroscale properties
cannot be directly used for nanometer-sized structures due to size effects. For
the analysis of the small devices, it is necessary to know the mechanical
behavior of BCC metals at small scales. However, there is lack of experimental
data for the deformation process at small scales, and also there is no
understanding of the deformation behavior of BCC metals at the nanometer scale.
An in-situ mechanical testing approach inside a special high resolution
transmission electron microscope (HRTEM) will be used in this research. This
constitutes a new approach for studying the mechanical behavior at atomistic
scale for nanometer-sized BCC metal specimens. The understanding of the
mechanical behavior of nanometer-sized BCC crystals gained from this research
will have direct impact on the design and fabrication of the high temperature
MEMS/NEMS. The research on the in-situ HRTEM is expected to open a new approach
to directly observe atomic-scaled deformation under mechanical stress. The
results from the research are expected to contribute to the advancement of
experimental mechanics and nanomaterials. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
will employ an in-situ tensile technique utilizing the most advanced instrument
of high resolution transmission electron microscope (HRTEM) to reveal the
deformation process in nanometer-sized BCC metal specimens. Firstly, nanometer-
sized high strength BCC metal specimens will be fabricated in-situ. Secondly,
tensile/compression experiment in-situ in the HRTEM will be conducted on these
BCC specimens to documents deformation behavior at room temperature and high
temperatures; Thirdly, lattice disturbance, dislocation dipole nucleation and
competition between slip and twinning in the deformation process will be
observed. Molecular dynamics modeling on key issues with a) dislocation dipole
formation; b) nucleation of twinning and dislocation and c) competition of
twinning and slip as function of crystal orientation will be carried out. The
experiments will be carried out via national user facilities at the
Environmental Molecular Sciences Laboratory (EMSL), Pacific Northwest National
Laboratory, Richland, WA. This collaboration will build national research
infrastructure.