* 1536133
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Assessing the Magnitude and Timing of Prehistoric Native American Landscape Impacts in Northeastern North America
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2015,04/30/2017
* Albert Fulton, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* sunil narumalani
* 04/30/2017
* USD 14,008.00

This doctoral dissertation research project will identify shifts in vegetation
and fire regimes related to human settlement and subsistence practices of
prehistoric Native American populations in the Finger Lakes region of the state
of New York. The doctoral student will analyze the range of environmental
impacts to distinguish various human-caused vegetation and landscape changes
from concurrent natural environmental changes. The project will provide new
insights into the chronological development of the vegetation and landscape of
the Finger Lakes region as it was subjected to a range of forces associated with
both human cultural change and natural environmental change during a critical
period of North American prehistory. The project has important implications for
paleoecological research, because it will employ new modeling techniques to
investigate prehistoric human-vegetation impacts using a suite of
archaeological, ecological, and historical datasets. The doctoral student will
work closely with several local Native American tribes, government agencies, and
nongovernmental organizations. The project should enhance understanding of
prehistorical environments and the dynamics of change over recent millennia. As
a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award also will provide
support to enable a promising student to establish a strong independent research
career.

This research focusing on Native American habitation and subsistence will
provide new information regarding the nature and magnitude of prehistoric
impacts on the forested ecosystems of the northeastern U.S. The doctoral student
will focus on the core question of whether a combination of archaeological and
paleoecological data can aid in reconstructing landscape changes related to
human activities that predate any historical record. The student will use an
integrated methodology that integrates historical, archaeological, ecological,
and geological data sets. These data sets will be analyzed using multivariate
statistical methods and geographic information system-based analyses. He also
will develop an ecologically based conceptual model to guide research on
prehistoric human impacts. The model will provide a template that can be used
elsewhere in the world to address the relative contributions of landscape change
related to natural environmental perturbations and human disturbance.