* 1536260
* The Role of Affect in Decisions Involving Risk across the Adult Life Span
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2021
* Joseph Mikels, DePaul University
* Standard Grant
* Claudia Gonzalez-Vallejo
* 06/30/2021
* USD 601,432.00

Though traditionally considered a cognitive endeavor, recent theory and research
highlight the role of emotion in decision making. In particular, it has become
increasingly clear that various aspects of affect are central to decisions
involving risk. Because human aging is known to bring substantial change in
emotion and cognition, the dynamics of decision making change as we grow older.
For instance, older adults are more emotion-focused and are biased toward
positive versus negative information relative to younger adults. Age induced
changes in the way people make choices are particularly consequential for
decisions involving risk in financial and health domains. These age-related
changes have major societal implications given that the proportion of older
adults in Western societies is approaching unprecedented levels. As greater
numbers of older adults are charged with making crucial financial and health
decisions, understanding how older individuals make such decisions becomes
increasingly critical. How might age-related changes in affect lead to more or
less risk taking? How do such age-related changes impact different financial and
health-related judgments and decisions? The objective of this research is to
address these questions and reconcile currently inconsistent findings regarding
aging and risk taking by examining different affective influences across
financial and health-related risky decisions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In a series
of studies this research will examine how positive and negative affect, both
integral to and incidental to the decision being made, influence attitudes
toward risk. Physiological measures of integral and incidental affect will be
collected to examine the mechanistic paths through which affect influences risk
taking across a range of tasks from an experience-dependent financial investment
task and multiple descriptive financial and medical framing tasks that
manipulate the presence of loss. The differential and combined effects of
integral and incidental affect as well as arousal on decision making across age
groups will be contrasted with cognitive changes across all studies. The
findings obtained will facilitate the development of interventions and risk
communication strategies, as well as new policies aimed at assisting older
adults as they make consequential decisions. Ultimately, this project will make
strides toward better understanding the affective underpinnings of risky
decision making across the adult life span.