* 1536741
* Citizens and the Social Sustainability of Energy Infrastructure Siting (SEI)
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2016,06/30/2017
* Hal Nelson, Claremont Graduate University
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Chen
* 06/30/2017
* USD 174,962.00

Delays in the construction of energy infrastructure can raise energy costs,
reduce electricity reliability, and cause supply disruptions. A systematic
empirical understanding of the social sustainability of energy infrastructure is
needed. This project develops and tests new theories about siting of
electricity, oil, and gas infrastructure using a variety of data and extensive
computer simulations. The Citizens and the Social Sustainability of Energy
Infrastructure Siting project will provide theories, empirics, and tools to
improve social welfare by shortening energy facility permitting times. The
broader impacts of the project include a methodology to engage communities
earlier in the siting process, help project proponents identify key concessions
to impacted communities to increase acceptance, as well as reduce legal and
political costs. The research will serve as the core material for a new Social
Sustainability of Energy course for the Claremont Colleges. Other project
outreach includes the development of the SEI project website that will host a
document repository as well as interactive maps of all the energy projects for
dissemination to siting practitioners and stakeholders.

The project objective is to understand and predict complex citizen opposition to
energy infrastructure projects. The comparative case-study design examines
citizens' perceptions of risks and associated place-protective actions across
energy technologies, integrating public acceptance surveys with case-specific
data about the type of energy technology and citizen proximities. The sample
frame comprises natural gas and oil pipelines, high voltage power lines, natural
gas electricity generation, and wind generation projects in the western US.
Seven to nine historical siting cases will be selected for which publicly-
available citizen and stakeholder contact information is available. Participants
will be asked to complete online surveys about risk attitudes along with
behavioral, demographic, and spatial data. Infrastructure Siting (In-Site)©
software will be used. This software integrates an agent-based model of
stakeholder dynamics with a Geographical Information System model that
structures the agents- interactions based on demographic, engineering, and
spatial data. The In-Site model simulates the emergence of community-based
oppositional organizations, which have been surprisingly effective in delaying
or blocking energy facilities projects. Spatial statistics and econometrics will
complement the agent-based modeling and allow a comparative analysis of the
underlying drivers of opposition across energy sectors and siting issues.