* 1536368
* Collaborative Research: Identifying the Role of Basin-scale Climate Variability in the Decline of Atlantic Corals
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Daniel Sigman, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 08/31/2018
* USD 264,801.00

Human carbon dioxide emissions are causing measureable changes in ocean
conditions. Many of these changes negatively affect coral reef ecosystems,
reducing their ability to provide food, arable land, tourist destinations and
coastline protection for hundreds of millions of people worldwide. This project
focuses on the effects of enhanced stratification, caused by ocean warming, on
the growth of reef-building corals across the Caribbean and Bermuda. Enhanced
stratification impacts primary productivity which generates food for corals.
Initial data generated by the investigators suggest that Atlantic coral growth
has declined in the last 5 decades in response to these changes. A laboratory-
based experiment is designed to test this hypothesis. If verified, the projected
decline in Atlantic primary productivity through the 21st century could
potentially rival and will certainly exacerbate the effects of warming and ocean
acidification on coral reef ecosystems across the North Atlantic. Support is
provided for graduate research, and undergraduate participation is facilitated
through the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution Summer Fellowship and the
Bermuda Institute of Ocean Sciences-Princeton Environmental Institute Summer
Internship Programs. The results will be presented at national and international
meetings and disseminated in a timely manner through peer-reviewed publications.
All data produced through this program will be archived in the Biological and
Chemical Oceanographic Data Management
Office.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Anthropogenic climate change has emerged as a
principle threat to coral reef survival in the 21st century. In addition to
ocean warming and acidification, global climate models project enhanced
stratification of the upper oceans through the 21st century and a consequent
decline in productivity, by up to 50%, in the North Atlantic. This project
employs controlled laboratory manipulation experiments to test the link between
productivity and growth of the dominant reef-building corals across the
Caribbean and Bermuda. Preliminary data generated by the investigators,
including multi-decade long coral growth histories and nitrogen isotope ratios
of coral tissue and skeleton, suggest that coral growth across the region has
declined over the past 50 years in response to productivity changes already
underway. If the link between ocean circulation, productivity decline, and coral
growth is verified, the projected 21st century decline in productivity could
rival and will certainly exacerbate the effects of warming and ocean
acidification on North Atlantic coral reef ecosystems.