* 1536019
* Improving Outcomes from Interdisciplinary R&amp;D
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Melissa Appleyard, Portland State University
* Standard Grant
* Cassidy Sugimoto
* 08/31/2018
* USD 99,100.00

Advanced research and development in industrial sectors ranging from life
sciences to electronics, requires interdisciplinary efforts to pool knowledge in
order to extend the technological frontier. This project will inform managerial
approaches to heighten the chance of commercial success for interdisciplinary
R&amp;D programs. The National Institutes of Health's Nanomedicine Development
Centers (NDCs), a research program designed with a ten-year horizon to fund not
only basic nanomedicine science but its translation into clinical outcomes
provides an opportunity to study the organization and outcomes of science. The
clinical applications are expected to improve health outcomes and the efficiency
of the U.S. healthcare system. The NDC researchers come from a variety of
disciplines, including biology, integrative physiology, computational biology,
neurobiology, genetics, chemistry, biomolecular engineering, oncology and
ophthalmology, and thus understanding their ability to engage in
interdisciplinary integration is paramount to their success. This research will
help improve strategies for forming and managing interdisciplinary teams.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project introduces an analytical approach to
examining the antecedents and payoffs to interdisciplinary R&amp;D. This study
considers the researchers' prior experience with interdisciplinary research, in
conjunction with the variety, distance, and interdependence of the disciplines
represented in their respective NDC teams. This research is grounded in the
theory of human capital accumulation, defined as the knowledge, experience and
skills by individuals. A related management literature has examined how human
capital contributes to innovation and firm financial performance. This research
extends these literatures by analyzing how interdisciplinary interaction
influences human capital accumulation and scientific achievement. Two primary
measures of scientific impact are employed by this study: quality-weighted
forward citations to the publications resulting from each research program; and
the progress made towards commercial application. Survey data provide additional
insights into the drivers of success for interdisciplinary teams.