* 1536581
* Collaborative Research: Effects of multiple stressors on Marine Phytoplankton
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2015,03/31/2020
* Edward Laws, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Sieracki
* 03/31/2020
* USD 189,806.00

The overarching goal of this project is to develop a framework for understanding
the response of phytoplankton to multiple environmental stresses. Marine
phytoplankton, which are tiny algae, produce as much oxygen as terrestrial
plants and provide food, directly or indirectly, to all marine animals. Their
productivity is thus important both for global elemental cycles of oxygen and
carbon, as well as for the productivity of the ocean. Globally the productivity
of marine phytoplankton appears to be changing, but while we have some
understanding of the response of phytoplankton to shifts in one environmental
parameter at a time, like temperature, there is very little knowledge of their
response to simultaneous changes in several parameters. Increased atmospheric
carbon dioxide concentrations result in both ocean acidification and increased
surface water temperatures. The latter in turn leads to greater ocean
stratification and associated changes in light exposure and nutrient
availability for the plankton. Recently it has become apparent that the response
of phytoplankton to simultaneous changes in these growth parameters is not
additive. For example, the effect of ocean acidification may be severe at one
temperature-light combination and negligible at another. The researchers of this
project will carry out experiments that will provide a theoretical understanding
of the relevant interactions so that the impact of climate change on marine
phytoplankton can be predicted in an informed way. This project will engage high
schools students through training of a teacher and the development of a teaching
unit. Undergraduate and graduate students will work directly on the research. A
cartoon journalist will create a cartoon story on the research results to
translate the findings to a broader general public
audience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Each phytoplankton species has the capability to
acclimatize to changes in temperature, light, pCO2, and nutrient availability -
at least within a finite range. However, the response of phytoplankton to
multiple simultaneous stressors is frequently complex, because the effects on
physiological responses are interactive. To date, no datasets exist for even a
single species that could fully test the assumptions and implications of
existing models of phytoplankton acclimation to multiple environmental
stressors. The investigators will combine modeling analysis with laboratory
experiments to investigate the combined influences of changes in pCO2,
temperature, light, and nitrate availability on phytoplankton growth using
cultures of open ocean and coastal diatom strains (Thalassiosira pseudonana) and
an open ocean cyanobacteria species (Synechococcus sp.). The planned experiments
represent ideal case studies of the complex and interactive effects of
environmental conditions on organisms, and results will provide the basis for
predictive modeling of the response of phytoplankton taxa to multiple
environmental stresses.