* 1536022
* The reach of the visible hand: government acknowledgments in US patents and technological change, 1975-2015
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2017
* Lee Fleming, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Mark Fiegener
* 08/31/2017
* USD 493,628.00

It has long been received wisdom that investment in research greatly facilitates
the technological progress that ultimately improves economic productivity and
living standards. Unfortunately, the systematic and quantitative evidence to
support these arguments remains thin and expensive to produce. This project
generates and makes public detailed observations of all patents that acknowledge
government support. More specifically, it calculates the proportion of patents
issued through 2015 that have relied, directly or indirectly, upon government
investment. This research provides a sharper picture of how government sponsored
research impacts technological change.

Using advanced data techniques, mainly natural language processing and machine
learning, this project identifies every US patent since 1976 that contains an
acknowledgment of government support. A real-time visualization tool will enable
the past and future citation networks of any U.S. patent since 1976. Taken
together, this work measures and illustrates the extent to which today?s
patented technology, both domestic and foreign, can be traced (whether directly
or indirectly) back to US taxpayer investment. This project investigates the
total number of government supported patents since 1976 and their
characteristics to discern the impact of government support on subsequent
invention, relative to similar private sector technology. Augmented with
characteristics of inventors the project will enable examination of the career
paths of government supported inventors and estimate US government support going
to foreign inventors. The project measures the impact of that support on
technological trajectories and the knowledge diffusion of ? and the foreign
brain drain from ? US government investment. It illustrates these results in a
dynamic rendering of the backward and forward citation network for any user-
specified patent. These easily communicated and illustrated findings facilitate
more informed discussion and debate regarding science and technology research
funding.