* 1536104
* Yukon River Chinook Salmon Declines: Learning From Tradition
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/2016,01/31/2018
* Catherine Moncrieff, Yukon River Drainage Fisheries Association
* Standard Grant
* Anna M. Kerttula
* 01/31/2018
* USD 49,955.00

This award to the Yukon River Drainage Fisheries Association (YRDFA) will
support an interdisciplinary workshop with Yup'ik Elders from the Yukon River
Delta, social scientists, and natural resource managers investigating the
natural history, environment, and health of the cultural keystone species whose
numbers are in precipitous decline, the Chinook salmon of the Yukon River,
Alaska. The focus of the workshop will be Elder knowledge of the salmon and
salmon fishing; discussing the history, changes, traditional place names,
harvest patterns, diet and food preparation, traditional fishing practices,
weather, river conditions, other animal and plant communities related to these
practices, as well as other relevant topics. This project is modeled after the
very successful Yup'ik Environmental Knowledge Project (YEKP) carried out by
Calista Education and Culture (CEC). Part of the project will be to transcribe
all of the recordings from the knowledge workshop. Following the workshop
resulting data will be analyzed and compared with other data sources, e.g.,
Alaska Department of Fish and Game, US Fish and Wildlife Service, scientific
research reports and publications, etc. in order to gain a more complete picture
of the natural history, environment, and health of Chinook salmon. Information
produced through the workshop will be shared widely among Yup?ik communities,
stakeholders, resource managers, and scientists.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Objectives of the project are:&lt;br/&gt;1) To work with
Yukon River Elder experts during a two and a half day workshop focused
on&lt;br/&gt;Chinook salmon declines;&lt;br/&gt;2) To analyze and compare
findings with contemporary social and biological studies about harvest patterns,
weather conditions, and related animal patterns;&lt;br/&gt;3) To share the
information gathered with Alaska Native and non-Native communities, resource
managers and scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;YRDFA will work in collaboration
with the CEC and use their proven model and methodology.&lt;br/&gt;Elder experts
will participate in an intensive multi-day Yup'ik language workshop in a
comfortable setting, talking at length about Chinook salmon declines. They will
be able to speak freely about concepts that may not be easily translatable into
English and will contain significant descriptions of places, animals, and
activities. The Elders will interact with social scientists from the CEC and the
YRDFA who will host, guide, record, and analyze the workshop interactions.
Discussion points will be reviewed in advance with western scientists at the
Alaska Department of Fish and Game (ADFG) and the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service
to gather their input on discussion topics that would meet their areas of
management and research interests.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Following the meeting in
Anchorage, the recordings will be transcribed and translated into English. The
transcriptions will be analyzed by theme by the PI. The themes will be shared
with the ADFG and USFWS managers to review for areas of further consideration
and analysis with existing fisheries data. This information will also be shared
with the Alaska Native communities that participated in the study.