* 1536795
* SHF:  Large:  Collaborative Research:  Designing the Programmable Many-Core for Extreme Scale Computing
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2014,12/31/2016
* Josep Torrellas, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* tao li
* 12/31/2016
* USD 274,973.00

This work proposes to design a programmable many-core for Extreme-Scale
Computing in mobile platforms (netbooks and smart-phones) of year 2020. This
work cuts across the architecture, compiler, operating system, and
correctness/performance tools areas. A key technology explored is that of cores
and all of the software continuously operating in Chunks (i.e., atomic blocks)
of instructions at a time --- eliminating the need for in-order, single-
instruction-at-a-time commit. The PIs will develop a novel chunk-based
architecture that supports the high levels of performance, power/energy
efficiency, concurrency, and locality required. They will develop advanced
compiler support for chunk generation that delivers high performance at low
power, and leverages all the programmability features of the architecture. They
will also design an OS that supports and takes advantage of chunks. Finally,
they will design a set of novel correctness and performance tools that exploit
chunks, signatures, hashes, and all the other features of this
architecture.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this work involve the
creation of a multidisciplinary research and education center at University of
Illinois and Purdue on Programmable Extreme Scale Computing. Faculty of diverse
expertise will be devoted to solving the problem of programmable, very-high
performance, very power/energy-efficient many-cores for mobile platforms of year
2020 and beyond. The PIs will broaden the course offerings at University of
Illinois and Purdue in the four areas, with multidisciplinary courses at
different depth levels. Graduate and undergraduate researchers in ECE and CS
will be involved in the research. Overall, the PIs hope to prove that
programmable, high-performance, and highly power/energy-efficient many-cores
based on continuous atomic-block operation are attractive.