* 1536453
* Collaborative Research: Dynamics of the Orkney Passage Outflow
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2018
* Sonya Legg, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 09/30/2018
* USD 84,220.00

Cold and dense water masses are formed through air-sea interaction near the
Antarctic and are funneled through narrow passages as they flow downward into
the deep ocean basins. The intense mixing that occurs along the way in these
passages sets the properties of the Antarctic Bottom Water, which spreads out to
fill the deepest layers over much of the global ocean. One of the most
remarkable features of contemporary oceanic climate change is the warming and
contraction of Antarctic Bottom Water. This study will make new field
measurements and computer simulations to address questions of how long-term
variability in the dense waters formed near the Antarctic is translated into
downstream variability elsewhere, such as the deep basins of the Atlantic Ocean,
and whether the observed warming trends result from diminishing Antarctic
contributions to the Meridional Overturning Circulation or from increased
mixing. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Orkney Passage is a key circulation choke point
that governs ocean exchanges between the marginal seas of the Antarctic
Continent and the Southern Ocean: approximately 5 Sverdrups (Sv) of newly
ventilated Antarctic Bottom Water are funneled through this narrow passage into
the Scotia Sea (Naveira Garabato et al., 2002) which represents a significant
contribution to the total 15 Sv of Antarctic Bottom Water estimated to pass
equatorward of the Antarctic Circumpolar Current?s southern boundary (Naveira
Garabato et al., 2014). Existing data (LADCP and CTD) reveal the presence of
thick bottom boundary layers, 500 meters in vertical extent, with intense
thermal wind shear above. Flows within the passage may also exhibit intense
horizontal velocity gradients and be hydraulically controlled upstream and/or
downstream of these observations: in the highly energetic and variable
environment above the bottom boundary layer, overturns exceeding 100 meters
extent have been observed. A control volume budget suggests that high levels of
mixing must continue downstream of Orkney Passage: the absence of observed
mixing in the Scotia Sea interior suggests this enhanced mixing must be located
along a boundary. This study will test the hypothesis that enhanced mixing in
the downstream boundary current results from overturning generated by tidally-
driven cross-slope shear in the Ekman boundary layer. This parameter regime,
however, is poorly understood from a theoretical standpoint owing in part to a
paucity of direct sampling of flows and diapycnal processes in situations such
as this. The dynamics that set turbulent mixing and transports within Orkney
Passage and in the boundary current downstream will be investigated using a
combination of numerical modeling and field measurements. The fieldwork will
complement observations of the diabatic and frictional processes in Orkney
Passage being carried out by collaborators in the UK, by employing a mooring
downstream of Orkney Passage. Regional numerical simulations using the MITgcm
model will be used in planning and interpreting the field measurements, and
importantly, in improving methods to accurately represent flows through narrow
passages in climate models such as the GFDL MOM6. Ultimately, the observations
and simulations will be used to address questions of how long-term variability
in the upstream Weddell Sea Deep and Bottom Water properties is translated into
downstream variability in the Scotia Sea: whether warming trends of Antarctic
Bottom Water in the Scotia Sea and Atlantic Ocean result from diminishing
Antarctic contributions to the Atlantic Meridional Overturning Circulation [e.g.
Johnson et al. (2008)] or increased diabatic mixing associated with a
strengthenedWeddell Gyre (Meredith et al., 2011). This study will significantly
improve the understanding of continuously stratified, rotating flow dynamics in
a sparsely sampled parameter regime with horizontal velocities having strong
horizontal and vertical gradients [Rossby number, Froude number &amp;#8764;
O(1)] and be applicable to many choke points of global deep ocean circulation.
The observations will be applied to improve the GFDL ocean general circulation
model, among the best of the coupled models contributing to IPCC future climate
projections. The project will promote teaching and training, by including 3
undergraduate interns (2 at Princeton, 1 at WHOI), with a particular effort made
to recruit under-represented minority students.