* 1536528
* RUI: A Molecular-Ruler Process to Create Nanostructures through Self- and Directed-Assembly
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Corey Causey, University of North Florida
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 08/31/2019
* USD 250,628.00

One of the great engineering challenges of the modern era is to create
nanometer-scale structures and devices with high throughput and reproducibility.
In nanoelectronics, the speed and density of devices have been the driving
forces behind the increased resolution and capabilities of traditional top-down
methods. The ability to maintain this trajectory is predicated upon the
development of novel fabrication methods. This Research in Undergraduate
Institutions (RUI) award supports the development of a hybrid approach that
couples a key aspect of conventional lithography, the ability to create complex
architectures over large areas, to the resolution afforded by molecular self-
assembly. The goal of this work is to create new economical nanomanufacturing
techniques for the electronics and communications industries. Given the
interdisciplinary nature of this project, undergraduate students will learn to
communicate across disciplines and will receive broad scientific and technical
training in preparation for their careers beyond the University of North
Florida.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the molecular-ruler process, conventional
lithography is combined with the selective deposition of multilayers that are
comprised of bifunctional thiol molecules and metal ions. The chemical
multilayer defines the nanometer-scale spacings of the lithographically
patterned surface structures. This hybrid approach is inherently parallel and,
hence, scalable and can be integrated into existing lithographic methods. The
molecular-ruler process has great potential as a fabrication technique, however
its general effectiveness and reproducibility is limited by the quality of the
multilayer. This award will support an investigation of extending the
capabilities of the molecular-ruler process by utilizing self- and directed-
assembly strategies. Bifunctional thiol molecules will be designed and
synthesized for use in metal-ligated multilayers. Monolayers and metal-ligated
multilayers will be assembled, and their structure and quality will be
characterized using a range of surface analytical techniques. Combining the
molecular-ruler process with atomic force lithography, devices with single-
nanometer interconnects within tailored nanogaps will be fabricated and their
electronic behavior will be characterized. This hybrid strategy for the
fabrication of nanogaps should provide a general and widely applicable
methodology to produce well defined, registered nanometer scale features.
Additionally, this award will support the interdisciplinary training of
undergraduate students in the areas of organic synthesis, analytical surface
science, and electronic device fabrication and characterization.