* 1536904
* Travel Support for Minority Students Attending Institute for Operations Research and the Management Sciences (INFORMS) Annual Meetings for Years 2015, 2016, and 2017
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Illya Hicks, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 08/31/2019
* USD 18,900.00

This grant provides funding for underrepresented minority graduate students to
attend the Institute for Operations Research and the Management Sciences
(INFORMS) annual meetings for years 2015, 2016, and 2017. The students supported
by this grant will either be engaged in the doctoral colloquium of the education
forum of INFORMS or presenting a technical talk at the conference. Hence, the
students will acquire necessary professional development skills to become an
integral part of the operations research and management science profession. In
addition, the experience gained through the professional development, the
presentation of research, and the interaction with senior professionals in the
field will positively affect the students' persistence to obtain a doctoral
degree and practice in the field. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the
efforts supported by this grant will increase the number and diversity of
operations research professionals. Also, the interaction of the students with
known professionals in the field along with other students will assist in
developing a network of colleagues to provide guidance to further their careers.
The primary goal of this work is to increase the exposure of underrepresented
minority graduate students to researchers in operations research and vice versa,
broadening the perception of both. The secondary goal is to foster these
individuals into positions within the professoriate.