* 1536161
* Structure of the Lithosphere - Asthenosphere Boundary Across the Northeastern US Margin from Seafloor MT Data
* GEO,OCE
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2017
* Robert Evans, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Candace Major
* 07/31/2017
* USD 174,040.00

The central mid-Atlantic region of the eastern North America margin is the focus
of ongoing studies of rift processes. The region presents the opportunity to
understand the role of pre-existing lithospheric weakness in guiding past
continental rifting. The tectonic plate at this currently 'passive' margin thins
through the transition from continental to oceanic crust, yet details of the
topography on the base of the plate, as well as the properties of the underlying
ductile mantle are not known. This information can provide clues about how
Earth's tectonic plates evolve over time and why continents break up in the
pattern that they do.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Determination of the lithosphere-
asthenosphere boundary (LAB) remains controversial, despite this boundary being
one of the most fundamental aspects of the plate tectonics paradigm. In addition
to limited knowledge about the topography on the base of the lithosphere,
constraints on the properties of the uppermost asthenosphere immediately beneath
the plate, are poor. Various interpretations have been presented to explain
seismic observations across the margin, including a remnant thermal perturbation
from a mantle plume, a hydrous upper mantle and the presence of partial melt.
However, the thermal perturbation model is not consistent with a dramatically
thinned lithosphere. This study will use magnetotelluric data to bring new
constraints to the problem. Processing of data from 14 seafloor instruments
deployed across the continental shelf offshore Martha's Vineyard, MA, and 2
stations on land will be accomplished. A 2-D resistivity model of the upper-
mantle structure will be obtained and interpreted in terms of lithospheric
alteration resulting from the influence of the Great Meteor hotspot. The depth
to the LAB, the nature of the deeper continental lithosphere and whether melt is
present at the top of the asthenosphere will be investigated.