* 1536383
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Reconstruction of Environmental Conditions and Human Occupancy Associated with Semi-Polar Settlements
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2017
* Gregory de Wet, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 08/31/2017
* USD 15,901.00

This doctoral dissertation research project will investigate why previously
thriving Norse settlements in Greenland collapsed or were abandoned in the early
15th century. The project will provide new insights into the regional
paleoenvironment of southwest coastal Greenland as well as how past societies
responded to environmental change. It will provide a test of competing
hypotheses, some of which posited that the settlements collapsed because of
deteriorating climatic conditions associated with the onset of Little Ice Age
cooling, but others have argued that the Norse Greenlander settlements were
victims of cultural and socioeconomic factors unrelated to environmental
conditions. More broadly, the project will enhance understanding of societal
fragility in the face of ecological change, and it may provide new knowledge
that can be employed by the Danish and Inuit residents of this region as well as
residents of other semi-polar environments in the U.S. and elsewhere. The
project will provide an excellent education and training opportunity for an
undergraduate research assistant. As a Doctoral Dissertation Research
Improvement award, this award also will provide support to enable a promising
student to establish a strong independent research
career.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will seek to identify what
environmental conditions may have contributed to the collapse of the Norse
settlements in Greenland. The doctoral student will analyze high-resolution
records of human occupancy, temperature, and precipitation using organic
geochemical proxies, also known as biomarkers, which were extracted from
lacustrine sedimentary archives adjacent to Norse ruins at three locations in
southwestern Greenland. He will reconstruct the history of human occupancy and
paleoenvironmental conditions at a multi-decadal scale for the past 1,500 to
2,000 years. He also will analyze human biomarkers to reconstruct shifts in
dietary patterns as a response to changing environmental conditions. The project
will blend geography, geology, archaeology, and geochemistry to produce findings
that include the integration of paleoenvironmental and human occupancy
reconstructions.