* 1536688
* RUI: Collaborative Research: What's their impact?: Quantification of medusan feeding mechanics as a tool for predicting medusan predation
* GEO,OCE
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2020
* Sean Colin, Roger Williams University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 07/31/2020
* USD 250,332.00

In many areas around the world jellyfish population abundances are increasing
and, at times, result in destructive blooms. Their rapid growth and high feeding
rates make them important predators in marine ecosystems and their effects on
ecosystems and human activities have increasingly raised concerns.
Unfortunately, scientists do not currently understand the factors that determine
which types of prey jellyfish eat and how much prey they eat. This presents a
knowledge gap of increasing importance as jellyfish undergo inexplicable
population fluctuations and invade new environments. In this project the
investigators will develop a robust understanding of the factors that determine
who and how much jellyfish consume based on their morphology, behavior and size.
This fundamental understanding of their feeding process will enable researchers
to use simple jellyfish characteristics to predict the ecological impact of
different types of jellyfish. This project will include the studying of a
greatly understudied group, rhizostome jellyfish, which represents many of the
recorded bloom events and geographic expansions. Further, these techniques are
sufficiently robust to have broader use in the study of physical-biological
interactions for other jellyfish species and other pelagic organisms. The
principal investigators participating in this collaboration are from primarily
undergraduate institutions. Student participation in the project will involve
several undergraduates during each year of the award. Through summer research at
the Marine Biology Laboratory, undergraduate students will become exposed to a
wide range of research and become immersed in a post-graduate environment that
can strongly influence their perception of the scientific profession. The
trophic impacts of scyphomedusae are subjects of broad international interest
and results of our research will be exchanged with a wide range of colleagues,
contributing to international scientific dialogue. In addition, we will use our
contacts with media (e.g. PBS Shape of Life series, Fantastic Jellies exhibit at
the New England Aquarium) involved in scientific education of the general public
to communicate our new findings.

The goal of this project is to quantify the variables that control the post-
encounter capture process in order to be able to predict the prey selection
patterns and clearance rate potential of different rowing medusae based upon
their morphological characteristics and size. To achieve this goal, the PIs will
use laboratory and in situ videography and optics techniques to quantify the
outcome of individual interactions with prey in the lab and in the field. Step-
by-step quantification of the post-encounter capture process will enable them to
quantify capture efficiencies of different prey types and determine which stages
of the process were most influential in determining the outcome of the
encounter. The investigators will use these quantitative observations to relate
medusan morphology and nematocyst properties to capture efficiencies. This will
allow them to predict prey selection patterns. These predictions will be
combined with flow-based encounter models to predict clearance rate potential
and prey selection of different medusan species under different prey conditions.
Finally, the investigators will validate our predictions using laboratory bottle
incubation studies to quantify prey selection and clearance rates of medusae fed
different prey assemblages. When achieved, this study will provide marine
ecologists with the critical "missing links" to be able to model and predict the
ecological impact of medusae populations in a variety of environments.