* 1536407
* Collaborative Research: Decision Model for Patient-Specific Motion Management in Radiation Therapy Planning
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,05/31/2017
* Wanpracha Chaovalitwongse, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 05/31/2017
* USD 184,758.00

A significant challenge in lung cancer radiation therapy (RT) is respiration-
induced tumor motion, which hinders sufficient delivery of curative doses to
target volumes. Although modern tumor motion management strategies for positron
emission tomography/computed tomography (PET/CT)-guided RT are becoming more
available, those techniques have yet to be fully incorporated into clinical
practice. This is mainly because not every patient will benefit from a costly
and lengthy motion-managed PET/CT scan due to high intra-patient and inter-
patient variability of respiratory patterns. The objective of this project is to
bridge the knowledge gap of which motion management method would best benefit an
individual patient. This project will develop a new decision-making paradigm, in
which machine learning techniques will be developed to characterize respiratory
motion patterns and combine them with other diagnostic factors to predict the
benefits from motion management methods for each individual patient. A decision-
analytic cohort model will be developed to compare and evaluate the cost-
effectiveness of the new decision paradigm and the traditional population-based
radiation oncology practice of motion management based on our existing database
of respiratory traces from more than 3,000 patients. While specifically applied
to decisions surrounding respiratory motion management, the developed decision
paradigm can be generalized and applied to other real life decision analysis
problems.

This award supports fundamental research in data mining/machine learning and
decision analysis, which will provide needed knowledge for the development of
tools for effective management of patient-specific tumor motion. The modeling
effort in this project will 1) establish a new mathematical foundation for
supervised multivariate sparse variable selection and prediction to discover
complicated multivariate relationships among high-dimensional variables; 2)
construct a general integrated validation framework to rigorously test the cost-
effectiveness of patient-specific health interventions. The new multivariate
sparse variable selection and prediction approach can be used to build an
interpretable prediction model, handle high-dimensional data with a low sample
size, avoid under-shrinkage effect, and incorporate structured group selection.
The cost-effectiveness analysis framework integrates the outcome of prediction
model, the treatment effect and survival outcome model. This modeling aims to
quantitatively estimate long-term cancer survival outcomes from improvement in
patient-specific planning of radiation dosing by selective motion control.