* 1536989
* Ecological impacts and drivers of double-stranded DNA viral communities in the global oceans
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2021
* Matthew Sullivan, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 08/31/2021
* USD 851,485.00

Ocean microbes produce half of the oxygen that humans breath and drive much of
the energy and nutrient transformations that fuel ocean ecosystems. Viruses of
microbes alter these microbial impacts through mortality, moving genes from one
organism to another, and reprogramming a host cell's metabolism during
infection. However, current understanding of ocean viruses is limited to just a
few specific model systems or study sites. This project will produce a
foundational dataset - the Global Ocean Virome (GOV) - for contextualizing newly
discovered viruses, and use this dataset to evaluate the environmental
conditions that structure viral communities or how viral communities change over
time and space. Additionally, the project will illuminate 'viral dark matter' by
experimentally identifying viral structural proteins and generating and
investigating single-cell genomic datasets to link novel and abundant viruses to
their host cells. The project will train 6 researchers, as well as lead to
curriculum, seminars and a public exhibit at The Wellington School and the
Columbus Center Of Science and Industry that will together reach approximately
500 students and 250,000 members of the public.

The GOV dataset is comprised of 104 viral metagenomes from around the world's
surface and deep oceans. This project seeks to analyze the GOV to identify and
quantify viral populations globally, then evaluate these data for ecological
patterns to determine the ecological drivers of surface and deep ocean viral
community structure. These patterns and drivers will be interpreted in the
context of (i) viral metaproteomic experiments to maximally annotate unknown
viral proteins that are structural, (ii) paired microbial sequence datasets
(metagenomes and metatranscriptomes) that will enable assessment of how biotic
factors impact viral community structure and (iii) single-cell amplified genomes
and phageFISH experiments that will enable identification of hosts for abundant
and novel viruses identified in the GOV. In total, this project will further
optimize recently developed genome- and population-based viral ecology methods
to establish a first available global map of surface and deep ocean viral
populations from both free viromes and infected microbes. These analyses will
help evaluate and establish myriad hypotheses about viral roles in marine
microbial ecology and biogeochemistry, and the dataset will be a foundational
resource for microbial and viral ecologists to contextualize new viruses,
identify viruses in microbial datasets, and explore virus-host interactions both
phenomenologically and through ecosystem modeling. The GOV will be made publicly
available through the NSF-funded iPlant Cyberinfrastructure and metaVIR
(http://metavir-meb.univ-bpclermont.fr/).