* 1536460
* Improving our Understanding of Tornadic Storms using VORTEX2 Observations and Idealized Simulations
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Yvette Richardson, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 08/31/2020
* USD 931,728.00

This research is targeted to improve our understanding of the processes
occurring within supercell thunderstorms that control the development of
rotation at the surface, its possible intensification, and the evolution of the
circulations thereafter using state-of-the-art observations from the Second
Verification of the Origins of Rotation in Tornadoes Experiment (VORTEX2) and a
hierarchy of numerical models. The generation of midlevel rotation in supercell
storms is well understood, but there are a number of outstanding questions
pertaining to the development of rotation at low levels and the subsequent
intensification of that rotation to tornado strength.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
main objectives of this research are&lt;br/&gt;- To examine how low-level
circulation in supercells is controlled by the storm environment and buoyancy of
the outflow&lt;br/&gt;- To investigate how environmental heterogeneity and storm
interactions influence the development and evolution of low-level
rotation&lt;br/&gt;- To determine how surface friction affects the development
of near-surface vertical vorticity&lt;br/&gt;- To explore the origins of small-
scale outflow "surges" and descending precipitation shafts on the supercell's
rear flank and their influence on the development and evolution of low-level
rotation&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;Despite having a
good grasp of how vertical wind shear and instability in a storm's environment
promote updraft rotation, scientists still lack a thorough understanding of how
many other aspects of a storm's environment, including environmental
heterogeneity, influence the development and maintenance of low-level rotation
in supercell storms. Even less is known about how storm interactions, sudden
precipitation impulses, and outflow surges affect low-level rotation. Moreover,
scientists are just now scratching the surface on how surface friction might be
an important source of angular momentum for developing tornadoes (as opposed to
simply playing an "indirect" role in tornadogenesis by enhancing near-surface
convergence of angular momentum that arises through other
means).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;A greater understanding
of tornado genesis, maintenance, and demise will have a broad impact on our
ability to predict and warn of these severe weather events and to reduce
casualties. The migration of National Weather Service (NWS) warning issuance
from counties to more flexible polygons now affords the opportunity to tailor
the size of the warning (and, implicitly, the duration of the warning) to the
expected longevity of the tornado. This research may help improve the guidance
that can be used by forecasters to anticipate how long a tornado might last. In
addition to communicating findings to the academic community at conferences,
both PIs have been directly involved with the transfer of new knowledge to the
NWS via seminars. Both PIs also have been active in a wide range of outreach
activities, including briefing the Congressional Natural Hazards Caucus,
briefing the National Academies Board on Atmospheric Sciences and Climate,
serving as science advisers for an IMAX film on tornadoes, developing K-12
educational materials, giving talks to nonscientist groups (e.g., elementary
schools, storm spotters, etc.), and developing museum exhibits.