* 1536927
* Collaborative Research: Phlorotannins - An Important Source of Marine Chromophoric Dissolved Organic Matter?
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2019
* Neil Blough, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 09/30/2019
* USD 145,308.00

Chromophoric dissolved organic matter (CDOM), the sunlight absorbing components
in filtered water, is important in the study of marine and freshwater ecosystems
as it can be used to trace the mixing of surface waters, as a proxy for carbon
cycles, and other biogeochemical processes. Although its importance in ocean
studies has been firmly established over the last several decades, sources and
structural composition of CDOM within the oceans remains unclear and continues
to be a subject of debate. Sargassum, a brown alga, is widely distributed in
temperate and subtropical marine waters and may be important source of CDOM to
the Sargasso Sea and Gulf of Mexico where Sargassum is abundant. This project
will investigate the contribution of macro brown algae-derived compounds to the
marine CDOM pool. Results from this study will have implications for the marine
carbon cycle and satellite remote sensing of ocean color to assess mixing of
surface water masses and biogeochemical processes. The project will provide
educational opportunities for a postdoctoral scholar, summertime undergraduate
internships (through a local NSF-sponsored Research Experiences for
Undergraduates (REU) program), and workshop and research opportunities for local
high schools students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sources of marine CDOM remain
debatable and a comprehensive understanding of its origins, distribution and
fate have been difficult. Marine CDOM, and in particular the "humic-like"
component, have been suggested to originate from terrestrial sources, primarily
lignins. However, recent evidence indicates that the exudation of phlorotannins
produced by macro brown algae may contribute significantly to the marine CDOM
pool. Phlorotannins, a class of polyphenols that are only found in, and
continuously exuded by macro brown algae such as Sargassum, strongly absorb
ultraviolet light and may have been underestimated in their contribution to the
marine CDOM pool within certain geographic locales. Upon partial oxidation,
light absorption by these specific compounds extends into longer wavelengths in
the visible creating an absorption spectrum similar to that of lignin. These
phlorotannins and their transformation products absorb light that might explain
in part the "humic-like" signatures observed in open ocean environments. This
study aims to characterize the optical properties and molecular composition of
Sargassum-derived CDOM including its aerobic oxidation and photochemical
behavior, as well as quantify Sargassum-derived CDOM to better estimate its
possible contribution to the CDOM pool in the Sargasso Sea and Gulf of Mexico.