* 1536277
* RUI: Behavior-Based Stochastic Traffic Flow Modeling for Intersection  Safety Improvement
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2019
* Winny Dong, Cal Poly Pomona Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Yueyue Fan
* 09/30/2019
* USD 200,000.00

This research will investigate driver behavior at signalized intersections and
derive sophisticated traffic flow models aimed at intersection safety
improvement. Intersection safety has long been a national concern, partly due to
the lack of understanding of complicated driving behaviors, especially decision-
making mechanisms present when drivers face signal phase changes. This research
tackles this issue by conducting a comprehensive investigation of driver
decision-making at signalized intersections and, using insights from these
investigations, developing a stochastic traffic flow model for such interrupted
flow situations. Through the integration of the developed traffic flow model
with connected vehicle technologies (specifically, V2X), the developed traffic
flow model can be used to quantify the safety performance of signalized
intersections, identify emerging hazardous situations, and contribute to the
development of driver-assistance and intersection-accident-avoidance
technologies. Furthermore, the outcomes from this research will create
opportunities for students, particularly those from underrepresented groups,
through educational and research opportunities in transportation engineering. It
will also provide opportunities for college students, traffic engineers, and
K-12 faculty and students through curriculum development, educational modules,
and creation of pathways between high school and college, as well as college and
graduate school.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of this research include:
1) investigating complicated driving behaviors and the inner mechanisms of
drivers' decision-making at signalized intersections through the analysis of
vehicular trajectory data extracted from video images and 2) developing a
stochastic traffic flow model to describe complicated driving behaviors and
predict potential traffic conflicts at signalized intersections by considering
the stochastic nature of drivers decision-making when facing signal phase
changes under varying circumstances. This research will contribute to the
theoretical development of traffic flow models. These traffic flow models will
be able to describe complicated driving behaviors and estimate traffic conflicts
at signalized intersections, both of which are absent from most other traffic
flow models. Furthermore, this research is expected to contribute significantly
to the improvement of intersection safety. This research will build a foundation
for the future development of dynamic systems for alerting drivers of emerging
hazards and helping to avoid intersection accidents.