* 1536221
* WORKSHOP:  "Central Valley California Rural Water Infrastructure Development and Outreach Project"
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2017
* Jeffrey Mosher, National Water Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 03/31/2017
* USD 59,864.00

1536221 Mosher

Central Valley California Rural Water Infrastructure Development and Outreach
Project

Within the United States, hundreds of thousands of families do not have reliable
access to clean drinking water. This reality impacts the US economy and national
security because the areas under the most stress tend to supply much of the
nation's food, fiber, mineral, and energy resources. The objective of this
project is to mitigate this problem by developing a methodology that will allow
local communities to combine resources to overcome this scale issue and to
address the maintenance and upgrade backlog of their systems by identifying
potential public-private partnerships that will provide financial support. The
effort will focus on the San Joaquin Valley in California for its test case,
using stakeholder driven workshops to identify the local issues and develop the
necessary communal relationships and support.

This project will develop a new and unique approach for helping these rural
communities through a combination of stakeholder driven activities and tradeoff
analyses. The approach will form the foundation for bringing rural communities
together to leverage common resources and increase their economic power, with
the end goal of using their collective involvement to pursue private-public
partnerships that will fund the necessary system and infrastructure
improvements. While stakeholder driven processes, communal approaches, and
tradeoff analyses have been used in the past, this effort will be the first to
combine the three with the goal of simultaneously developing engineered and
financial solutions for the region. The San Joaquin Valley is one of the fastest
growing regions in California with an average growth rate from 2000-2010 of 21.6
% and a population of approximately 4 million people. The population is
predominantly Hispanic (95.6) with a median income that is nearly half of the
California median ($22,792 vs. $58,328 in 2012). In 2006, six counties in the
San Joaquin Valley had the highest percentage of residents below the federal
poverty line with approximately 49 % of the residents living in poverty. Less
than 1 in 3 has a high school education or better. From 2008-2012, about three-
quarters (73 %) of the San Joaquin Valley?s economic production is from
agriculture, forestry, fishing and hunting, with transportation and warehousing
(4 %), accommodation and food services (3 %), retail trade (3 %), manufacturing
(3 %), utilities (2 %) and administrative support and waste management (2 %)
making up the majority of the balance. Approximately 50 % of the population
works in agriculture producing over 300 crops that represent approximately 13 %
of the national agricultural production. The statistics above show that this
project will provide broad impacts to a mostly Hispanic and impoverished
community that lacks the educational background and technical expertise to
tackle such a difficult problem. Through helping communities increase the
reliability and quality of their local water supplies, this project may also
contribute to local, regional, and national economies by increasing worker
production as well as by reducing health costs associated with water quality
ailments.