* 1536794
* RUI:  Beyond cleaning symbiosis: Ecology of
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2015,11/30/2021
* Alexandra Grutter, Arkansas State University Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 11/30/2021
* USD 1,141,983.00

Most research on the complex biological interactions that inhabit coral reefs
has focused on larger organisms that are easily observed by divers. However,
marine scientists are increasingly aware of the importance of the tiny organisms
that make up the "smaller majority." This includes parasites, organisms that
feed on other organisms without killing them, which may make up as many as 80%
of the species on coral reefs. Among the most important parasitic organisms on
coral reefs are gnathiid isopods, so-called 'ticks of the sea', that share many
similarities with blood-feeding ticks and other arthropods on land. Like ticks
and mosquitoes, gnathiids transmit malaria-like blood parasites. In high
numbers, they can remove enough blood to kill adult fish, but even a single
gnathiid can kill a juvenile fish. Thus, gnathiids may have a significant effect
on coral reef communities through their effects on coral reef fishes. This
project will use an integrative interdisciplinary approach involving field and
laboratory observations and experiments, and molecular tools. In addition to
contributing to our understanding of life in our oceans, this research will
provide continued support for U.S. Doctoral and Masters students and will create
valuable research opportunities for undergraduates from multiple institutions.
The project will further build on the investigators existing relationships with
resource managers, local divers, fishers, and boat operators, as well as K-12
schools and environmental education programs, and will contribute to local
economies. A major goal of our outreach efforts will include an exhibit
featuring our research at Coral World Ocean Park on St. Thomas, participation in
Virgin Islands radio programs, and hosting high school students from South
Carolina Governor's School.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal this
investigation is to understand the ecology of fish-parasite interactions on
coral reef and associated ecosystems. This project focuses on fish-parasitic
gnathiid isopods, the most common ectoparasites of coral reef fishes that are
best known for their role in cleaning symbiosis, as the major food item of
cleaner fishes. However, their abundance, host range, role as micropredator,
disease vector, and potential prey item for other species, as well as their
strong association with the benthos suggests the potential for much stronger
community impacts. The goals for this project are to: 1) characterize the
factors influencing local gnathiid isopod density by examining the role of fish-
hosts, benthic cover, gnathiid predators including cleaners, and gnathiid
conspecific attraction; 2) determine and quantify variation in host exploitation
and the effects of gnathiid density on larval fish-host recruitment. To
accomplish the first objective, the investigators will trap gnathiids from the
substrate at sites in the Caribbean, Australia, and the Philippines. Variables
associated with benthic habitat as well as local fish communities will be
quantified and compared with local gnathiid abundance. Laboratory experiments
will be conducted to determine the effects of different host species on gnathiid
growth and reproduction and to determine the role of conspecific attraction in
the formation of aggregations. Predators of gnathiids will be identified through
examination of gut contents and through laboratory feeding studies. To
accomplish the second objective, patterns of host-exploitation will be
determined by DNA barcoding of blood meals from wild-caught gnathiids and
results compared with the availability of different host species. To determine
the effects of gnathiids on early life history stages of coral reef fishes,
gnathiid abundance will be manipulated on small artificial patch reefs onto
which newly-settled reef fishes will be transplanted.