* 1536354
* Heterogeneity and Anisotropy in Tough Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Alain Karma, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 08/31/2019
* USD 444,998.00

Toughness is a material's ability to withstand fracture. Understanding and
predicting this key property remains a major challenge for most structural
materials. In biological systems high toughness is commonly associated with
composite microstructures. Often, soft flexible proteins are found in
combination with a hard mineral crystal, organized with specific orientations.
This project will utilize novel methods for constructing synthetic composite
materials in which the material components can be arranged in a controlled way
to achieve a large array of different microstructures. The materials will be
tested mechanically to determine their strength and toughness. Computer models
of the materials will be generated in order to predict crack propagation, giving
insight into the critical physical principles governing tough materials. This
project will determine critical characteristics of tough materials. Thereby, the
anticipated research outcomes will improve the ability to construct materials
with optimal mechanical properties. Undergraduate students and high school
summer interns will be involved in the construction and mechanical testing of
the materials. A K-8 module entitled 'Being tough' will be developed to teach
students underlying principles of mechanics of materials, including composite
structures, orientation of components, and material properties. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This project combines computational and experimental studies of crack
propagation to determine the relative importance of material anisotropy and
heterogeneities in crack path selection and fracture toughness. Novel synthetic
discontinuous fiber composites will be produced whereby inhomogeneity and
anisotropy of the composite can be tuned with a magnetic field. Numerical
simulations will employ the phase field method to predict complex crack paths in
materials with defined anisotropy and heterogeneities. Crack propagation will be
experimentally measured and computationally predicted in various loading
configurations. The interaction of cracks with macroscopic heterogeneities, and
crack growth in anisotropic materials will be investigated. With this research
we can determine what type and amount of anisotropy (elastic moduli versus
fracture energy) lead to crack destabilization, how these instabilities manifest
for different modes of fracture in two and three dimensions, and what relative
importance anisotropy and heterogeneity have in promoting crack deflection and
increased toughness.