* 1536109
* WORKSHOP: Doctoral Consortium at the PETRA 2015 Conference
* CSE,IIS
* 05/01/2015,06/30/2016
* Fillia Makedon, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 06/30/2016
* USD 29,040.00

This is funding to support a doctoral consortium (workshop) of approximately 12
promising graduate students from U.S. institutions of higher learning along with
distinguished research faculty mentors, to be held in conjunction with the
Eighth International Conference on Pervasive Technologies Related to Assistive
Environments (PETRA 2015), which will take place July 1-3 on the island of
Corfu, Greece. The PETRA mission is to promote interdisciplinary research on
ways to use pervasive ambient intelligent environments to improve the quality of
life and enhance human performance with greater capabilities; it is the only
annual conference that brings together theoreticians and practitioners from a
wide variety of disciplines to focus on the application of pervasive
technologies to assistive environments. Outcomes of this conference have a broad
impact in diverse application areas such as manufacturing, transportation,
energy systems, security and safety, robotics, healthcare, biomedicine,
environment and conservation. PETRA brings together very different types of
technologies to also address important social and healthcare issues for
sensitive populations, such as the elderly, persons suffering from chronic
conditions such as Alzheimer's, Parkinson's, Cerebral Palsy, and other
disabilities or traumas. The PETRA proceedings are published by the ACM digital
library, and the authors of the best papers are invited to submit to special
journal issues after the end of the conference. More information about the
conference may be found online at http://www.petrae.org. The PETRA 2015 Doctoral
Consortium will bring together some of the best students, researchers and
practitioners in relevant fields, and will thereby afford the younger
participants a unique opportunity to gain wider exposure for their innovative
ideas while also receiving reinforcement for the importance and value of
conducting research with societal impact. The workshop will allow the junior
participants to create a social network both among themselves and with senior
colleagues. The organizing committee will make a concerted effort to attract
participants who are women, members of under-represented minorities, and persons
with disabilities; to further assure diversity, NSF funds will be used to
support no more than 2 student participants from any one institution, and if 2
students are supported, one of them must be a minority or person with
disability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of the day-long Doctoral Consortium
are to increase the exposure and visibility of the participants' work within the
community, to help establish a sense of community among this next generation of
researchers, and to help foster their research efforts by providing substantive
feedback and guidance in a supportive and interactive environment from a group
of senior researchers. Student participants will be drawn from diverse
communities including computer science, engineering, psychology, social science,
neuroscience, human-computer interaction, cognitive science and communication.
They will make formal 20-minute presentations of their work and will receive
feedback from a faculty panel; the feedback is geared to helping students
understand and articulate how their work is positioned relative to other
research, whether their topics are adequately focused for thesis research
projects, whether their methods are correctly chosen and applied, and whether
their results are appropriately analyzed and presented. The workshop faculty
members will bring a wide spectrum of expertise, and provide student mentoring
and coordination. Doctoral Consortium attendees will be asked to create and
maintain a "digital workbook" where along with their work they include feedback
on papers they attended and observations that they gathered (e.g., through
meetings and discussions with conference speakers and other participants) that
will apply to and impact their work. Short papers on the participants' work will
be published in the conference proceedings, and a summary report on the event
will be posted on the conference website.