* 1536486
* Early Career: Acquisition of Laser Diffractometer Particle Size Analyzer for Grain Size Analyses of Pyroclastic and Sedimentary Deposits
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2016,02/28/2017
* Kimberly Genareau, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* herbert wang
* 02/28/2017
* USD 76,207.00

This project will obtain a Laser Diffractometer Particle Size Analyzer (LDPSA)
to study the physical dynamics of explosive volcanic eruptions. The instrument
will be used to analyze volcanic ash as a product of magmatic fragmentation and
as a hazard to aircraft, electrical infrastructure, and human health. The
instrument will also serve multiple faculty researchers in geoscience and
physics. The LDPSA will provide hands-on training for several graduate and
undergraduate courses in the Department of Geological Sciences. The instrument
will also permit public outreach efforts to local high schools by providing
opportunities for visiting students to use the instrument.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A Laser Diffractometer Particle Size Analyzer (LDPSA)
allows researchers at University of Alabama Tuscaloosa to explore grain size
analyses as a complementary tool for answering research questions seeking
information about watershed systematics and the regulation of bacterial
communities. Preliminary data demonstrate that sediment surface area, calculated
using particle size, is an important factor regulating the total bacterial
biomass. The LDPSA will provide information to evaluate: 1) whether this
relationship holds across seasons and hydrological regimes; 2) whether sediment
surface area and size distribution also play an important part in determining
microbial community structure. The LDPSA will provide hands-on training of
research methodologies for a variety of both graduate and undergraduate courses
in the Department of Geological Sciences. The availability of an LDPSA will
broaden the effectiveness of these lessons and allow students to directly
perform analyses and examine the resultant data in an interactive setting.
&lt;br/&gt;