* 1536736
* Investigating the Mechanics of Cell Division with A Side-View Atomic Force Microscope
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,05/31/2019
* Ovijit Chaudhuri, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Laurel Kuxhaus
* 05/31/2019
* USD 399,999.00

Cell division is essential for life; it underlies the development of humans from
embryo to full-grown adult, as well as regenerative processes such as wound
healing and pathologies such as cancer. While cell division is an inherently
mechanical process, its physical nature is poorly understood. This fundamental
research will use a device called an "atomic force microscope" (AFM) to measure
the small forces created by a cell and the stiffness changes of the cell during
division into two cells. In addition, the AFM will be used to measure how the
division of cells is changed by application of force. As cell division is an
essential process in biology, the results of this work will contribute to
understanding development and growth of organisms, tissue development, tissue
regeneration, and cancer. The interdisciplinary approach taken in this research,
involving the application of cutting edge techniques in engineering to the study
of cell biology, will have a positive impact on the education of engineers and
biologists including those from underrepresented groups. In addition, the novel
measurement device built during the project will remain as a resource for future
research by the current team and their colleagues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
tissues, cell division is physically restricted in all dimensions by neighboring
cells and extracellular matrix. Dividing cells must be able to generate
significant forces in a spatially and temporally coordinated manner to create
the morphological changes accompanying cell division, and in some contexts must
do this while experiencing physiological forces. How cells generate and respond
to such forces remains unclear, as cell division has been primarily studied in
cells cultured on flat petri dish surfaces. The objective of this project is to
elucidate how cells generate and respond to forces, and alter their structural
properties, during cell division. We will construct and use a high-resolution
side-view imaging atomic force microscope to directly measure forces generated
by cells during each stage of cell division while simultaneously imaging the
dynamic cytoskeletal and chromosomal rearrangements in dividing cells in epi-
fluorescence along a plane perpendicular to the sample surface. With this tool,
we aim to address the following important questions regarding the mechanics of
cell division: (1) What are the forces generated by cells following during cell
division and how are they generated?; (2) How do the viscoelastic properties of
cells change during each stage of cell division?; and finally (3) what is the
effect of applied force on cell division?