* 1536542
* Collaborative Research:  Connecting Women Faculty in Geotechnical Engineering - Thriving in a Networked World
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/15/2016,02/28/2022
* Shobha Bhatia, Syracuse University
* Continuing Grant
* Giovanna Biscontin
* 02/28/2022
* USD 641,155.00

This project focuses on professional networking outcomes among faculty in the
geotechnical engineering community which will lead to broader impacts for the
nation by improving retention, advancement and scientific collaboration of
especially female geotechnical engineering faculty. Networking improvements will
be facilitated by developing a cohesive intellectual community that provides
access to mentoring, novel information and new resources, as well as
collaboration partners. Using an intervention into the existing - largely
disconnected - scientific community, female faculty will participate in
networking workshops, as well as pre- and post-intervention surveys to
understand their current networking needs, improvement of their networking
abilities over time, and the impact their network ties have on academic
collaboration. The goal of the intervention process is to lower isolation of
female faculty in geotechnical engineering by creating and sustaining a
supportive national network that drives career success in
academia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will apply social network analysis
and professional development activities to improve networking and collaboration
among geotechnical engineering faculty in order to bridge the geographical
distance and connectivity gaps faced especially by female geotechnical
engineering faculty. Building on past efforts of NSF and others, the project
will create a network that fosters active tie creation and provides access to
collaboration opportunities among geotechnical engineering faculty in the U.S.
The intervention into the existing network combines face-to-face networking
meetings and virtual networking practices to increase collaboration
opportunities. The core challenges are: (a) how to sustain the attention
network, (b) how to maintain strong connections among female faculty in their
immediate professional environments and, (c) how to create weak ties that will
help them in situations where their strong ties are unable to provide the social
support, collaboration and information that they need. The outcomes of the
research will improve the faculty's understanding of the importance of
networking, provide opportunities for sustaining collaborative connections with
colleagues across the nation, and equip participants with the knowledge and
skills to collaborate in a networked world. The summative evaluation, including
a before and after social network analysis, will evaluate the effectiveness of
the purposeful interventions into the existing network of mostly weak ties among
geotechnical women faculty and recommend promising practices for use in other
disciplines where women face similar challenges.