* 1536340
* Learning Failure Propagation Patterns in Interdependent Network From Observed Post-Disaster Disruptions
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Gregory Miller, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Walter Peacock
* 08/31/2020
* USD 306,018.00

This project is to develop models and tools to uncover the failure cascading
process, or how failures of an initial, small set of nodes propagate through
interdependent networks as it happened in the real world. Recent disasters such
as blackouts in the United States and Canada and the 2012 Hurricane Sandy have
repeatedly shown the effects on society resulting from cascading failures
between interdependent critical infrastructures. This research addresses a
fundamental challenge in building toward our next-generation resilient critical
infrastructures: what kinds of interdependencies within and across systems will
facilitate or mitigate a potential failure cascading process. This project will
also provide a critical opportunity to develop a methodological class that
combines knowledge from multiple fields. The modules developed in the course
will be widely disseminated through the project website. Outreach activities
will focus on under-represented minority students, as well as an advisory team
comprising practitioners in disaster/emergency response.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will utilize novel geostatistical and
statistical approaches that will allow the PIs to estimate disaster disruptions
at a fine spatial scale and identify a sequence of events replicating the
failure propagation process using empirical data collected before and after a
disaster. It will also use independent datasets, reports and informal
qualitative interviews to statistically validate and contextualize the numerical
model results. This project builds on a solid intellectual and methodological
foundation resulting from our previous studies as well as the most recent
developments in advanced statistics, general network science, and infrastructure
interdependency. The research has the potential to bring transformative changes
across multiple fields.