* 1536502
* Collaborative Research: Wave driven flow through a shallow, fringing reef
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2019
* Juan Alonso, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 09/30/2019
* USD 787,404.00

Coral reefs face two significant long-term challenges to their existence: (1)
Ocean acidification, which hinders the ability of corals to calcify; and (2)
Ocean warming, which leads to coral bleaching. The Ofu reef (American Samoa),
home to corals that seem to have exceptional bleaching resistance, is the
location of active research into how corals may be able to meet those challenges
biologically and biogeochemically. Given that both carbon system and temperature
dynamics on the reef depend on flow, the physical insights and quantitative
results from the data and modeling of this study should provide significant
input to studies of ecology and biogeochemistry at Ofu and other similar reefs.
In addition, the project will advance the technology for mapping reefs at high
resolution. The project will involve several undergraduate and graduate
students, as well as a postdoctoral scientist, providing unique material for
university courses. The results of this study will be brought to the general
public through a series of short online videos, produced to explain the link
between hydrodynamic processes and reef health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals
of this project are: (1) Test the concept that the relative importance of
friction in the lagoon and friction on the reef crest determines the structure
of the overall circulation; (2) Test the hypothesis that drag coefficients
related to local, spatially averaged, flows can be estimated from data on reef
topography; (3) Carry out a quantitative evaluation of the dynamics of Ofu reef
flows using a depth-averaged circulation model based on detailed bathymetry and
estimates of spatially variable drag parameterizations. The primary activities
of this project would be: (a) Mapping of reef bathymetry at decimeter scale
using an Unmanned Aerial Vehicle carrying cameras and novel image processing of
the resulting images; (b) Deploying a set pressure loggers, temperature loggers,
acoustic Doppler current profilers and a meteorological station for a 2-km long
section of the Ofu reef for two one-month periods and analyzing the results of
these observations to estimate flow properties such as drag; (c) Idealized and
realistic modeling studies carried out using a three dimensional model. The
design of the instrument array in combination with the mapping and modeling is
intended to both test the conceptual circulation model and to evaluate how drag
on different parts of the reef varies with overall depth, flow and with
geometric parameters describing the physical structure of the reef.