* 1536135
* EAGER: Microbial Populations as Biosignatures for Evaluating Long Term Effects of Urbanization
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2017
* Maia Larios-Sanz, University of Saint Thomas
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 08/31/2017
* USD 22,000.00

This unique, high-risk, multidisciplinary study will bridge microbial ecology,
environmental genomics, archaeology and urban ecology. The investigators posit
that studies of soil microbial communities will reveal new insights into the
activities of past civilizations, particularly at sites that have undergone
repeated urbanization. Samples will be collected from soil profiles at an
archaeological site in Turkey (Tel Ta'yinat) and Israel (Tel Gezer). DNA
sequences will be recovered from soils and used to profile the microbial
communities, and correlate them with other geological measurements. A model will
be formulated using the multiple lines of evidence generated from this
experimental regime, and informed by previous excavations and interpretations of
the cultural history of the two sites. The research involves international
collaborative work with colleagues in Australia and Canada, and at sample sites
in Turkey and Israel. The project will also involve hands-on, process-oriented,
guided inquiry learning field trips for undergraduate and high school students
to archaeological sites in Montana and Wyoming. The project will broaden
participation in science by supporting the involvement of an a faculty member at
a Hispanic American-serving institution.

Soil microorganisms provide a potentially tractable system to investigate
repeated urbanization events. These communities, or "microbiomes" could provide
new insight into the processes that shape and modify urban landscapes across
time scales. This team hypothesizes that natural and anthropogenic processes
localized at tells (archaeological mounds created by human occupation and
abandonment) have produced measurable signatures from microbiomes, and that
these microbiosignatures can be correlated to human impacts as reflected in
urbanization and land use dynamics. Two Middle Eastern tells representing a
gradient of duration of abandonment (4000 to 40 years) will be studied with two
objectives in mind: i) characterization of each tell using compound-specific
isotopic, biogeochemical, stoichiometric, and archaeological approaches in
combination with novel biosignature/-omics approaches providing a description of
the legacy of human occupation and use and ii) parameterization of a process-
based model capable of defining the complex evolution of microbiosignatures to
help predict human disturbance effects. The novel approach of this project
addresses these questions: i) What secondary metabolite inventory is resident in
tell soils that is not found in non-urbanized soils? ii) How does this inventory
reflect the complex urbanization history of tells? iii) How can Hardin's Law of
Human Ecology help frame the mass and energy balance dimensions of urban tells?
Hardin's law states that total human impact on the ecosphere (here, each tell)
is the product of the population and per capita impacts. The outcome will be the
ability to define human carrying capacity (in terms of the occupation of each
tell) which include the ecological footprint and boundary extent of each tell to
that area of land provisioning ecological goods and services. The cross
disciplinary team includes biologists, archaeologists, microbial ecologists, and
a soil scientist and relies upon the integration of expertise across a broad
range of disciplines to frame the question of urbanization impact in a novel
historical, biological, and environmental context. The resulting product will be
a microbiome-based protocol for understanding historical human impact in
urbanization settings. This will transform our capabilities of predicting
current and future environmental consequences of urbanization. The team will
naturally impact a broad range of research communities as well as K-12 education
through a summer workshop utilizing process-oriented guided inquiry learning
(POGIL) techniques and archaeological sites in the Greater Yellowstone Area.