* 1536842
* Collaborative Research: A Scalable Processing Method to Produce Thermoplastic Nanofibers from Melt
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Mohammad Saed, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 08/31/2018
* USD 66,161.00

Polymeric nanofibers can have major societal impacts in many applications
including water filtration, drug delivery, energy storage, and light-weight
composites for automotive and aerospace sectors. Despite significant potential
applications, scalable methods to produce nanofibers are in their infancy.
Current methods such as the well-known electrospinning process often rely on
polymer processing from solutions in which a large quantity of solvent is
released to the environment. The solvent significantly increases the cost of raw
materials and the environmental footprint of the production units, and demands
extreme measures for safe ventilation to protect the workforce. This award
supports fundamental research to generate the knowledge required to produce
polymeric nanofibers in a solvent-free and industrially scalable method. The
method is applicable to a wide range of polymers. The results from this research
will impact advanced manufacturing and, hence, the U.S. economy, by establishing
solvent-free and thus "green" nanofiber production methods. The fulfillment of
the research goal will be through a multidisciplinary effort, guided by
expertise in material science, chemical engineering, fiber processing and
energy-matter coupling. This effort will also broaden the participation of
underrepresented student groups in STEM fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal
is to develop the science and technology of manufacturing continuous polymeric
nanofibers in an environmentally sustainable and scalable fashion. To this end,
a novel form of melt electrospinning, where polymer melts are energized via
electromagnetic radiation and pulled by electrostatic fields is planned.
Microfibers with carbon nanotube inclusions will be utilized as nanofiber
precursors. The intellectual significance of this work partly lies in attempts
to develop new understanding for coupling energy to matter required to develop
nanofibers. The proposition to utilize microfibers is also intellectually
significant and is a key to scalability. The nanotubes in microfibers will serve
as energy absorbers from radiation to raise the temperature of the jet, regulate
its viscosity and assist with reducing the jet diameter via electrostatic
forces. The research team will experimentally study the energy absorption by
composite fibers from microwave radiation. The team will then develop physics-
based models to explore the formation of nanofibers from microfibers. Based on
model output, the team will develop the setup to process nanofibers. The setup
will allow for real time monitoring of the nanofiber formation to obtain more
insight into energy-matter couplings.