* 1536306
* Advanced Composites Manufacturing and Repair Using Integrated Distributed Actuation and Dynamic Network Control
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Mark Tuttle, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Irina Dolinskaya
* 07/31/2019
* USD 357,168.00

Because of their high stiffness and light weight, composites such as carbon-
fiber reinforced polymers are finding increased use in the automotive,
aerospace, and marine transportation sectors and in renewable energy systems
such as large wind turbines. An important step in the manufacture of many
composites is high-temperature curing, which involves cycling the part through a
precise temperature sequence in a sealed pressure vessel called an autoclave.
This project focuses on the joining of these finished individual parts to form a
complete product. While mechanical fasteners or low-temperature adhesives have
inferior performance to high-temperature composite bonds, the assembled system
is far too large to place in an autoclave as a unit. This project considers the
use of embedded heaters distributed throughout the joint to execute the
necessary thermal cycle. So as not to compromise the integrity of the structure,
these heaters are made using the same carbon-fiber material as the rest of the
composite structure. In preliminary tests this approach has produced joints that
equal autoclaved parts in quality; the challenge addressed by this project is
achieving such a result over a large, complex structure, such as an airplane
wing. This will be done by repurposing advanced control techniques originally
developed for networks of dynamic systems, such as mobile robots. The same
approach may be used to repair damaged or fatigued composite systems,
economically and sustainably extending the useful life of expensive
infrastructure. The most advanced technology is useless without a trained
workforce capable of employing it. This project will provide training and
education to undergraduate and graduate students in advanced manufacturing and
controls, and the results will be used in outreach and recruitment to high-
school students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A network of multiple distributed heaters
that can account for variations in heat loss, e.g., due to uneven sub-
structures, and enable uniform temperatures at the bondline for consistent
curing of the adhesive are planned. The control challenge arises from
differences in the thermal dynamics of each of the distributed heater system
(input voltage to local temperature) in the network due to differences in
material properties (e.g., thickness of composites) and boundary conditions
(e.g., due to the presence of substructures). Current iterative approaches for
networked multi-agent systems are mostly applicable to homogenous agent
dynamics. It is challenging to prove convergence of iterative learning for
heterogeneous, networked multi-agent systems when the dynamics of the different
agents are general linear systems. A novel inversion-based iterative control is
planned that can correct for the dynamics of each agent and, thereby, can
achieve the desired output specified through the network. The intellectual merit
of the research is to develop conditions that quantify the acceptable modeling
uncertainty for ensuring convergence of iterative approaches in the presence of
heterogeneity. Thus, the research will advance the state-of-the-art in
iterative-learning theory for networked multi-agent systems and its
applicability to important technological problems such as manufacturing.