* 1536035
* Design, Control and Optimization of Robotic Systems with Energy Regeneration
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Hanz Richter, Cleveland State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Landers
* 08/31/2019
* USD 202,467.00

Many industrial, consumer and medical products involve masses in motion. These
motions are powered from energy sources, and always involve cycles of
acceleration and deceleration. Conventional braking is a very inefficient method
of deceleration because the object's energy is wasted as heat. In contrast,
regeneration involves surplus energy capture and storage into the power supply.
Regeneration engineering is advanced and visible in electric and hybrid
vehicles, but its understanding and optimal utilization in mobile and industrial
robotics remains a challenging area of research. The outcomes of this research
have the potential for significant energy savings in industrial installations
where many robots are in use. Mobile biomedical devices powered from electric
energy sources such as wheelchairs, prostheses and exoskeletons are another
target application of this research. Optimal energy utilization in these devices
will translate into lighter units with a reduced need for frequent recharging.
Impaired people wearing advanced regenerative prostheses will be able to extend
the range of their daily activities, improving their quality of
life.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will introduce a systematic treatment
of general motion control problems with explicit consideration of bidirectional
energy flow. The intellectual significance of the project is centered in its
generality and broad applicability, which contrasts with the mostly case-
oriented current literature on regenerative systems. The project focuses on the
use of ultracapacitors as key elements of advanced regenerative systems. In
comparison to batteries, ultracapacitors have very high power densities. This
means that energy extraction and return can be achieved at fast rates. This
feature affords great flexibility to alter a robot's dynamic behavior by means
of control, in particular its mechanical impedance. Moreover, recent advances in
graphene-based ultracapacitors have resulted in devices with energy densities
approaching those of lithium-ion batteries. These advances have the potential
for the elimination of batteries in certain mobile robotic systems, particularly
in medical assistive devices. The project will establish a framework to design,
control and optimize such systems. The project has three goals: 1. development
of new approaches for modeling, control and design of robotic systems with
advanced regenerative hardware such as ultracapacitors; 2. formulation and
solution of fundamental energy-motion multi-objective optimization problems for
the same; 3. bridging of theory and practice with a custom-built study robot.