* 1536834
* New Techniques for Fault Detection and Diagnosis for Safety-Critical Applications
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Dennis Bernstein, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Irina Dolinskaya
* 08/31/2019
* USD 350,000.00

Sensors are critical components of virtually all technological systems,
especially those that depend on control for safe and reliable operation. Control
systems play a key role in automotive, aerospace, robotic, building, and process
control applications. Safety-critical implementations have increased
dramatically and will continue to grow as systems become increasingly
autonomous. In the context of autonomous systems, sensors malfunctioning or
failure can lead to severe degradation of performance, can destabilize the
control system and may produce destructive control inputs. All of these events
can severely compromise the operation of the system under consideration and may
lead to tragic consequences, such as loss of human life. For these reasons,
there is a compelling need for techniques that assess the integrity of sensors
that are critical to a system?s operation. The investigation of such techniques
is the objective of this project, which is expected to contribute to
improvements to the reliability of safety-critical autonomous systems.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on a technique for sensor fault
detection called sensor-to-sensor identification (S2SID). S2SID takes advantage
of freely available and unknown external or ambient excitation to identify a
sensor-to-sensor model called a pseudo transfer function (PTF), which is
independent of the excitation. A PTF is a time-domain generalization of a
transmissibility used in structural dynamics. S2SID is performed under healthy
sensor conditions in the presence of unknown excitation. Then using a validation
data set, again induced by unknown external or ambient excitation, the
identified PTF can be used to compute a sensor-to-sensor residual. This
residual, which is the discrepancy between the predicted sensor output based on
the identified PTF and the actual measurements, provides a metric for detecting
and diagnosing sensor faults. Unlike frequency-domain techniques based on
transmissibility operators, this project focuses on time-domain identification
methods that can exploit transient signal characteristics, which can degrade
frequency-domain estimates. S2SID will be demonstrated on flexible aircraft
applications.