* 1536238
* Quantitative Judgments in Law: Studies of Damage Award Decision Making
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2021
* Valerie Hans, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Reginald Sheehan
* 08/31/2021
* USD 389,996.00

To have a well-functioning society, businesses, insurance companies, and members
of the public depend on a reliable and competent jury system. In a civil case in
which a defendant injures a plaintiff and a damage award must be determined,
civil jurors must translate their subjective, qualitative sense about the
severity of the plaintiff's injury into dollars. Yet many injuries are difficult
to value, and civil juries receive limited guidance. Some jurors, too, have
difficulty working with numbers. This research project examines how to improve
jury damage award decision making so that damage awards are well-matched to the
harm done. The project tests predictions from a new model of damage award
decision making that focuses on the gist or underlying meaning that people
derive from trial evidence. These predictions are (a) most jurors have a
coherent sense of the gist of damage awards; (b) a gist-based understanding of
numerical magnitude is essential for coherent judgments; and (c) this gist-based
understanding can be facilitated with simple interventions to improve jury
decision making. Three experiments are proposed to identify the jury damage
award decision process and to test easily implemented and cost-effective
solutions to reduce unwarranted inconsistency. The question of fair and
consistent evaluation of injury arises in many business and insurance contexts,
so effective solutions discovered through this research could prove useful in
other domains beyond the courtroom. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The legal system
regularly requires fact finders to translate their qualitative impressions into
quantitative judgments such as criminal sentences, fines, and damage awards.
However, the relationship between qualitative and quantitative judgments in law
is under-studied and under-theorized; no comprehensive theory yet explains it.
The proposed research promises to move theory in the field forward by testing
specific predictions derived from a new model of damage award decision making.
The experiments extend fuzzy-trace theory to damage award decision making,
testing a number of specific predictions about meaningfulness and relative gist
of anchors (or benchmarks), relevant and irrelevant emotional evidence, and the
utility of instructions about how to scale damages. Specifically, the first
experiment investigates how potential jurors interpret the gist of case facts,
how that influences damage awards, and whether providing meaningful anchor
amounts reduces variability in award amounts. The second experiment focuses on
effects of relevant and irrelevant emotion, and on the mapping process--how
simple questions can help orient potential jurors to the magnitude of damages--
with the aim of reducing variability in award judgments. The third experiment
tests our new model in a realistic mock civil jury setting, including jury
deliberations. Data collection will include multiple measures of numeracy
(facility with numbers), allowing the researchers to determine how numeracy
influences decision making about dollars in the context of civil damage awards.