* 1536108
* Assessing Probabilistic Extreme and Fatigue Responses of Wind-Excited Structures through Integration of Both Uncertainty and Directionality with a System Perspective
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Xinzhong Chen, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 08/31/2020
* USD 298,248.00

Better modeling and quantification of wind load effects on buildings and
structures are essential for structural design and wind hazard mitigation. Wind
tunnel studies and structural dynamic response analysis provide information of
wind-induced extreme and fatigue responses as functions of wind speed and
direction. The overall structural performance to strong wind is then evaluated
by a further consideration of variations of wind speed and direction. As the
most unfavorable wind direction that causes the largest wind load and structural
response under given wind speed does not necessarily align with the direction of
strongest wind, consideration of directionality effects can result in more
economical design of structures as compared to the analysis with the "worst
case" approach of disregarding wind directionality. The discrepancies of
predictions from current existing approaches on directionality effect are found
to be significant. Furthermore, these approaches cannot account for uncertainty
and directionality in a unified framework. Due to a lack of scrutiny on the
accuracy and effectiveness of these approaches, and a lack of a unified approach
for both uncertainty and directionality, the detailed and comprehensive wind
loading information derived from wind tunnel studies may not necessarily lead to
expected improvement in the design of wind-excited structures. This research
will consider the uncertainty and directionality of wind, aerodynamics, and
structural characteristics in a unified framework with a system perspective.
Simplified procedures will be developed for possible use in future design codes
and standards. The new tools and knowledge can also be used for performance-
based design and assessment of structural systems against multiple
hazards.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research is to investigate
transparent and reliable approaches for better assessing probabilistic multiple
limit state responses to support a reliability and performance-based design of
wind-excited structures. This research has the following objectives: 1) modeling
of probabilistic extreme and fatigue responses of non-Gaussian response
processes, 2) modeling of directional extreme wind speeds, 3) prediction of
probabilistic extreme and fatigue responses considering both uncertainty and
directionality, and 4) assessing structural performance with the effects of
uncertainty and directionality accounting for multiple limit-state responses.
The research findings will help develop consensus on how wind directionality
effects are best quantified, thus the large discrepancies of existing approaches
can be reduced or eliminated. The framework will also help wind engineering
laboratories to better integrate wind tunnel study results with wind modeling
for cost-effective design of structures to wind loads.