* 1536315
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Neoliberalism, Gender, and Politics in Post-Soviet Societies
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2015,12/31/2016
* Jennifer Fluri, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Antoinette WinklerPrins
* 12/31/2016
* USD 14,137.00

This project will examine the effects of economic restructuring and rising
social and political conservatism on gender roles in post-Soviet societies.
While much research has explored the effects of neoliberal economic
restructuring in post-Soviet regions on ethnicity, labor, and nationalism, fewer
studies have paid attention to the connections between gender and domesticity
and the geopolitical and economic changes in the region. Anxieties arising from
economic liberalization have led to calls for new regulations on family values,
gender roles and domesticity. This study will analyze how neoliberalism and
nationalism are redefining gender identities in order to shed light on how
political actors draw on symbols of the "home" and "family" to justify
restrictive social policies and, in some cases, validate engagement in political
conflict. Understanding how political and economic processes link with intimate
home and family matters will also help to elucidate the effectiveness of
international development programs seeking to empower women. Documenting the way
women navigate social and economic change in their everyday lives will inform
regional development policies in an effort to alleviate gender based violence
and poverty.

Various groups in post-Soviet Armenia have been struggling with economic and
geopolitical anxieties caused by continual economic and political
transformations. Many of these anxieties have manifested in new concerns over
gender roles and the socioeconomic and political meanings of home and domestic
spaces. To better understand these changes, this study asks: 1) What is the
symbolic significance of the home and practices of domesticity in geopolitical
debates? 2) What are the impacts of economic restructuring on practices of
domesticity and the spatial politics of home? 3) How do the symbolic meanings of
the home and everyday domestic practices become sites for reproducing or
contesting neoliberalism and geopolitical divides? Specifically, this research
will examine the discursive production of gender and the material conditions
within which people experience and navigate economic change. The researchers
will employ critical geography perspectives to illuminate how economic
transformations materially affect everyday lives and the ways in which gendered
subjects are produced or transformed. The study relies on qualitative methods
including semi- structured interviews, participant observation, and textual
analysis of news and magazine articles about contemporary domesticity. Data
gathered from these sources will be triangulated to understand how various
actors - citizens, political groups, and international development programs -
have renegotiated the value of women's domestic labor as a result of economic
restructuring and growing social conservatism.