* 1536072
* A Conference on Waves, Spectral Theory, and Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2015,12/31/2017
* Jeremy Marzuola, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 12/31/2017
* USD 22,000.00

This project will provide support for participants, especially junior
researchers, in the conference "Waves, Spectral Theory, and Applications" in
Princeton, NJ from September 10-11, 2015. This conference will bring together
experts in both the theory of nonlinear partial differential equations and
cutting edge applications, which are dramatically impacted by the study of waves
and spectral theory in nonlinear science. The models to be discussed at the
conference have applications to the studies of graphene, nonlinear optics,
neuroscience, large quantum systems, and the formation of topological states.
Such states are ideal for the transfer or storage of energy or information.
Another important set of mathematical problems concerns the issues for design of
metamaterials. Metamaterials are composites that include nano-size
microstructures. In some regimes these materials exhibit properties not
achievable in naturally occurring materials. For example, it is possible to
manufacture a metamaterial with negative index or reflection that allows one to
"cloak" objects, making them invisible. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The conference
will focus on the issues of spectral theory and nonlinear dynamics that are
instrumental for understanding the behavior of nonlinear bound states
interacting with various types of potentials. Another focus of the conference is
on the metameterials-related problems that lie outside the realm of standard
homogenization theory as well as to problems concerning non-elliptic limits of
families of elliptic problems. More details about the conference can be found at
&lt;br/&gt;https://sites.google.com/site/wavesandspectraltheory/