* 1536566
* Thermal and melt structure of the Juan de Fuca plate from ridge to trench to arc, inferred from seismic attenuation across the Amphibious Array
* GEO,OCE
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2016
* Geoffrey Abers, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Candace Major
* 07/31/2016
* USD 80,480.00

The primary goal of this study is to better understand the mantle beneath
tectonic plates that floor the ocean basins. The Cascadia Initiative deployed an
Amphibious Array of seismic stations across the complete Juan de Fuca plate and
adjacent Cascadia margin, in the Pacific Northwest. This is the first time a
seismic array has covered a complete plate from spreading center to trench to
volcanic arc. The cooling, rigid structure that characterizes an oceanic plate
from its formation, through aging, and its eventual subduction at the
continental margin is well understood. In contrast, the nature of the ductile,
partially molten mantle underneath is less certain. Does melt occur in the
mantle only beneath the magma-producing upwelling zone beneath the oceanic
spreading center, or are small amounts of magma beneath the aging plate? As the
plate approaches a trench and bends downward to subduct, does fracturing let
seawater filter down into the plate, to be absorbed in minerals and carried into
the mantle? If so, how and where do these volatiles later emerge to affect the
fluidity of the slowly circulating mantle? The seismic analysis carried out in
this study aims to answer these questions. A graduate student will carry out
most of the analysis, expanding skills in a final PhD training year beyond what
has already been gained in earlier thesis
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although the thermal structure of oceanic
lithosphere is well understood, basic questions regarding asthenosphere still
exist. Both partial melt and bound water are proposed to explain low
asthenosphere seismic velocities and viscosities but their distribution is not
well constrained. It is not known if the base of the asthenosphere is defined by
a constant pressure / homologous temperature, or if the asthenosphere is
entrained at a subduction zone and carried to depth. Additional questions about
temperature, water distribution and melt exist once plates subduct. This study
focuses on seismic attenuation across the Cascadia Amphibious Array measured
from body waves, since these physical properties can be better elucidated than
from seismic velocity studies alone. Because the Amphibious Array provides such
comprehensive broadband seismic data, the expected variations in body-wave
attenuation can be seen here better than any other oceanic region. Comparisons
with geodynamic models and with surface-wave derived images will allow
calibration of laboratory-based theories of anelasticity.