* 1536179
* I-Corps:  NanoOptics - Highly efficient scintillator photonic devices for national security, medical imaging and high energy particle detection applications
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2015,09/30/2016
* Alex Yi, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* lydia mcclure
* 09/30/2016
* USD 50,000.00

Inorganic scintillators are widely used in modern medical imaging modalities (as
converter for the x-rays and ã-radiation that are used to obtain information
about the interior of the body, like x-ray, CT and PET scan), national security,
airport security, and high energy particle detector. One key problem in the
development of the next generation scintillator systems is the enhancement of
the timing, positioning and energy resolution of the detectors. Most of the
high-density scintillators have a high refractive index; only less than 10% of
the light from the scintillator can enter into the photo detector. This
seriously impacts the detection system's efficiency and detection sensitivity.
This team has developed a novel class of nano-scale photonic structures that
function as efficient light extraction devices for scintillator materials and
devices. This is an emerging field and the proposed research has made the
overall efficiency of these scintillator materials increase
significantly.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The unique properties of the nature-inspired
nano-scale photonic structures allow one to engineer the output light beam
shape, so that the angular behavior of the light can be controlled. This makes
smaller pixel, higher imaging resolution possible for the next generation of
integrated scintillator devices, with a variety of application possible in
market areas including national security and medical imaging. This I-Corps team
will work together to seek out market opportunities for commercialization of the
innovation, discovering new and previously uncharted applications based on
conversations with many potential customers throughout the United States.