* 1536830
* Investigating the Emission of Sounds by the Mammalian Ear Using a Computational Model
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Julien Meaud, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Laurel Kuxhaus
* 08/31/2019
* USD 273,913.00

The function of the mammalian inner ear is to detect sounds. However, the inner
ear is not just a sensory system; it can also emit sounds that can be measured
by placing a microphone in the ear canal. These sounds, called otoacoustic
emissions, are commonly used to obtain indirect information about inner ear
function. Because of the noninvasive and low-cost nature of otoacoustic emission
measurements, otoacoustic emissions have not only scientific applications but
also clinical applications such as newborn hearing screening tests.
Unfortunately, many aspects of otoacoustic emissions are still poorly
understood, which limits how much information can be obtained from these
measurements. This project aims to develop a clear understanding of mammalian
otoacoustic emissions. The results from this fundamental research will help to
improve hearing screening tests, auditory prostheses and cochlear implants.
Hence this project could have a tremendous societal impact since about 50
million Americans suffer from some level of hearing loss. Additionally, the
knowledge gained from this research about hearing biomechanics will help to
design novel sensors that mimic the function of the inner ear. This award will
support the interdisciplinary training of graduate students in biomechanics,
biophysics, acoustics and computational modeling. This research will involve
participation of women and students from underrepresented groups and will be
disseminated to a broader audience.

This research will focus on a specific type of otoacoustic emissions, called
distortion product otoacoustic emissions. Distortion product otoacoustic
emissions are emitted in response to a two-tone stimulus due to the nonlinearity
of the inner ear. Current experiments and models are unable to conclusively
establish the precise site of generation of distortion product otoacoustic
emissions. Furthermore, several hypotheses exist regarding the primary path for
the propagation of distortion product otoacoustic emission from their site of
generation to the ear canal. To address these questions, this research will use
physiologically-based computational models of the mammalian ear that include key
features not included in other models of otoacoustic emissions. These models
couple a lumped parameter model of the middle ear to three-dimensional finite
element models of the inner ear. Numerical simulations will be used to determine
where otoacoustic emissions are generated and how they propagate from their site
of generation to the ear canal. These theoretical results will be validated and
tested by comparison to experimental data provided by collaborators.