* 1536397
* Graph-Based Control Design for Network Dynamics with Time Delays
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Rifat Sipahi, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Irina Dolinskaya
* 08/31/2020
* USD 301,362.00

When complex systems interact with other complex systems, unexpected behavior
may result, sometimes with severe consequences. A few examples include stock
trading, disease epidemics, vehicle traffic, and opinion propagation in social
media. A great deal of progress has been made towards the analysis and control
of complex interdependent systems by modeling them as interconnected networks of
dynamic nodes, and by making extensive use of the mathematical tools of graph
theory. However this framework to date lacks good methods for incorporating the
dynamics of the network itself. Yet, in all real systems the time required for
communication and decision-making causes delays, and neglecting these can
significantly degrade the accuracy of the analytical result. This project will
demonstrate new tools to relax the current standard simplifying assumptions --
for example, identical dynamic nodes and uniform delay times -- and allow more
realistic models. The project will also show how these new tools may be scaled
to address extremely large and complex systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Lacking a
strong analytical framework, it is common for control engineers to design
control systems for complex networked systems while ignoring time delay.
Subsequently stable behavior is verified under a highly simplified delay model,
with control redesign if the system is sufficiently robust. This project will
provide the missing systematic control-design framework, specifically by
considering three key ingredients, namely, (i) dynamical systems, (ii) network
structure as a parameter, and (iii) the effects of delays on dynamical behavior.
Development of such a framework is, however, challenging as network dynamics are
large scale, and by the very nature of their design, are impacted by multiple
time delays. Moreover a well-established connection between algebraic networks
and dynamics affected by time delays does not exist. Recent theoretical results
in connecting network graph Laplacian eigenvalues to the eigenvalues associated
with the dynamical behavior (~ stability, performance) of a class of network
systems with delays show promise in addressing the challenging problem at hand.
The intellectual merit of this project lies in expanding such theories to
multiple delays, heterogeneous dynamics, and large-scale networks, as well as
developing tools to study invariance features between eigenvalues, stability,
and performance, and advanced decomposition techniques to simplify the
understanding and control design of such networks. The successful completion of
this project will lead to the analysis, optimization, and control of large-scale
network dynamics affected by time delays, as arising in a broad spectrum of
applications.