* 1536308
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: A Geographic Examination of the United States Diplomatic Footprint
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2015,02/28/2017
* Alexander Murphy, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 02/28/2017
* USD 12,759.00

This doctoral dissertation research project will analyze and assess the ideas
and assumptions that motivate the maintenance of the United States' widespread
diplomatic apparatus, a far-reaching network of 285 embassies and consulates.
The practice of diplomacy has changed dramatically in recent decades as a result
of technological advancements and shifting geopolitical concerns. Individuals
around the world now have the opportunity to communicate directly with
ambassadors and foreign ministers on Twitter, disclosure of diplomatic
correspondences on WikiLeaks have heightened calls for more transparency in
diplomatic exchanges, and non-state terrorist actors continue to challenge the
idea that diplomats and their facilities are inviolable. While some countries
have adjusted to 21st century realities by adapting to a more mobile,
maneuverable diplomatic corps and fewer diplomatic facilities, the United States
remains committed to a widespread diplomatic network. This diplomatic footprint
is the hallmark of universality, a sustained effort beginning in the second half
of the 20th century to acquire nearly total diplomatic coverage by scattering
around the world embassies and consulates designed to look, work, and behave in
a similar manner regardless of their geographic location. Attending to this
understudied phenomenon means studying the historical and geographic conditions
out of which the United States? relatively even and uniform diplomatic apparatus
materialized. By examining the relationship between diplomatic infrastructure
and foreign policy aims, this project will apply geographic approaches focusing
on everyday materialisms and institutional networks to examine diplomatic
practice and the implications of those practices. The project will expand
current approaches to diplomatic theory and practice, bringing examinations of
everyday practice back into a central role in diplomatic studies. Project
findings will facilitate self-evaluation by the U.S. Department of State of the
implications of its diplomatic geography, and it will assist others engaged in
diplomatic practice in assessing the geographic implications of practices on
statecraft. As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award
also will provide support to enable a promising student to establish a strong
independent research career.

The doctoral student will focus the project on the following sets of questions:
(1) What factors influence decision making related to U.S. embassy and consulate
placement? (2) How does the U.S. approach to diplomatic infrastructure differ
from that of other states? (3) In what ways does the universal character of each
facility prove alternately productive and counterproductive for U.S. foreign
policy aims? The student will employ methods that draw on institutional
ethnographic techniques at multiple scales and a wide range of voices, including
ground practitioners, high-level policymakers, retired ambassadors, voices from
the past, and the student's own experience in Washington, D.C., and within the
U.S. Department of State. She will identify the origins of the universality
argument and its continued relevance alongside 21st century diplomatic
practices. She also will engage in archival research and conduct interviews with
current and former members of the diplomatic corps.