* 1536233
* The Role of Genetic Modifications, Age and Exercise on Cartilage Biomechanics using Genetically Engineered Mice
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Alan Grodzinsky, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Laurel Kuxhaus
* 08/31/2020
* USD 398,508.00

Cartilage is a thin tissue covering the ends of bones which provides a low-
friction interface for the easy motion of articular joints such as the knee,
shoulder, hip and others. The biomechanical properties and low friction of
cartilage often make it possible for this thin tissue to carry high load with up
to millions of cycles per year for a full lifetime. The genetic sources of
cartilage properties are not well understood. This research will use novel
technology to measure biomechanical properties of cartilage from mice that were
genetically modified to determine what genes contribute to cartilage mechanical
properties across the age of the animals. These assessments of cartilage
function and aging will provide important basic understanding of how genes
interact with activity and time to produce function. The results and new
mechanical testing method will also have application to the detection of the
early stages of arthritis. The application to arthritis could have a societal
impact because it is a leading cause of disability for hundreds of millions of
people worldwide. The biomechanical methods developed in this study will also
work for measuring properties of other materials including artificial hydrogels
and engineered tissues as well as natural animal tissues such as: tectorial
membrane, ligament, meniscus and skin.

This multidisciplinary research program will enable for the first time a
comprehensive and quantitative study of biological factors by measuring nano-
scale solid-fluid interactions within murine cartilage tissue and key matrix
molecules (i.e., aggrecan and collagen type II) over a frequency range pertinent
to walking, running and impact-injury using atomic force microscopy. The knee
joints from well-established mouse models will be provided from animals allowed
normal ambulation and those exercised on running wheels, at three selected age
groups. The research will determine the nanodynamic biomechanical measurements
of cartilage tissue as well as of isolated aggrecan brush layers using an
aggrecan decorated probe tip. These tissue and molecular assessments will be
tested for their dependence on genetic, excercise and age factors to determine
how the modified mice differ from normal.