* 1536287
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Fire, Vegetation and Environmental Interactions Across the Holocene on the U.S. Southeastern Coastal Plain
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2018
* Sally Horn, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Jacqueline Vadjunec
* 07/31/2018
* USD 15,387.00

Human influences on the environment have transformed natural vegetation and
altered natural fire regimes, leaving researchers and land managers with an
incomplete understanding of natural fires and their response to changes in
vegetation and environment. This doctoral dissertation research project will
investigate long-term vegetation and fire interactions in response to Holocene
environmental variability. This project will provide a better understanding of
past interactions among fire activity, vegetation, and environment on the U.S.
southeastern coastal plain. The research project will provide new insights
regarding the modeling of ecosystem responses to future environmental change,
and it will identify past environmental changes that may have affected
prehistoric societies. The project will inform land managers who are conserving
and restoring imperiled plant communities dominated by fire-dependent longleaf
pine, an economically and environmentally important tree species. As a Doctoral
Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award also will provide support to
enable a promising student to establish a strong independent research career.

The restoration, conservation, and management of longleaf pine forest ecosystems
has gained recent importance because of their commercial and environmental
value. The conservation and management of these imperilled ecosystems requires
an understanding of the long-term histories of vegetation and fire as well as
their interrelationships with environmental change. The doctoral student will
investigate historical natural fire activity and its response to past changes in
the composition of vegetation. He will analyze pollen and stable carbon isotope
ratios in sediments for evidence of temporal changes in vegetation composition,
and he will analyse stable carbon isotopes to identify past drought intervals.
The quantification of these biophysical properties will document changes in fire
activity and fuel sources. These analyses of changes in vegetation, fire
activity, and the environment during the Holocene will provide new insights into
conditions analogous to those predicted under current environmental change
scenarios.