* 1536918
* Household-Level Use of Autonomous Vehicles: Modeling Framework, Traveler Adaptation, and Infrastructure to Mitigate Negative Effects
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Mark Karwan, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 08/31/2019
* USD 205,000.00

With recent development in vehicle automation, the idea of sharing public roads
with Autonomous Vehicles (AVs) or self-driving vehicles has been widely
accepted. Adoption of AVs will drastically change the current picture of the
transportation system. One of the areas that is expected to be greatly
transformed is vehicle use, travel behavior, and subsequently vehicle ownership
from the driverless operations. Yet, there exists no framework to forecast such
behavior, demand, and systemic changes at this stage. First, this research will
define a framework to simulate and evaluate potential household-level use of AVs
from the fundamental notion that travel is a derived demand of individuals'
activities and time allocations. Second, this research will develop an
infrastructure planning framework, with a focus on parking structure planning,
to reduce the potential negative external effects such as increased Vehicle-
Mile-Traveled (VMT), congestion, greenhouse gas emissions, etc. The research
will enhance understanding of potential issues and external effects as well as
policy and infrastructure planning strategies to help reduce the social cost of
AV adoption. More broadly, this research will help creating a more sustainable,
economic, and efficient transportation and infrastructure system through the AV
adoption. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The framework of AV operations is an innovative
variation of the Vehicle Routing Problem (VRP) in that (1) it integrates two
scheduling and routing problems of travelers and vehicles, and (2) incorporates
driverless operations. The novelty of this formulation is that it integrates two
routing problems, thus providing routing flexibility for travelers and vehicles.
The infrastructure planning framework is modeled through bi-level programming
where AV operation decisions are at each household level. A creative modeling
approach is introduced to handle the computational challenges. Lastly, a
sensitivity analysis will provide insights in understanding changes and
challenges in infrastructure, environment, congestion, vehicle ownership, etc.
that may arise with the adoption of AVs.