* 1536314
* Collaborative Research: A Study of Submesoscale Mixed-Layer Dynamics at a Mid-Latitude Oceanic Front: Isolating the Sub- and Super-Inertial Response to Atmospheric Forcing
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2021
* James Girton, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 09/30/2021
* USD 2,161,815.00

The ocean mixed-layer is both conduit and barrier for exchange of momentum, heat
and gases between the atmosphere and ocean. Recent modeling has revealed a host
of competing submesoscale mixed-layer processes which can either promote or
inhibit air-sea exchange. These processes are an observational challenge because
of the need for unaliased temporal and lateral resolution, as well as sufficient
duration to establish persistent mechanisms. This study plans to dramatically
improve understanding of 1-10 km scale lateral processes in three-dimensional
mixed-layer dynamics with a 28-day experiment in the North Pacific Subtropical
Front, a region of above-average atmospheric forcing, typical mid-ocean
mesoscale advection and straining, and typical submesoscale activity, maximizing
the likelihood of finding significant signals. The results of this observational
program will improve the physical basis of mixed-layer parameterizations,
leading to better model predictions for air-sea fluxes, gas transfer and
biological productivity. The project will train one graduate student and provide
research experiences to undergraduate students. A cruise blog and experiment
website will make the results of the project available to the wider scientific
community and general public

Multiple ship surveys, profiling float array deployments (16-20 floats measuring
temperature, salinity, horizontal velocity and microstructure) and a drifting
air-sea flux platform will sample the upper-ocean's response to winter storm
forcing in the presence of the mixed-layer fronts that characterize the central
ocean gyres. The arrays will profile in sync every 30-40 minutes to eliminate
space-time aliasing, cycling between the surface and 100-150 m depth (below the
transition layer). During and between deployments, the region will be surveyed
repeatedly with (i) a tow-yo body and a shipboard Acoustic Doppler Current
Profiler to provide larger-scale context and (ii) a multi-depth flow-through
temperature and salinity system to resolve smaller horizontal scales in the
upper 2-5 m. Submesoscale variability in the surface mixed-layer leads to
dynamical processes which do not readily satisfy the quasigeostrophic or 1-D
surface layer approximations in common use. Although these processes have been
examined in isolation or idealized conditions, observational evidence to date is
insufficient to clarify whether these subinertial processes are able to operate
in the presence of high-frequency atmospheric forcing and strong internal-wave
shears. The planned 5-7 array deployments of 3-5 days each will be of sufficient
duration to separate the evolution of low-frequency dynamics from near-inertial
shear that dominates short timescales, allowing evaluation of mixed-layer
restratification and destratification rates by mixed-layer eddies, wind-forcing
and vertical processes.