* 1536361
* III: Student Travel Fellowships for Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining (KDD) 2015
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2017
* Wei Wang, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 06/30/2017
* USD 20,000.00

This grant provides international and domestic travel support for U.S. based
graduate student participants to attend the 21st ACM SIGKDD Conference on
Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining (KDD 2015), which will be held in Sydney,
Australia, from August 10-13, 2015. KDD is the world's premier research
conference in data mining. It is an interdisciplinary conference that brings
together researchers and practitioners from all aspects of data mining,
knowledge discovery, and large-scale data analytics. The conference is a highly
selective meeting that includes oral and poster presentations of refereed papers
as well as panel discussions and invited talks by the leading academic and
industrial experts. It provides an international forum for presentation of
original research results, as well as exchange and dissemination of innovative
and practical development experiences. Conference proceedings are published by
ACM. Besides the technical program, the conference features workshops,
tutorials, panels, demonstrations, exhibits, and a data mining contest (KDD
Cup). Since 2013, the conference also included a Broadening Participation in
Data Mining workshop and we intend to continue this tradition of increasing
diversity in data mining. A strong representation of U.S. researchers,
particularly students, at the conference is useful in maintaining U.S.
competitiveness in this important area today and into the future.