* 1536121
* Collaborative Research: Measuring Ocean Productivity from the Diurnal Change in Oxygen and Carbon
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Paul Quay, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 08/31/2020
* USD 356,066.00

The rate of primary production in the ocean is fundamental to the ocean's food
web and the movement of carbon from surface waters to the deep ocean, known as
the biological pump. Yet spatial and temporal variations in primary productivity
are poorly known because the effort required for the current method of measuring
primary productivity is significant, limiting its application, and the method
has biases that are difficult to quantify. Using a novel combination of
approaches, the investigators will estimate daily primary productivity in the
ocean at three ecologically distinct sites. The research will significantly
improve understanding of primary productivity variations and their impact on the
ocean?s biological pump, which will benefit the broader ocean community involved
in carbon cycle modeling and benefit society via the impact of ocean primary
productivity on atmospheric carbon dioxide uptake and future climate change. The
research results will be incorporated into both undergraduate and graduate
course curricula and outreach talks at the two institutions. There will be
active undergraduate student participation in the project at both Oregon State
University and the University of Washington.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Within the
last decade, an in-situ primary productivity method based on measuring the
isotopic composition of dissolved oxygen (O2) gas has gained traction within the
oceanographic community because it yields a primary production estimate from a
simple water sample collection. This method has yielded basin-wide snapshots of
primary productivity based on underway sampling of the surface ocean by ships of
opportunity. However, accurate estimates of oxygen/particulate organic carbon
(O2/POC) produced during primary productivity are needed to convert oxygen-based
primary production rates to carbon production. In this project, daily in-situ
rates of primary production in the surface ocean at three ocean sites will be
estimated from continuous measurements of diurnal cycles in the oxygen/argon
dissolved gas ratio and POC and compared to simultaneous in vitro primary
productivity estimates. Variations in the O2/POC produced during primary
production will be determined. Autonomous float-based estimates of primary
production based on measurements of diurnal cycles in O2 and POC will be
validated using ship based measurements. Estimates of primary production based
on autonomous measurements resulting from this research have the potential to
revolutionize our knowledge on the spatial and temporal variations in primary
productivity in the ocean.