* 1536219
* Collaborative Research: Understanding the Spatio-Temporal Characteristics of Earthquakes at Axial Seamount Late in an Eruptive Cycle
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* William Wilcock, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Candace Major
* 08/31/2020
* USD 306,000.00

Axial Seamount is a hotspot volcano and the most magmatically active feature on
the Juan de Fuca oceanic spreading center. The Ocean Observatories Initiative
(OOI) cabled observatory at Axial provides a ground-breaking opportunity to
capture volcano behavior leading up to, during, and following a seafloor
eruption. Axial volcano erupted in 1998 and 2011 and, prior to April 2015,
seafloor sensors showed that it was inflating with magma again. Over their first
six months of operation, the cabled seismometers at Axial Seamount recorded
increasingly high rates of small earthquake activity, supporting the inference
that the volcano was in the late stage of its volcanic cycle. This was confirmed
in late April 2015 when the volcano erupted. The researchers on this grant will
work with both graduate and undergraduate students to analyze this first-ever
seafloor volcanic event to be observed in real-time with seafloor
sensors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will use the OOI cabled ocean bottom
seismometer network to determine the pattern of earthquake activity at Axial
Seamount to understand how stress at the spreading axis is partitioned spatially
and temporally. The implications in terms of possible broad structures of
hydrothermal flow will be assessed. Changes in the physical properties of the
volcano through a volcanic cycle will be documented, with ultimate aim of
advancing knowledge about how individual geologic events sum to produce long-
term, steady oceanic spreading. Production of near-real time earthquake catalogs
for the continuing OOI cabled seismic data stream will allow rapid
identification of significant new events. Relocation analysis will yield
relative earthquake locations accurate to within tens of meters, bringing
structural features in the seismicity into focus. Focal mechanisms, repeating
earthquakes, and shear wave splitting parameters will be obtained to further
constrain the volcano's dynamics.