* 1536405
* Collaborative Research: Investigating the Lost City as an ultramafic urban center of the subseafloor, fueled by energy and carbon from the mantle
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2022
* William Brazelton, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 08/31/2022
* USD 281,816.00

The vast majority of deep seafloor sediments are inhabited by microbial
communities that survive under extreme energy limitation, with apparent
generation times of centuries to millennia. Hydrothermal systems are a stark
contrast to these energy-starved environments and may represent important, high-
activity, 'population centers' in the oceanic subsurface. When rocks from the
Earth's mantle are uplifted and exposed to water, the resulting reactions lead
to acidic fluids with high concentrations of hydrogen. Under certain
circumstances, small organic molecules such as methane can also form in the
absence of biology. These compounds can provide energy to subseafloor microbial
communities and, given the ubiquity of mantle rocks, such reactions may fuel a
significant proportion of the active subsurface biosphere. The current project
will characterize the microbial communities inhabiting an iconic example of this
type of system, the Lost City Hydrothermal Field, using a remotely operated
vehicle. The ghostly spires of Lost City are highly telegenic and have been
featured in professional documentaries. The high definition underwater video
footage collected during the expedition will provide the raw material for an 8
week educational training program in digital media focused on kindergarten
through 12th grade high school students and undergraduate students. The
resulting short documentaries will be published on YouTube and the Utah
Education Network.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mantle rocks comprise significant
portions of the seafloor, and microbial communities hosted within them may be
important mediators of carbon and energy exchange between the deep Earth and the
surface biosphere. Upon tectonic uplift and exposure to water, the
serpentinization of these materials releases potential energy in the form of
hydrogen, methane, and heat, and further reaction of these products can sustain
the abiogenic synthesis of small organic molecules. Recent studies have
highlighted, however, the lack of alkalithermophiles that are capable of
survival at the high pH (9-11) and elevated temperatures found in these systems.
The almost complete lack of carbon dioxide (CO2) represents a second, and
possibly more significant, limitation to growth. To better understand the extent
of the serpentinite subsurface, this project will address the question: What
limits biological activity in the serpentinite subsurface? Specifically, the
proposed work will test the hypotheses: (1) microbial diversity spans a wider
range of temperature-pH conditions than currently recognized and (2) the
scarcity of CO2 is a key biological limitation to serpentinization-driven
ecosystems that can be overcome by the metabolic activity of one or a few
foundation species. These hypotheses will be tested during a 20 day (10 days on
site) expedition to the Lost City Hydrothermal Field, focusing on fluids as
windows to the subsurface biosphere. The sampling approach will capitalize on
the differences in temperature, carbon availability, and microbial activity
across the field. The analytical approach will integrate multidisciplinary
techniques performed on replicate subsamples and feature the application of
next-generation sequencing technologies to these marine serpentinizing fluids
for the first time. This study will generate extensive sequence data from
environmental DNA, environmental mRNA, and single-cell genomes, allowing us to
identify the in situ expression of metabolic pathways and the genomics of active
single cells. These efforts will be closely linked with a thorough
characterization of carbon in these fluids that will focus on identifying
available substrates (e.g. methane, CO2, organic acids) and on characterizing
biomarkers that reflect specific metabolic pathways (e.g. lipids, amino acids).