* 1536936
* Spectral Multiplexing of Fiber Bragg Grating Sensors for Low-Power Optical Sensor Networks
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Kara Peters, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Irina Dolinskaya
* 08/31/2019
* USD 425,222.00

It is important to monitor the structural integrity and performance of large,
complex structural systems throughout their service life. In-service monitoring
can increase the safety of the structure and reduce downtimes for repairs. The
aim of this research is to derive, implement and demonstrate a low-power,
optical fiber based, strain sensor network that can be scaled up to a large
number of sensors and applied for high-speed testing of large mechanical and
aerospace structural systems. The low-power, high data acquisition rate sensor
network will be evaluated for two critical applications of composite structures.
First, crash-testing of composite automotive structures for accident
survivability analysis will better enable the understanding of how these
materials behave and absorb energy during a crash. The implementation of the
sensor network with a large number of sensors in the automotive structure will
permit a detailed analysis of the dynamic failure of the materials during the
crash. Second, the sensor network will be applied to lightning strike testing of
composite airframe structures. Lightning strikes pose a large problem for carbon
composite materials in aircraft structures due to the inherent low conductivity
of composite materials, leading to significant material damage as the converted
lightning electromagnetic energy propagates through the material. The high-
density sensor network will permit a detailed correlation between the lightning
strike properties and the resulting material damage. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
fundamentally new method for multiplexing fiber Bragg grating sensors based on
the measurement of their individual spectral properties will be derived and
tested. This multiplexing strategy can be scaled to both a large number of
sensors and high-speed data processing, enabling the capability to multiplex a
large number of Bragg grating sensors using a single low-bandwidth, low-power,
low-cost laser source. An algorithm for sensor data identification and
measurement in highly multiplexed fiber Bragg grating sensor networks will be
derived based on combined shape profile division multiplexing and wavelength
division multiplexing, while incorporating prior knowledge of the sensor network
responses for increased accuracy. The outcome of this research would be fiber
Bragg grating sensor network multiplexing capabilities with power requirements
orders of magnitude less than current systems, enabling future fiber Bragg
grating sensor networks on wireless sensing platforms.