* 1536384
* Analysis and interpretation of Tritium and Helium tracer data collected in the North Pacific in 2015.
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* William Jenkins, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 08/31/2018
* USD 421,840.00

By following the evolution of transient tracers in the upper two kilometers of
the water column, it is possible to document changes in thermocline ventilation,
in particular the interior circulation pathways between the subtropics and the
equatorial region. These circulation cells have been argued to respond to and
play an important role in modulating/maintaining major climatic phenomena,
including ENSO, and are also relevant to the Pacific Decadal Oscillation.
Moreover, there is mounting evidence of decade-timescale changes in the strength
of these circulation cells which may have significant climate impacts on even
larger scales. Transient tracers highlight the pathways of newly ventilated
water into the ocean. Their time-evolving distributions provide quantitative
constraints on water mass formation rates and circulation, and the rates of
biogeochemical processes. Tritium is a valuable transient tracer because it has
a distinctive time history and boundary condition that yields additional
information to other tracers. Moreover, its daughter Helium-3 provides
additional, unique information because of its complementary (nutrient-like)
boundary conditions to all other transient tracers. Extending the time series to
longer times provides a description of both longer time-scale ventilation
processes and the opportunity to diagnose time variations in the short time-
scale processes. Additionally, the evolution toward smaller spatial gradients in
the tritium distribution and reduced time derivatives further minimizes non-
linear behavior in the tritium/Helium-3 age. Through the reoccupation of key
hydrographic sections, observation of the evolving distributions of these
tracers will provide powerful constraints on theories and models of ocean
circulation and ventilation. The processed data set will be archived and made
publicly available through established data centers.. This data will be
accessible to a wide range of research enterprises involved in modelling ocean
circulation, ventilation, and climate change. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Tracers, and
in particular radioactive and transient tracers (e.g., chlorofluorocarbons,
radiocarbon, tritium/Helium-3), have been integral to both the WOCE (World Ocean
Circulation Experiment) and CLIVAR (CLImate VARiability and predictability
program) hydrographic programs and are valuable tools for studying ocean
ventilation and its variations on climatic scales. Recognizing that global
change is already affecting the oceans, the CLIVAR program has sought to re-
occupy key WOCE sections at roughly decade time-scale intervals since2003. The
primary objectives of this project are to document the temporal evolution of the
distributions of the transient tracers tritium and Helium-3 over the 24 years
since the WOCE occupation, and to use this information to diagnose the changing
rates of thermocline ventilation and meridional overturning in the shallow
Pacific Ocean. Moreover, the longer term evolution of these tracers on density
horizons that do not directly outcrop in the North Pacific may provide useful
constraints on the effect of mixing processes on ventilation of those density
horizons. The investigators will analyze and interpret helium isotope and
tritium measurements on samples acquired on the 2015 occupation of the P16N
section in the central North Pacific that crosses the northern subpolar and
subtropical gyres as well as the northern and southern tropics.