* 1536604
* Collaborative Research: Evaluating Deep-Sea Ventilation and the Global Carbon Cycle During Early Paleogene Hyperthermals
* GEO,OCE
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2020
* Pincelli Hull, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel McCorkle
* 07/31/2020
* USD 110,974.00

Rapid, short-term global warming events in the Early Paleogene (~65-45 Million
years ago) were caused by massive greenhouse gas release into the ocean-
atmosphere system. These warming events, called "hyper thermals", had far-
reaching effects on the evolution of life on Earth, ecosystems, and the carbon
cycle. The most extreme of these events was the Paleocene-Eocene Thermal Maximum
(~55.5 Million years ago). Hyperthermals resemble what could happen during
anthropogenic climate change, and provide analogs for the effects of greenhouse
gas emissions and their long-term effects on life on Earth. By testing earth
system interactions during the Paleogene hyperthermals, this interdisciplinary
project will provide new insight into global climate-carbon cycle feedbacks and
extremes in climate. The research will serve the national interest by improving
a widely used Community Earth System Model on high-performance computers, and by
synthesizing data and model output with observations from novel isotopic and
trace element techniques in marine geology and paleoceanography.
Multidisciplinary research and educational activities are integrated and will
lead to development and widespread circulation of educational materials on
abrupt climate change, thus enhancing training in quantitative science for
undergraduate and high school students from diverse
backgrounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, this collaborative effort
involves integration of new biotic, isotopic and trace element proxies with
existing data into a state-of-the-art, high-resolution, comprehensive earth
system model to test the hypothesis that deep-sea ventilation released a massive
amount of carbon from the refractory dissolved organic matter (DOM) pool during
hyperthermal events, increasing atmospheric CO2 levels, and thus amplifying
climate change through carbon-cycle feedback. The research team will investigate
the environmental response (e.g., ocean acidification and deoxygenation) and its
impact on pelagic ecosystem structure for three Paleogene hyperthermals with
different magnitudes and durations. The project will focus on a key mechanism
involving remineralization of organic matter and oxidation of the DOM pool in
the ocean, with potentially major implications for future climate evolution,
addressing these questions:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(1) How might changes in
oceanic productivity, organic carbon remineralization, ocean oxygenation, and
export efficiency during hyperthermals have contributed to changes in the
oceanic dissolved organic matter reservoir? &lt;br/&gt;(2) Could DOM release due
to enhanced ocean ventilation have been at least a partial cause of Paleogene
hyperthermals?&lt;br/&gt;(3) What are the implications of Paleogene
climate?carbon cycle changes associated with DOM storage and release for future
extremes in climate and the environment?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;New data on
planktic and benthic foraminifera, and accumulation of marine barite on the same
samples will be obtained and integrated with a large amount of existing data to
provide insight into ecosystem-dependent export productivity and
remineralization, as well as regionally varying vertical carbon fluxes. Recently
gathered data from the equatorial regions will be incorporated in a database to
provide initial conditions for the earth system model. The model results will
give insight into changes in ocean stratification, vertical carbon gradients,
DOM reservoirs, oxygenation, and ecosystem composition during transitions into
and out of hyperthermals. In particular, the team will evaluate the possibility
of extreme changes in response to ecosystem-related fluctuations in DOM
accumulation and subsequent oxidation and emission from the oceans, because the
DOM pool is the largest reservoir of easily interchangeable carbon. This
mechanism has not been thoroughly explored as a contributor to a transition into
a hothouse climate with more extreme weather patterns.