* 1536398
* Collaborative Research: Collaborative Degradation Analysis for Enterprise-Level Maintenance Management via Dynamic Segmentation
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Shuai Huang, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 08/31/2019
* USD 194,862.00

There is an emerging need for enterprise-level management in many applications
where a large number of units operate, which requires thorough understanding of
their degradation patterns. While recent advancements in sensing technology
provide unprecedented data collection opportunities, developing the desired
enterprise-level framework, however, faces several challenges. A common practice
is to identify a representative degradation model that assumes the homogeneity
of all units throughout their operational life. Such approaches capture average
characteristics, but ignore differences among the units and the different
degradation paths taken by different units. Another alternative, that of
individualizing management operations for each unit, is either intractable or
unrealistically costly, given the sheer number of units involved at the
enterprise level. This project will lead to an implementable integrated
framework for learning heterogeneous degradation processes of a large number of
units and guiding the allocation of limited monitoring and maintenance
resources. The results from this research will benefit a variety of US
manufacturing or production enterprises that operate massive number of working
units. This research aligns well with the educational efforts to prepare the
nation's next-generation engineering workforce for manufacturing enterprises via
integration of underrepresented undergraduate student mentoring into advanced
research, K-12 outreach programs incorporating basic and advanced engineering
design activities and opportunities for students to interact with field
engineers in industry and to partner with international
collaborators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to create a
collaborative prognostics and health management methodology for manufacturing
enterprises. The integrative framework will model the heterogeneous degradation
processes of a large number of units by investigating the differences and
similarities among individual units: the population characteristics will be
represented by a manageable number of canonical models forming an enterprise
knowledge base, whereas the individual degradation characteristics will be
captured via dynamic segmentation that models the resemblance between each
unit's degradation pattern with the canonical models. The results will
contribute to the following scientific advancements: 1) a new collaborative
degradation modeling method which can characterize both population-level and
individual-level heterogeneities in their degradation mechanism; 2) a scalable
sensing method which can incorporate both statistical prognostics information
and segment structure for effectively monitoring a large number of units; 3) an
enterprise-level maintenance decision-making which can minimize the overall
costs by exploiting the interdependency of the cost structure while conducting
multi-unit repairs.