* 1536327
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Cognitive Agents and Pedestrian Redevelopment Modeling
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2015,01/31/2017
* Amy Lobben, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* sunil narumalani
* 01/31/2017
* USD 15,640.00

Cities across the country are trying to determine how to best deal with existing
systems of transportation infrastructure while incorporating shifting views
about public health, urban mobility, and environmental sustainability. In many
locales, planners have proposed pedestrian-oriented redevelopment projects that
would require a fundamental shift in the spatial organization of the city. This
doctoral dissertation research project will enhance understanding of how
structural changes to the urban environment would impact individual behaviors.
The doctoral student will employ computational approaches to examine how
individual perception and cognition of environmental features influences real-
world decisions and behaviors. New insights will be provided regarding the
theoretical and practical facets of urban behaviors via empirically driven
cognitive models. The project will provide new information and insights for
planners and policy makers, because it will address larger societal questions
regarding the appropriate redesign of urban spaces in order to address larger
environmental, economic, and public health issues. Findings of the project also
will increase knowledge of how agent-based modeling can be used by the
stakeholders and the public to evaluate the impacts of redevelopment on both
individual citizens and the community at large. As a Doctoral Dissertation
Research Improvement award, this award also will provide support to enable a
promising student to establish a strong independent research career.

This project will approach pedestrian-oriented redevelopment from a
computational, human-centered perspective, which will offer new insights into
the multiple ways designed space is perceived and how those perceptions are
translated into individual spatial behaviors. Pedestrian-oriented redevelopment
is often understood to be a simple, solution-based approach to address larger
structural and social issues of the city. Transforming existing street
infrastructure is not a straightforward process, however, because of embedded
automobile-oriented perspectives. This project will focus on three core
questions: (1) How can data about individual differences regarding environmental
cognition be used in the development of a pedestrian movement model? (2) How
does the development of agent cognition aid in the credibility of real-world
pedestrian movement models? (3) What key design variables in urban redevelopment
projects emerge from cognitively driven pedestrian movement models? The doctoral
student will use data generated from psychometric tests of environmental
cognition as he develops agent-based spatial models. The outputs of the models
will provide new information regarding how small changes to the urban
environment could impact real-world decision making and behaviors. Examining and
modeling individual cognitive processes in urban spaces will provide a rigorous,
data-driven approach to answer questions both about individual agency as well as
about the structure of the planned urban environment.