* 1536418
* Collaborative Research: Common Era Climate Variability from Marine Proxy Surrogate Reconstructions
* GEO,OCE
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2018
* Casey Saenger, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Candace Major
* 07/31/2018
* USD 145,776.00

The density-driven Atlantic meridional overturning circulation (AMOC), which can
influence climate on regional and global scales, is poorly constrained by brief
observational records. This adds considerable uncertainty to the interpretation
of modern climate trends and to forecasts of future change. The proposed work
will extend the instrumental record by generating quantitative reconstructions
of AMOC variability over the past 2,000 years within the physically consistent
framework of coupled ocean-atmosphere general circulation model (AOGCM)
simulations. The project will identify the significant patterns of AMOC
variability that emerge from proxy data and their most likely causes. Synthetic
pseudoproxies will be used to evaluate the skill of these results and identify
sites that might reduce uncertainty in the future. Results from this work will
provide a valuable baseline for natural AMOC-climate relationships, giving
context to recent trends that will inform future climate change forecasts.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will combine a network of marine proxy
records spanning the past two millennia, compiled during Phase 1 of the PAGES
Ocean2K initiative, with Climate Model Intercomparison Project (CMIP) isotope
enabled AOGCMs to estimate AMOC using proxy surrogate reconstructions (PSRs).
The uncertainty in the PSR method arising from methodological choices, data
type, proxy distribution and observational error will be evaluated based, in
part, on pseudoproxy experiments (PPEs). PSRs represent completely consistent
physical systems, allowing AMOC strength and pattern in skillful PSRs to be
compared with atmospheric circulation, external radiative forcing and other
variables to evaluate their dynamical links. Confidence in PSRs will likely
increase as the proxy network expands in the future, and a PPE will be used to
identify additional locations from which additional data might reduce the
uncertainty in PSR-based estimates of AMOC (and other variables), providing a
target for future work. In addition to the broader scientific relevance of
advancing the international Oceans2K and model intercomparison project efforts,
other notable impacts include support of an early career researcher with no
prior NSF support, research opportunities for undergraduates, and involvement of
both researchers in local education initiatives for minorities and high school
students.