* 1536586
* Collaborative Research:  The Oleander Project:  High-resolution observations of the dynamic ocean between New Jersey and Bermuda
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2015,03/31/2022
* Charles Flagg, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Baris Uz
* 03/31/2022
* USD 939,322.00

This project will extend for five years and enhance the multi-decadal
oceanographic observations from the MV Oleander, a container vessel that on a
weekly schedule crosses four distinct regions, namely the continental shelf,
Slope Sea, Gulf Stream and Sargasso Sea on its route between New Jersey and
Bermuda. The enhancements include an acoustic Doppler current profiler (ADCP)
pair that will provide direct measurement of the currents through the base of
the thermocline to about 1200 m depth in the open ocean on the one hand, and
high vertical resolution profiling of the upper ocean on the other. The former
will enable research into the full upper ocean structure of the Gulf Stream, the
mesoscale eddy field, and the highly variable Sargasso Sea, all of which are
important components in the large scale ocean circulation including the
climatically important meridional overturning circulation (MOC). The latter will
greatly improve coverage on the continental shelf, shelfbreak front and
resolution of the mixed layer seasonal thermocline
structure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Oleander track is uniquely situated as it
enables in situ measurements across the shelf and slope, through the
southernmost extension of the North Atlantic subpolar gyre, and into the
subtropical gyre. The beauty of these ADCP snapshots is that they tell us what
the ocean is doing over a wide range of scales. Ensemble averaging these leads
to robust data sets that will contribute to continued and deeper investigations
into (1) seasonal, and interannual to decadal variability on the mid-Atlantic
Bight shelf, (2) dynamics controlling the communication between the shelf and
open ocean, (3) connectivity along western boundaries in the MOC at different
latitudes, and (4) interannual to decadal variability in the Gulf Stream
position, strength and the structure of the subpolar gyre, and the recirculation
in the Sargasso Sea. In addition, the high horizontal resolution of surface
salinity, temperature and velocity afforded by individual tracks will enable
continued investigation into sub-mesoscale processes. A replacement ship is
expected to enter service in the second or third year of the project. With the
installation of two new ADCPs on the new hull, one for improved shelf-slope
operation and one to profile to 1200 m depths, the Oleander project will greatly
increase its observational footprint in the northwest Atlantic. All data will be
available to the public as soon as they are processed and quality-controlled.
The expansion of the University of Hawaii UNOLS-wide ADCP data acquisition
system, UHDAS to include volunteer observing ships will allow for real time data
streams from not only the Oleander, but also other such ADCP-equipped vessels in
operation in the North Atlantic.