* 1536265
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Working Lives and Spatial Practices of Digital Media Developers
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2015,01/31/2017
* Matthew Zook, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Antoinette WinklerPrins
* 01/31/2017
* USD 15,783.00

This project will analyze the production of digital media and software and the
spatial transformations and work practices and places to which they contribute.
Its specific aim is to examine the systems of privilege - especially gendered
privilege and exclusionary standards of masculinity - that influence the work
practices and workplaces of digital media developers to shed critical light on
the conditions leading to and perpetuating the exclusion of women software
engineers from digital media firms. Specific research questions to be
investigated include: How are everyday work practices conducted and structured
in digital media work by its developers? What are the physical working spaces of
digital media developers and how do they support or restrict particular work
practices? In what ways are digital media developers' work practices and spaces
gendered? Through a detailed study of the gendered spatial practices and
dynamics of power in digital media workplaces in San Francisco, this research
will contribute theoretical understanding to a range of scholarly disciplines
including the sociology of work, new media, social media, geography, feminist
theory, and STS. In terms of broader impacts, the findings of this research will
inform and enhance efforts to expand participation in the STEM workforce by
under-represented segments of the population.

The theoretical framework in which this research project is situated
incorporates insights from cultural economic geography, feminist economic
geography, and the sociology of work, which emphasize the importance of
language, meaning, symbols, power, and subject identities and gendered and/or
racialized performances in the economic sphere. The project draws on and
contributes to research in these fields that point to the manner in which high
tech and other high end service sector (e.g., finance) work presents particular
workplace practices and performances of masculinity that are exclusionary. By
analyzing precisely how gender bias constitutes a cultural component of economic
practice that is normalized in everyday settings, the overarching objective of
this study is to assess how positive change toward the broader inclusion of
women and other under-represented groups in the digital media and software
industry may be accomplished. Methods to be utilized include participant
observation and semi-structured interviews with digital media developers in San
Francisco, where several hundred digital media firms are located.