* 1536377
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Perspectives of and Preferences Towards Stormwater Management
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2015,06/30/2017
* Joshua Newell, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Antoinette WinklerPrins
* 06/30/2017
* USD 15,996.00

This doctoral dissertation research project will focus on the factors that shape
how stormwater managers have redefined the uses and value of stormwater. In both
arid and humid regions, the treatment of stormwater from dealing with
wastewater, polluted runoff, and floodwater as something to treated and drained
away to handling it as a beneficial resource that can enhance urban
sustainability, recharge local groundwater supplies, and have other beneficial
uses. Given the possibility for future water scarcity and increases in the size
of storms, effectively integrating stormwater into current water management
schemes will be crucial for both human and ecological health. To better
understand the governance arrangements of this emerging type of integrated water
resource management, the doctoral student will empirically examine attitudes
about stormwater as well as how converging and diverging attitudes of it
influence how it is managed in Chicago and Los Angeles. This project will
integrate scholarship in science and technology studies and political ecology in
order to advance knowledge regarding how attitudes, beliefs, and understandings
shape urban environmental governance and water resource management. It also will
enhance basic understanding of the impacts of technological innovation on urban
environmental governance. By characterizing expert attitudes toward stormwater
in cities with different political, technological, and climatic regimes this
research will provide water managers and municipal agencies with new information
and insights regarding different ways to deal with stormwater as they
contemplate the implementation of new management policies. By including key
stakeholders in multiple phases of the research design, the findings have the
potential to directly influence decision-making processes and public policy. As
a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award also will provide
support to enable a promising student to establish a strong independent research
career.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will focus on three sets of core
questions: (1) What is the history of stormwater management and regulation, and
in what ways have the flows of stormwater been remade and redefined by political
actors, scientific experts, and ordinary citizens? (2) What are the competing
technological systems, social perspectives, and institutional arrangements that
currently define stormwater, shape its management, and inscribe its uses and
value? (3) How do these competing technologies, perspectives, and institutional
arrangements relate to one another and influence how stormwater is understood,
managed, and controlled in order to address issues of risk and vulnerability? To
identify the shared attitudes and perspectives driving transitions in stormwater
management, the student will use a comparative extreme?case study approach. He
will use the Q-method of analysis in tandem with key informant interviews,
analysis of archival data, and participant observation to identify different
points of view and relate them to the points of view of others. The analyses
will provide a better understanding of the perspectives driving transformations
in stormwater management in different geographical contexts, and project
findings will provide generalizable insights into the range of variation that
occurs across a spectrum of water-stressed to water-abundant sites.