* 1536871
* EAGER: Managing Information Risk and Breach Discovery
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2018
* Bradley Malin, Vanderbilt University Medical Center
* Standard Grant
* Shannon Beck
* 09/30/2018
* USD 300,000.00

Increasing demands for data access dominate privacy concerns, putting both data
and organizations at risk. However, there is currently a shortage of research on
how organizations develop and maintain practices to ensure information privacy.
Small scale, preliminary investigations suggest there is variation in
organizational practices and those that have been studied only minimally reflect
documented organizational policies. While technologies exist to help monitor
accesses to data, they are rarely deployed, such that manual audits remain the
norm. This project aims to improve security measures in organizations by better
understanding risk management and breach discovery life cycles. Traditional
technological solutions lack grounding in real organizational routines,
resulting in poor fit with existing work practices and limited adoption. The
problem demands a multi-disciplinary effort to represent organizational risks
and practices, theory to quantify the risk, and methods to translate the
findings for privacy and security practices and technologies that seek to
mitigate the risk. This work will influence the development and deployment of
technological cybersecurity tools in multiple industries. Specifically, it will
provide concrete assessments of breach management routines, how they are
structured, and the uptake that can reasonably be expected of breach management
technologies given industry-specific constraints. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project uses a sociotechnical approach, integrating qualitative data on privacy
practices, and perceived constraints and influences within the process, into a
computational model that will be used to represent constraints and influences on
the deployment of privacy and security measures. This model will account for
various actors within the privacy and security hierarchy, such as compliance
officers, security officers and executives. It allows for conceptualization of
organizational practices and the areas of potential adaptation for the
practices. In particular, the computational contributions are two-fold: (i) an
optimization problem formulation of the risk management and breach discovery
life cycle, and (ii) a taxonomy of perceived organizational risks and their
mapping to mitigating technological measures. In addition, these computational
methods will inform changes in life cycle process, and gaps among current
technological offerings. Results include tools for analyzing an organization's
security routines and risk perspectives, and output organization guidance to
better manage risk.