* 1536565
* Multi-Decadal Global Surveys of Benthic Nepheloid Layers
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2020
* Wilford Gardner, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 09/30/2020
* USD 250,044.00

An accurate knowledge of the abundance and distribution of suspended particles
in the ocean is essential to the study of marine biogeochemical cycles,
especially trace elements and isotopes that interact with these particles.
Particles in the benthic nepheloid layer (BNL), a layer of ocean water just
above the seafloor, can accumulate radionuclides that are used in studying past
global changes, as paleo-proxies, and in investigating modern and glacial ocean
circulation. This project aims to assess the relationship between global maps of
benthic nepheloid layers and surface and deep sea kinetic energy to document how
these processes influence deep-sea processes of sediment resuspension and
redistribution. Results from the research will be shared broadly with the
oceanographic community. A graduate student who qualifies for the National
Science Foundation Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and
Mathematics Program would be supported and trained as part of this project.

Over the past 35 years, the investigators have collected more than 8000
transmissometer - an optical instrument calibrated to estimate particle mass -
profiles from conductivity-temperature-density casts on approximately 70
cruises. These archived and ongoing collections of transmissometer data along
with nephelometer data from the Lamont Doherty Earth Observatory, are the only
collections of particle distributions in the ocean encompassing significant
temporal and global scales. The main goals of the project are to 1) convert beam
attenuation data to mass concentrations, 2) integrate the Net Standing Stock
(NetSS) for each of the thousands of profiles, 3) map the NetSS globally from
the 1980s-to-2016 transmissometer data, 4) compare these maps against global
distributions of nephelometer data from the 1960s-1980s for which a preliminary
global map has been constructed, and 5) compare nepheloid layers along 9 Repeat
Hydrography lines where multiple cruises have occurred. The global maps (and
supporting data) of the benthic nepheloid layers will be widely disseminated to
the oceanographic community, enhancing the scientific understanding of BNL
formation, decadal persistence, and their relationship to kinetic energy regimes
for studying, deciphering and modeling biogeochemical cycles through the water
column and near the seafloor.