* 1536079
* Utilizing Memory Parallelism for High Performance Data Processing
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2018
* Xian-He Sun, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Yuanyuan Yang
* 07/31/2018
* USD 191,000.00

While advances in microprocessor design continue to increase computing speed,
improvements in data access speed of computing systems lag far behind. At the
same time, data-intensive large-scale applications, such as information
retrieval, computer animation, and big data analytics are emerging. Data access
delay has become the vital performance bottleneck of modern high performance
computing (HPC). Memory concurrency exists at each layer of modern memory
hierarchies; however, conventional computing systems are primarily designed to
improve CPU utilization and have inherent limitations in addressing the critical
issue of data movement in HPC. In this research, the PI proposes the concept of
memory parallelism and the customized parallel memory (CuPM) system architecture
in order to address data movement bottleneck issues. CuPM is an architecture
designed to exploit memory concurrency to support high performance data
processing (HPDP). This new abstraction extracts the general principles of
parallel memory system by building on the new Concurrent-AMAT metric, a set of
fresh theoretical results in data access concurrency, a series of recent
successes in parallel I/O optimization, and new technology opportunities. CuPM
is a novel cross-layer and cross-cutting approach for exploring and utilizing
current and future memory technologies based on opportunities arising from
memory concurrency.

Current HPC systems do not fully recognize or exploit the concurrency that
modern memory systems provide. The key new idea of CuPM is to establish a
systematic way of exploring, enhancing, utilizing, and customizing memory
concurrency to build effective memory systems. It will be developed with two
goals: to understand and reveal the memory concurrency and its properties, and
to explore and utilize current memory concurrency for HPDP. The former will
evaluate the potential of the latter; while the latter will verify and testing
the former. Together, they enable CuPM to address a central challenge for
extreme computing ? efficient memory systems. The proposed CuPM architecture has
the potential to transform systems from application through runtime through
architecture.