* 1536776
* Patterns of Microbial Community Structure Within and Between Hadal Environments
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Douglas Bartlett, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Michael Sieracki
* 08/31/2019
* USD 141,134.00

The deepest portion of the ocean is present in ocean trenches, whose steep walls
descend from approximately 4 miles down to depths that in some cases are close
to 7 miles below the seawater surface. At these locations Earth's crust is
recycled. Perhaps not surprisingly given their remoteness, deep ocean trenches
are the least understood habitats in the ocean. The researchers participating in
this project are working to characterize the microbes present in two of the
deepest trenches present on Earth, both in the Pacific Ocean, the Kermadec
Trench located north of New Zealand, and the Mariana Trench, located east and
south of the island of Guam. Most of the Mariana Trench is located within the
United States Mariana Trench Marine National Monument. Relatively little is
known about the diversity and adaptations of the microorganisms in deep ocean
trenches. An unknown fraction of the microbes present have descended from
shallow waters above and are unlikely to participate in any nutrient cycles in
the deep sea. Others are adapted to near freezing temperatures and up to
pressures greater than 10e7 kilograms per square meter (16,000 pounds per square
inch). These latter microbes perform important roles recycling organic matter.
But who are they? This project is contributing to the training of diverse
undergraduate and graduate students participating in research, additional
undergraduate students learning about microbes inhabiting extreme environments
in a web-based class, and additional graduate students and postdoctoral
scientists participating in an advanced training course being offered in
Antarctica.

Experiments being performed include direct counts of prokaryotes and viruses in
seawater and sediments, analyses of the abundance and phylogenetic breadth of
culturable heterotrophic bacteria at a range of pressures, measurements of
bacterial community species diversity and richness both within and across
seawater and sediment samples, as well as within and across the two trench
systems, measurements of microbial activity as a function of pressure and the
identification of high pressure-active cells. The data generated from these
analyses are being integrated into the results of additional chemical,
geological and biological measurements performed by others as a part of the
National Science Foundation funded Hadal Ecosystems Studies Project. Two of the
working hypotheses are that prokaryote numbers and diversity are generally
positively correlated with surface productivity and proximity to the trench axis
and that bacterial taxa exist which are endemic to specific trenches, present in
multiple trenches and more widely distributed in deep-sea environments.