* 1536605
* Collaborative Research: Coupled Ocean-Atmosphere Recycling of Refractory Dissolved Organic Carbon in Seawater
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2015,12/31/2018
* David Kieber, SUNY College of Environmental Science and Forestry
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 12/31/2018
* USD 236,774.00

The oceans hold a massive quantity of organic carbon that is greater than all
terrestrial organic carbon biomass combined. Nearly all marine organic carbon is
dissolved and more than 95% is refractory, and cycled through the oceans several
times before complete removal. Refractory dissolved organic carbon (RDOC)
concentrations are uniform with depth in the water column and represent the
"background" carbon present throughout the oceans. However, very little is known
regarding RDOC production and removal processes. One potential removal pathway
is through adsorption of RDOC onto surfaces of rising bubbles produced by
breaking waves and ejection via bubble bursting into the atmosphere. Building on
prior research, the investigators will evaluate the importance of ocean-
atmosphere processing in recycling marine RDOC during a research cruise in the
northwestern Atlantic Ocean. Results of the research will provide important
insights regarding the coupled ocean-atmosphere loss of RDOC, thereby improving
understanding of and ability to predict the role of RDOC in oceanic and
atmospheric biogeochemistry, the global carbon cycle, and Earth's climate. The
research will involve three early career faculty, and will provide training for
undergraduate and graduate researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent results
based on a limited set of observations indicate that the organic matter (OM)
associated with primary marine aerosol (PMA) produced by bursting bubbles from
breaking waves at the sea surface is comprised partly to wholly of RDOC rather
than OM of recent biological origin as has been widely assumed. The injection of
RDOC into the atmosphere in association with PMA and its subsequent
photochemical oxidation is a potentially important and hitherto unrecognized
sink for RDOC in the oceans of sufficient magnitude to close the marine carbon
budget and help resolve a long-standing conundrum regarding removal mechanisms
for marine RDOC. This project will involve a shipboard investigation and
modeling study to (1) quantify the relative contributions of marine refractory
dissolved organic carbon (RDOC) to primary marine aerosol organic matter (PMA
OM) produced from near-surface seawater in biologically productive and
oligotrophic regions and from North Atlantic Deep Water, and to (2) determine
the importance of atmospheric photochemical processing as a recycling pathway
for RDOC. To test these hypotheses, a high-capacity aerosol generator will be
deployed at four hydrographic stations in the NW Atlantic Ocean to characterize
(1) the natural abundance of 14C in PMA and in surface and deep seawater; (2)
the surface tension and physical properties of bubble plumes; (3) size-resolved
production fluxes, chemical composition, organic carbon enrichments, spectral
absorbance, and photochemical evolution of PMA; and (4) the carbon content,
optical properties, and physical properties of seawater. The importance of RDOC
recycling via PMA production and photochemical evolution will be interpreted
with model calculations.