* 1536461
* Workshop on Monsoons and Inter-Tropical Convergence Zones: The Annual Cycle in the Holocene and the Future
* GEO,AGS
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2016
* Michela Biasutti, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Anjuli Bamzai
* 04/30/2016
* USD 20,000.00

The workshop entitled Monsoons and Inter-tropical Convergence Zones (ITCZ): the
annual cycle in the Holocene and the future will be held at Columbia University,
September 15-18, 2015. It will foster interactions between scientists versed in
paleo climate observations and modeling, theorists of the general circulation of
the atmosphere, experts in convection and the organization of rain-bearing
disturbances, and climate modelers and climate scientists focusing on future
projections. The workshop will provide a forum for a lively exchange of ideas
between eminent leaders in the field, early career scientists, and participating
students from both the host institution and nearby institutions, including those
with high minority enrollment, such as the City University of New York. NSF
support will go towards support for the participation by students and
postdoctoral scholars, in particular from groups underrepresented in science and
engineering. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The focus will be on modeling and theoretical
understanding of the annual cycle of oceanic ITCZ and land monsoons in the
present climate, the past, and the future. Coupled General Circulation Models
fail to accurately reproduce the position and strength of the Tropical
precipitation maxima both in the current climate and in the past. Talks will be
posted on the symposium website after the event, and a summary article
highlighting the conclusions of the workshop will be published.