* 1536782
* Coral Chorus: The Role of Soundscapes in Coral Reef Larval Recruitment and Biodiversity
* GEO,OCE
* 11/01/2015,04/30/2020
* Aran Mooney, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 04/30/2020
* USD 1,010,181.00

Coral reef ecosystems host some of the highest biodiversity of life per unit
area on Earth and harbor about one quarter to one third of all marine animals.
Reef-associated animals are a major source of protein for millions of people,
and reefs offer shoreline protection and provide a significant source of tourism
revenue, especially in developing countries. Factors that influence supply and
settlement of young (larval) fish, coral, and associated animals can have large
impacts on reef ecosystem and population structure, and learning more about
these can help improve understanding of how to maintain the benefits provided by
coral reefs. This study will lead to a detailed, mechanistic understanding of
how young larvae use natural sounds to orient toward, locate, and select
preferred settlement habitat. The approach will combine detailed field
measurements and experiments to isolate key soundscape variables that impact
coral reef larvae. The results will be broadly distributed to the scientific
community and the public through open-access articles, media releases, blogs and
website updates. Graduate and undergraduate students will be directly involved
in all aspects of the research and outreach. This project will leverage a
skilled communications department, the Cape Cod summer community, a community
outreach center in a national park and marine protected area, and the public's
interest in coral reefs to broaden the awareness of marine ecology through: (a)
public presentations in a summer seminar series, (b) direct communication and
interaction with journalists and teachers, and (c) education in local schools
for preschool, grade-school and college students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For
marine communities, such as those on coral reefs, factors influencing larval
supply and settlement can have major impacts on community structure and
population replenishment. There are now some indications that sound plays an
important role in attracting larvae to suitable settlement habitat. There is
little understanding of what soundscape habitat information is available to
larvae and how differences and variability in sound can influence settlement.
This project will include comprehensive experiments, environmental measurements,
and modeling with the goal of understanding the role of sound in influencing
larval recruitment and local biodiversity. The investigators will measure in
situ settlement of larval fish and coral in relation to different soundscapes
and habitat conditions in a marine protected area using traditional larval
sampling methods, moored acoustic recorders, and a suite of environmental
observations. Controlled and calibrated environmental playback experiments will
isolate soundscape components and determine specific and fundamental acoustic
cues larvae use to orient and settle. The spatial and temporal variability of
soundscape cues and components across reef habitats will be established.
Finally, the project will determine the relevant ranges of sound plumes that
larvae may encounter through direct measurements of the sound fields of multiple
reefs.