* 1536943
* Collaborative Research: Modeling hydrothermal recharge and outflow in oceanic crust analogs with sharp permeability gradients
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2015,12/31/2017
* Jean-Arthur Olive, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Barbara Ransom
* 12/31/2017
* USD 68,110.00

Fluid circulation through the oceanic crust at the axis of mid-ocean ridges is a
primary mechanism through which the Earth loses its internal heat. At the
seafloor, this circulation releases hot fluids into the deep ocean. These
hydrothermal sites typically host ecosystems and life forms found nowhere else
on the planet and are thought to be one of the places on Earth where life may
have originated. Hydrothermal fluid venting often occurs at or near major fault
or fracture zones, suggesting that these breaks in the ocean crust can act as
highly permeable conduits for fluids escape. It is unclear, however, to what
extent these breaks in Earth's crust enable fluids to enter and move downward
into the seafloor where they get heated. This research uses analog experiments,
using a 3-D printer, and modeling to explore how fluid circulation at mid-ocean
ridges spontaneously organizes itself and transports heat in highly fractured
and faulted crust. By allowing exploration of the relation between venting sites
and major tectonic features, the research facilitates our understanding of
geothermal processes and the search for new hydrothermal sites on the seafloor.
Broader impacts of the work include integration of research and education and
support of three early career investigators, one from an institution in an
EPSCoR state (Idaho). Results have applications ranging from terrestrial
groundwater hydrology to geothermal energy, carbon sequestration, and the oil
industry.

This research employs numerical and analog experiments to describe and
quantitatively explain the effect of heterogeneous permeability on subsurface
flow geometry and heat extraction. Using a 3-D printer, we will generate plastic
analogs of oceanic crust, containing a series of regularly spaced tubes that
will act as fluid pathways of defined permeability. Within this permeable
matrix, a planar slot of prescribed width, inclination, and greater permeability
(achieved through wider tubes) will be created, representing the damage zone
that typically surrounds active faults. The printed volume will be placed in a
glass-walled tank containing a mixture of glucose and water. The fluid will be
heated from below to initiate porous convection. A combination of particle image
velocimetry, thermo-chromic liquid crystals, and temperature sensors at the top
and bottom of the volume will allow quantification of the locations of fluid
recharge and discharge and the heat output of the convective system as the
permeability contrast and geometry of the slot is varied. Results will be
compared to numerical models of porous convection in heterogeneous media and
then extrapolated to natural conditions. The research will focus on predicting
the conditions under which high-permeability fault zones can trap and focus
hydrothermal convection rolls. The combined experimental and theoretical
approach will greatly inform the investigation of targeted hydrothermal sites on
slow-spreading mid-ocean ridges that sit next to major fault systems or near
major crustal heterogeneities.