* 1536996
* Collaborative Research: Multiple Stressors in the Estuarine Environment: What drives changes in the Carbon Dioxide system?
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2020
* Raymond Najjar, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 09/30/2020
* USD 180,000.00

Understanding the vulnerability of estuarine ecosystems to anthropogenic impacts
requires a quantitative assessment of the dynamic drivers of change to the
estuarine carbonate system. Estuaries are currently experiencing multiple
environmental stressors that have significant impacts on their carbonate
chemistry, making this assessment a major challenge. Although the effects of
changes in nutrient run-off (i.e. eutrophication and hypoxia) have been long-
studied in many estuaries, much less attention has been given to the impacts of
global change on these systems. In this study, a team of field scientists and
modelers will attempt to distinguish natural interannual variability in a major
US estuary from the impacts of local anthropogenic changes (e.g., nutrient
inputs, changing freshwater end member characteristics) and global change
(increases in atmospheric temperature, atmospheric carbon dioxide, and sea
level), by using numerical models calibrated with CO2-system observations at
appropriate spatial and temporal scales. If successful, this will be the first
study to quantitatively distinguish between local and global anthropogenic
impacts on the CO2 system in an estuary. The results are expected to have
important implications for management of Chesapeake Bay because the impact of
local anthropogenic stressors on the system, once isolated, may be mitigated by
appropriate environmental policy implemented at the regional scale. Two of the
PIs have a strong history of proven relationships with Chesapeake Bay managers
and policy makers, which will insure direct infusion of these scientific results
into ongoing management decisions.

In this project researchers will study the diurnal, seasonal, and interannual
variability of the CO2 system in the Chesapeake Bay, a non-pristine estuary,
using a combination of conventional shipboard sampling (of dissolved inorganic
carbon, and alkalinity) and new high-frequency autonomous instrumentation (for
observations of pH and CO2 partial pressure) to assess the impact of extreme
events, like tropical storms and nor?easters on carbonate chemistry. These high-
quality observations will afford a rigorous assessment of the uncertainty
associated with a 30-year water-quality monitoring time series of pH and
alkalinity. The team will use an estuarine-carbon-biogeochemical model evaluated
and calibrated with the new and long-term observations. Sensitivity experiments
will be applied to disentangle multiple impacts on the CO2 system in the estuary
over the last 30 years, including increased atmospheric temperature and CO2,
sea-level rise, eutrophication due to increases in nutrient run-off, and
changing carbonate characteristics of riverine end-members.