* 1536743
* Assessing the effects of carboxylated amino acids and polysaccharides on the fluid-calcite element partitioning
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2020
* Richard Zeebe, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Candace Major
* 08/31/2020
* USD 330,826.00

Many marine organisms build elaborate skeletons and shells made of carbonate
minerals. Organic molecules such as amino acids and carbohydrates play important
roles in regulating the structure and texture of these carbonates. Recent
studies show that certain amino acids enhance magnesium uptake in carbonates and
thereby influence the overall chemical composition. It is likely that these
organic molecules influence the uptake of other elements as well, though this
idea has not been tested. Using carefully controlled laboratory experiments,
this study will investigate the effect of organic molecules on the abundance of
several trace elements in carbonates. Trace element compositions of marine
biogenic carbonates are widely used as tools ("proxies") to infer the
temperature and the chemistry of ancient seawater, though it is known that
biological processes also influence the shell chemistry. The outcome of this
study will improve the reliability of trace element proxies by providing
insights into biological controls on carbonate formation. This should advance
our ability to reconstruct the dynamics, biology, and chemistry of the oceans in
the past, which is a key to understanding the Earth's climate system. The
research outcomes should be also relevant to other areas, such as removal of
toxic heavy metals from the environment, engineering of new synthetic materials
for industrial purposes, and geological CO2 sequestration.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Based on inorganic calcite precipitation experiments using
a pH-stat system, the research team will determine if and by how much element/Ca
ratios in CaCO3 and precipitation rates depend on the types and concentrations
of organic molecules at a constant saturation level. The research team will also
address whether such effects are due to modulation of precipitation rates
(kinetic effects) or due to direct molecular/ionic interactions by performing
additional experiments using a known calcite precipitation inhibitor. This
project provides support for an early-career investigator as well as research
opportunities for undergraduate students at the University of Hawaii, where the
student population has an exceptionally diverse ethnic background.