* 1536294
* Support for the U. S. GEOTRACES Project Office
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2022
* Robert Anderson, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 09/30/2022
* USD 1,281,746.00

The International GEOTRACES Program is a worldwide effort to study the global
marine biogeochemical cycles of trace elements and their isotopes in the global
ocean. The cycling of chemical substances between organisms and the environment
is intimately associated with such diverse phenomena as the carbon cycle,
climate change, ocean ecosystems, and the distribution and fate of environmental
contaminants. This award provides funding to continue operation of the US
Project Office, established in 2006 to manage the US national component of
GEOTRACES. The US GEOTRACES Project Office provides coordination and
communication support for the teams US marine scientists who are funded by the
National Science Foundation to carry out the American contribution to this
difficult but important multi-national effort. Community building is a
cornerstone of the GEOTRACES program and will constitute a major broader impact
of Project Office activities. For example, young investigators involved in
GEOTRACES will be offered an excellent professional networking and educational
opportunity by being involved in cruises and workshops. GEOTRACES findings,
including information about micronutrients essential to marine life and the
distribution of contaminants, will certainly be of interest to a broad spectrum
of society. A new education and outreach initiative proposed here, coordinated
by the US GEOTRACES Project Office, will begin by building on these aspects of
the program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will provide three years of renewal
funding for the US GEOTRACES Project Office at the Lamont-Doherty Earth
Observatory of Columbia University. Under the direction of the US GEOTRACES
Scientific Steering Committee, the Project Office will provide planning and
coordination services for all aspects of the US national GEOTRACES program.
Specifically, the Project Office will be responsible for (1) arranging workshops
to facilitate the planning and implementation of field programs as well as the
interpretation and synthesis of results of those expeditions, while also
communicating information about international GEOTRACES and providing logistics
support for enabling activities (intercalibration, data management, modeling);
(2) serving as a point of contact for communication among international and
regional efforts involving US scientists;(3) communication, outreach and
community-building activities; and (4) supporting the US GEOTRACES Scientific
Steering Committee by facilitating its deliberations, arranging its meetings and
implementing its decisions.