* 1536790
* Travel Support for DAMOP2015 for US Students -The Conference is being held June 8-12, 2015 at the Greater Columbus Convention Center in Columbus, Ohio.
* MPS,PHY
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Protik Majumder, Williams College
* Standard Grant
* Mike Cavagnero
* 05/31/2016
* USD 12,000.00

This award provides travel support for student participation in the 46th Annual
Meeting of the American Physical Society Division of Atomic, Molecular, and
Optical Physics (APS-DAMOP) to be held June 8-12, 2015 in Columbus, Ohio.
Support is provided only for US students (students enrolled in US universities).
The Conference has grown in recent years and attracts over one-thousand
participants. Covering all the major areas of atomic, molecular and optical
physics, this conference series is of outstanding importance to the vitality of
atomic, molecular, and optical physics in the United States. This Conference
offers an opportunity for students to present their research results and to
interact with senior scientists primarily from the United States, but also the
broader international community. In addition, a one-day graduate student
symposium in conjunction with the conference has been organized to introduce
students to cutting-edge topics in atomic, molecular, and optical physics. The
support of students through this award makes a substantial contribution to the
education and training of future scientists. Students who graduate with a
background in atomic, molecular, and optical physics acquire a broad range of
knowledge and skills that enable them to contribute to progress in many areas of
science and technology.