* 1536463
* New paradigms for relating the microstructure of cartilage to its large scale mechanics: The Roles of Rigidity-Percolation and Double Gel Network Structure in  Non-Linear Response
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Lawrence Bonassar, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Laurel Kuxhaus
* 07/31/2019
* USD 348,134.00

Cartilage, the smooth tissue that coats bones in joints, is a remarkable
material that can last decades and outperform any man-made substance in its
unique combination of material properties. There are several aspects of
cartilage's microstructure that contribute to its longevity. First, the matrix
that gives rise to these mechanical properties is comprised of two
interpenetrating polymer networks, a design that has recently been shown to
inhibit crack formation. Second, the mechanical properties of cartilage change
with depth such that energy damping occurs almost entirely in a thin region near
its surface. The PIs have recently developed a theoretical model that explains
how variations in the concentration of the polymer networks lead to this
localization of energy absorption to the tissue surface. This project uses an
array of experimental techniques to test this model and extend its applicability
to extreme deformations where cartilage can be damaged. By chemically treating
the tissue to remove essential molecular components and testing the tissue
response in their absence, the PIs will determine which elements of the matrix
are essential for generating cartilage's unique combination of mechanical
properties. A better understanding of the macromolecular origins of cartilage
mechanical properties will give insight into how diseases such as arthritis
develop, guide approaches to tissue repair therapies, and more broadly, provide
mechanical design criteria for fabrication of robust materials that can endure
extreme loading.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Articular cartilage has unique material
properties that enable it to endure millions of loading cycles per year while
protecting underlying tissues. The structural and compositional origins of its
compressive properties have been known for decades. However, there is no
equivalent understanding of the underlying mechanisms associated with its shear
behavior. Recently the investigators introduced a rigidity percolation theory,
previously established to explain the properties of reconstituted polymer
networks, to explain the linear response of cartilage shear mechanics. This
theory is that the observed orders of magnitude variation in the shear modulus
of cartilage arises from small concentration differences of matrix constituents
that are poised near a rigidity percolation threshold. Furthermore, the theory
makes novel predictions about molecular mechanisms of non-linear shear behavior
and gives new insight into mechanical changes that occur from biochemical and
mechanical damage. This project will test these predictions and determining if
rigidity percolation can be used as a new paradigm for the macromolecular
origins of the mechanical shear properties of articular cartilage. Specifically,
using chemical and mechanical degradation techniques, predictions made by the
model about the critical extracellular matrix elements that give rise to
cartilage's macroscale mechanical properties will be tested. Finally, this
project will extend the applicability of the model to describe how the
microscopic structure of cartilage is altered when it is sheared beyond the
linear regime.