* 1537027
* Biomechanics of the Aging Crystalline Lens
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* giuliano scarcelli, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Laurel Kuxhaus
* 08/31/2019
* USD 327,644.00

With aging, every person experiences presbyopia, an eye condition leading to the
inability to see far and near objects in sharp focus. Current treatment options
for presbyopia, either surgical or with spectacles, only improve vision at a
fixed distance but do not restore the ability to actively change the focus
distance, which is called ?accommodation.? Visual accommodation is governed by
the deformability of the crystalline lens of the eye, which determines the
ability to vary lens shape and thus focusing distance. Therefore, the
fundamental understanding of the biomechanics of the crystalline lens and its
aging process could lead to novel treatments for presbyopia. However, measuring
the mechanical properties of the intact lens is difficult because mechanical
testing methods are generally based on physical contact. The research addresses
this need with a novel imaging modality, Brillouin microscopy, which can map
lens properties without contact at high 3D resolution. The overall goal of this
research program is to measure the biomechanics aging crystalline lens tissue
using Brillouin technology in order to develop biomechanically-efficient
approaches to delay presbyopia onset, slow progression and perhaps to restore
accommodation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will advance the fundamental
understanding of the accommodation process, thus addressing long-standing open
questions in the field and providing potential solutions to presbyopia. Novel
Brillouin microscopy will provide three-dimensional maps of the elastic modulus
inside the lens and of its age-related changes. Development of a computational
model of lens biomechanics and validation against gold-standard mechanical tests
will enable testing the hypothesis that the spatial distribution of elastic
modulus within the lens should be targeted to delay presbyopia onset or restore
dynamic accommodation. Brillouin measurements and the validated model will be
used to design and test three potential avenues to presbyopia-correction, i.e.
limiting lens growth, disrupting protein crosslinking, and light-based localized
micro-cutting. These are potentially effective solutions in increasing lens
deformability and are compatible with current technological capabilities. In
broader terms, the comprehensive information provided by Brillouin imaging could
yield mechanistic insights into how accommodation is related to the underlying
molecular processes, such as protein expression and micro-structural changes,
which are responsible for the mechanical properties of the lens.