* 1537306
* Computational Studies of Fracture Networks in Particulate Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* John Dolbow, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 08/31/2018
* USD 290,000.00

This project is motivated by recent observations of evolving fracture networks
in tightly-packed systems of particles, or particle rafts, interacting with
fluids. Research supported by this award is focused on computational models and
simulations of these systems. Simulations will enable detailed investigations
into their behavior, and help to answer open questions such as why seemingly
small perturbations in particle packing give rise to dramatically different
fracture patterns. The tightly packed particle network is an idealized porous
medium, and the injection of surfactant is what drives the growth of the
fracture networks. This type of coupling between fluid flow and crack growth is
central to many problems of technological relevance, including hydraulic
fracturing and corrosion-assisted fracture. The tabletop experiments are simple
and cost effective to study particle systems in detail. The effort involves
outreach activities to public elementary schools in North Carolina, where movies
of the simulations and experiments of fracture networks will be shown. These in-
class demonstrations will be used as a launching point to introduce students to
basic programming concepts at a young age. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
supported by this award is aimed at using simulation science to determine the
influence of particle packing, size distributions, and surfactant injection on
fracture evolution in particulate systems. The simulations will provide a means
to consider systems beyond the practical limits of experimental testing, such as
a much broader range of particle sizes and packing configurations. In the
process, fundamental contributions will be made in applied mechanics and
computational science. These include: 1) a chemo-poro-elasticity based theory
for the fracturing of particulate raft systems; and 2) multi-scale, coupled
finite-element and molecular dynamics methods that can handle a range of time-
scales, from the fast scales of particle interactions to the much slower scales
of surfactant diffusion. These models and simulations will be used to study
recent experiments in the dynamics of fracture of particulate rafts, focusing on
the important roles of particle heterogeneity and surfactant injection.