* 1537652
* Life-cycle Assessment of Resiliency and Sustainability of Buildings
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Aimee Buccellato, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Caglar Oskay
* 08/31/2019
* USD 398,883.00

A typical building must be in use for decades before the energy expended in its
daily operations surpasses the energy embodied within its initial construction.
Thus, how a sustainable building is constructed is as important as how it is
operated over its lifetime. Unfortunately, the environmental impact of building
construction has only recently been considered by design consultants, quantified
by the energy expended in the manufacture of the materials employed. By
considering only the materials' 'cradle' and not the 'cradle-to-grave'
environmental impact, these evaluations fail to quantify the true impact of US
building construction practices. In addition, each building has specific
vulnerabilities, whose implications for sustainability has not been previously
considered, despite the significant environmental impact of repairs after a
disaster. This project will develop an integrated life-cycle analysis that
responds to the complex relationship between sustainability and resilience. This
research will help the US building industry realize designs with truly optimal
performance. Doing so will advance the global mandate to reduce environmental
impact and better steward of natural resources. Moreover, this project's
adoption of established modeling environments, real world case studies, and
private sector partnerships will aid in the effective translation to US design
practice. The project's educational crossover opportunities will ensure that
future design professionals are well equipped to further this legacy by using
the outcomes of this research to enhance resilience and sustainability of our
built environment.

This project will develop an integrated life-cycle assessment capturing the
dependencies between multi-hazard resilience and sustainability, across the
multiple contributing dimensions of environmental impact. The computationally
efficient assessment will take advantage of (i) simulation-driven approaches,
(ii) sample-based tools, (iii) soft-computing techniques, and (iv) new
environmental impact toolsets that will mine publically available data to
quantify the building's operational and embodied energy. Through sensitivity
analyses on actual buildings, the framework will reveal which design aspects
truly drive environmental impact and how this is affected by the consideration
of lifetime exposure. The transfer of this newfound understanding is further
facilitated by engaging practicing engineers and architects directly in the
research effort.