* 1537711
* Virtual Fields Methods for Soft Musculoskeletal Tissue Characterization and Model Validation
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2018
* Ellen Arruda, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Michele Grimm
* 07/31/2018
* USD 429,459.00

Each year hundreds of thousands of people suffer soft tissue injuries. The
mechanical properties of the tissues that are damaged are difficult to measure.
It is very difficult to make a test specimen from a natural soft tissue because
the pre-load in the tissue is lost when it is cut. In addition, the cutting
process damages fibers that are essential to the properties. This project will
create and apply a method that can measure the deformations of a soft tissue
without cutting a specimen and without removing the natural preload. All of the
stretch of the tissue is measured using an MRI (magnetic resonance imaging)
method and the deformations are put into a mathematical model of the tissue to
calculate the properties needed to understand how injury occurs. The project
will be applied to the anterior cruciate ligament (or ACL) which is part of the
knee. Damage or rupture of the ACL is the most common soft tissue injury in
athletic individuals. Women are particularly susceptible to ACL injury with
rates from 4-10 times that of men depending on which activity. This research
will develop new technology for measuring soft tissue mechanical properties and
apply it to the ACL. The developed methods will be applicable to other soft,
preloaded tissues and also to MRI visible soft engineering
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The mechanical properties of the anterior
cruciate ligament (ACL) of the knee are particularly challenging to
experimentally characterize; in its anatomically relevant state the ACL is
twisted and at least one of its two bundles is partially extended regardless of
knee flexion angle. This tissue is also mechanically non-linear, anisotropic,
(poro)viscoelastic, and heterogeneous. Full-field displacement methods that
provide two- and three- dimensional displacement information over a large
surface can reduce the number of test geometries needed to characterize soft
tissue, as information about anisotropy, heterogeneity, non-linearity, and even
viscoelasticity is contained within the displacement fields. This work seeks to
explore full-surface and full-volume imaging modalities with corresponding
displacement field analyses as a means to characterize the ACL bundles under
uniaxial loading. A constitutive model for the ACL based on the uniaxial loading
will be implemented into an MRI-derived finite element framework for
computational analysis of the ACL. This model will be validated by using it to
predict the ACL response to anterior tibial translation (ATT), its primary
failure deformation mode.