* 1537168
* The Role of Extracellular Matrix Fibrils in Stiffness Changes and Growth Factor Tethering during Fibrosis
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Christopher Lemmon, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Standard Grant
* Laurel Kuxhaus
* 08/31/2020
* USD 431,776.00

Fibrosis is a pathological condition in which tissue healing proceeds in an
uncontrolled manner. It has been estimated that nearly half of all deaths in the
western world can be attributed to fibrosis. Fibrosis occurs in nearly every
organ, including liver, kidney, heart, skin, and lung. While it is well
appreciated that fibrosis is associated with organ failure in many disease
states, there are few treatments that have proven successful. This award will
support fundamental work in this area by studying the mechanobiology of
fibrosis. Mechanobiology is a growing field in which researchers investigate the
role of mechanical properties of cells and tissues in disease progression. The
research team hypothesize that fibrosis proceeds by initially increasing the
stiffness of the tissue, which then leads to the generation of larger
contractile forces in local cells, which in turn drives the assembly of more
stiff fibrotic tissue, resulting in uncontrolled progression of fibrosis. This
research has the potential to discover important insights in fibrosis treatment
by investigating the mechanical signaling that underlies fibrosis
progression.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;While there are tissue-specific aspects of
fibrosis, there are several common themes that are seen regardless of tissue
type or disease: cells at the site of fibrosis generate larger contractile
forces, they secrete increased levels of extracellular matrix proteins, and they
have elevated activation of the Transforming Growth Factor-beta pathway, which
is implicated in many diseases, but is also critical in wound healing.
Progression of fibrosis drives tissue stiffening, which ultimately disturbs
tissue structure and impairs organ function. The research team hypothesizes that
these common events are integrated through cell-driven assembly of the
extracellular matrix protein fibronectin into elastic fibrils. These fibrils are
assembled in response to cell-generated contractile forces and possess a growth-
factor binding site that binds several growth factors, including Transforming
Growth Factor-beta, with nanomolar affinity. The research team will investigate
the hypothesis that fibronectin fibrils facilitate fibrosis by both increasing
tissue stiffness in fibrotic tissue and localizing Transforming Growth Factor-
beta to the cell surface via tethering to fibronectin fibrils. The team will
investigate this hypothesis through the use of microfabricated pillar arrays
that can quantify both cell-generated contractile forces and assembly of
fibronectin fibrils. A novel tool will also be developed to quantify the
stiffness of in vitro assembled extracellular matrix.