* 1537582
* Joining of Dissimilar Materials through a Novel Hybrid Friction Stir Resistance Spot Welding Process
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Jun Ni, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 08/31/2019
* USD 300,000.00

A reliable, efficient, and economical method for joining dissimilar materials is
highly desired in many industrial applications (e.g., automotive, aerospace, and
defense industries). Such a method enables utilization of multi-material
structures and reduction of vehicle weight. Achievement of reliable dissimilar
material joints will provide design guidance for future multi-material vehicle
structures. This award supports fundamental research to provide knowledge needed
to create a novel, hybrid, and highly efficient joining method that integrates
traditional resistance spot welding method with recently developed friction stir
process. Research results can greatly contribute to the vehicle light-weighting
efforts and thus to increased fuel economy of transportation vehicles and future
sustainability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of this research are: (1) to
determine the effects of pulsed electric currents on the thermal and mechanical
stress fields, and material behaviors when joining dissimilar materials through
the use of electro-plastically enhanced friction stir spot welding, and (2) to
create the mathematical relationship between key input parameters (e.g., pulsed
electric current magnitude and frequency, rotational speed of friction stir
tool, plunge speed, etc.) and the resulting prediction of process dynamics and
the associated process performance metrics such as joint quality, temperature
distribution, and welding force and torque. The scope of this research includes
the modeling and analysis of material flow stress and morphology in the welding
zone where dissimilar materials are fused through the friction stir technique in
resistance spot welding process. A multi-physics modeling approach will be
utilized to calculate the material, temperature and stress distribution fields.
This model will also be utilized to analyze the effects of electro-plasticity
and heating associated with pulsed electric current on material behavior in the
weld nuggets. Multiple phase flow theories will be used for describing
dissimilar material behaviors in the weld nugget. In order to quantify the joint
quality, both mechanical tests and microstructure analysis will be conducted.