* 1537360
* GOALI: Behavior of Materials from Natural Cellulose Fibers and Plant Resins for Automotive and Other Applications
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Deborah Mielewski, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Wells
* 08/31/2019
* USD 400,714.00

This Grant Opportunity for Academic Liaison with Industry (GOALI) project with
Ford Motor Company concerns the mechanical behavior of composites of nanometer-
sized fibers from woody and herbaceous sources contained in synthetic and
naturally derived resins. Research on the manufacture, characterization and
mechanics of these materials will be jointly conducted at both the university
and industrial partner's facilities. Based on previous research, the materials
are expected to have pronounced ability to reduce vibration and to perform well
under some impact conditions. Potential applications of the materials are in the
public infrastructural area where they could be used in energy dissipation
systems such as guard rails and safety flooring. Transportation industries are
potential major users of bio-based materials due to the wide diversity of
applications and the magnitude of resource consumption and product turnover.
Transportation related applications include exterior vehicle body panels,
interior energy absorbing material, and bumper energy reinforcements.
Nanocellulose is inexpensive, widely available and can displace petroleum used
in conventional fillers. Cellulose will be trialed from woody and soy sources.
Since soybeans are an excess crop in the United States, industrial uses bolster
the nation's farmers. Other broader impacts of the project include a large
number of outreach activities, potential applications outside of the target
field such as in bioengineering, and the education of a team of REU students, a
GSRA and a Ford engineer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of the project is
to create optimized cellulose nanocomposites via a research plan including
sophisticated manufacturing techniques, finite element modeling of the composite
nanostructure, and, vibration, viscoelastic and rate dependent constitutive
testing. A goal is to tune the nanostructure of the materials to yield specific
macroscopic characteristics. In preliminary modeling, it has been found that the
dynamic response of material nanostructure of biocomposites can benefit from
control of regional gradients of strain rate at the nanoscale. A ramification of
this result is the suppression of local stress concentrations that are often the
sites of dynamic fracture initiation in composites. The research could lead to
novel nanocomposites that are well optimized for dynamic applications.
Sophisticated manufacturing will advance current state-of-the-art
functionalization techniques to improve the compatibility of nanocellulose and
common matrix polymers. A full set of dynamic-mechanical data will result for
the materials, as well as a model for damping, that would be useful to other
researchers. The conclusions from the modeling can indicate how to best
construct nanostructure to achieve particular performance characteristics, such
as damping, creep, impact resistance and energy dissipation.