* 1537485
* Deep North Atlantic Salinity, Density and Pre-formed Nitrate during the Last Glacial Maximum
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Rebecca Robinson, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Candace Major
* 08/31/2019
* USD 319,978.00

Increasing atmospheric CO2 is recognized as one of the world's most pressing
environmental challenges. Many details of this challenge require further
scientific understanding, including the feedbacks between ocean circulation,
atmospheric CO2 and climate. It is generally accepted that CO2 transfer between
the ocean and atmosphere has driven the co-variation of CO2 and climate over the
past 800,000 years. However, there is no consensus on what drives these
transfers principally because there is a lack of data to test proposed
mechanisms. The proposed project is directly aimed at understanding the
relationship between ocean circulation and climate, particularly atmospheric
CO2, during the Last Glacial Maximum (LGM, ~18,000 years ago). The improved
understanding of the relationship between ocean circulation and climate is
societally important because future changes in the circulation are likely to
have large effects, such as changes in the climate of northwest Europe, the
position of the Intertropical Convergence Zone (ITCZ) and the uptake of
anthropogenic CO2 into the ocean. Scientific understanding of the controls of
ocean response to climate change will inform the societal response to
anthropogenic CO2. Additionally, this project will support full participation
and leadership development of a female Ph.D. student in science.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More specifically, the work focuses on laboratory analysis
of sedimentary pore fluids collected during a recent research expedition in the
North Atlantic, and interpretation of the data. This analytical and
interpretative work is aimed at addressing the following hypotheses:&lt;br/&gt;
- During the Last Glacial Maximum (LGM), deep-ocean density stratification in
the North Atlantic was dominated by salinity variation rather than temperature
variation.&lt;br/&gt; - During the LGM, North Atlantic deep water was a mixture
of water originating in the North Atlantic and water originating in the Southern
Ocean.&lt;br/&gt; - The present relationship between d18O and water density
existed during the LGM, enabling use of benthic carbonate d18O to infer
density.&lt;br/&gt; - The relative balance of the key nitrate (NO3-) removal
processes was similar to that of today, as was the average NO3- concentration in
deep water.&lt;br/&gt; - Deep water in the LGM North Atlantic was dominated by
low preformed nutrient water. &lt;br/&gt; - A significant fraction of
atmospheric pCO2 reduction during the LGM was due to the low pre- formed
nutrients in the Atlantic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The analytical work includes,
high precision determination of chloride concentrations by titration, the
development of a new density based method of paleo-salinity determination and
the isotopic analysis (O and N isotopes) of nitrate. This data will be used to
constrain inverse diffusion models to infer bottom water properties of the LGM
western North Atlantic.