* 1537201
* Selective feeding by mucous-net filter feeders on the ocean's smallest organisms
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2015,01/31/2019
* Kelly Sutherland, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Michael Sieracki
* 01/31/2019
* USD 239,488.00

The surface of the ocean is dominated by microscopic plants and animals called
picoplankton, which are at the base of the marine food web. Jelly-like animals
called appendicularians specialize in feeding on these miniature organisms by
filtering large quantities of water using nets made out of mucus. In the past,
it was thought that appendicularians eat anything that passes through the mucous
net, but new work shows that feeding may be selective. The most abundant group
of microorganisms in the ocean, called SAR 11, seems to evade the
appendicularian, while similar-sized photosynthetic microbes are captured. In
this study, a series of lab and field experiments will be conducted in Oregon,
USA, and Villefranche-sur-mer, France, to uncover the mechanisms for
selectivity. The research will test the effect of particle shape (e.g. spherical
vs. ellipsoidal), adhesion properties of particles to mucous meshes, and the
role of hydrodynamics. It will focus on the cosmopolitan appendicularian
Oikopleura dioica, an important grazer of picoplankton. Results will be
important for understanding the role of mucous-net filter feeders in shaping the
structure of the ocean's microbial community as well as biogeochemical cycling.
The project will support an early-career faculty member, will provide training
and mentoring for one PhD student and two undergraduates, involves collaboration
with scientists in France and Israel, and will engage the public through
exhibits and images to be displayed at the Hatfield Marine Science Visitor
Center and Charleston Marine Life Center. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Picoplankton
occur at densities of up to a million per mL and numerically dominate the upper
ocean prey field. Since appendicularians influence pico- and nano-particle flux
through their high filtration rates and the production of mucous aggregates,
selective grazing will have important ramifications for microbial loop dynamics
and vertical flux. Therefore, this work will provide insights into the
mechanisms governing bacterioplankton community structure in the upper ocean and
increase understanding of microbial-metazoan food web interactions in both
neritic and oceanic ecosystems. The specific goals of the project are to a)
determine the role of flow morphology in regulating particle capture within the
houses of free-swimming appendicularians using micro-Particle Image Velocimetry,
b) determine the effect of particle shape on retention efficiencies by
appendicularians, and compare this effect between synthetic and biological
particles, and c) quantify particle adhesion to the mucous filtration apparatus
in order to determine if picoplankton cell surface properties influence
retention efficiencies by mucous-net filter-feeders.