* 1537868
* A Synoptic View of the Formation, Evolution, and Shallow Subduction of the Juan de Fuca and Gorda Plates
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Michael Ritzwoller, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Candace Major
* 08/31/2019
* USD 274,530.00

The installation of a large array of ocean bottom and land seismometers for the
Cascadia Initiative provides unprecedented coverage of the Juan de Fuca and
Gorda plates, offshore, and in Cascadia, onshore. The array makes it possible to
study the structure and processes of an oceanic plate from its formation at the
spreading center, through its evolution, and ultimate subduction beneath the
continent. The scientific goals are to image the magma producing regions beneath
the Juan de Fuca and Gorda spreading centers, to understand the thermal
evolution of an oceanic plates and to determine how the plate deforms over time.
In the region where the plate begins to bend downward at the onset of
subduction, special attention will devoted to the Locked and Transition Zones of
the major fault separating the downgoing plate from the over-riding plate. The
new 3-D model that will emerge will encompass much of the locked zone that fails
in major earthquakes across Cascadia, which pose perhaps the greatest seismic
hazard to the US.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study focuses on the development of
a 3D model of the crust and uppermost mantle to a depth of between 60 km and 100
km, depending on the maximum period of observation. The model will encompass
isotropic structures as well as the radial (or polarization) and azimuthal
anisotropy of shear velocities. The work will be based primarily on Rayleigh and
Love wave dispersion data derived from ambient noise and earthquakes, which will
be interpreted within the framework of a Bayesian Monte Carlo inversion to
generate a distribution of accepted models from which uncertainties will be
estimated. Receiver functions and Rayleigh wave horizontal/vertical amplitude
ratios will be assimilated in the inversion wherever practical. The
seismological models, and the data used to construct them, will be archived and
shared with the broader geoscience community. High level data products such as
dispersion maps, 3-D models, receiver functions, other surface wave observables
like H/V ratios, and research codes are delivered through dynamically updated,
internet-accessible databases. The proposal will also support one graduate
student.