* 1537614
* Collaborative Research: The North Anatolian Fault system in the Marmara Sea, Turkey - Insights from the Plio-Quaternary evolution of a multi-stranded transform
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2019
* Michael Steckler, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Candace Major
* 09/30/2019
* USD 226,223.00

The North Anatolian Fault, a young continental transform fault, splits into
several branches and forms a transtensional basin. Most of the strain is
associated with the Northern Branch, which created three 1200-m deep basins. It
has been proposed that the strain is focusing on the Northern Branch and that
the Central and Southern branches are being abandoned. However, recent seafloor
data demonstrate continued activity of the Central Branch. The will PI use new
data collected in 2013 and 2014 in combination with a large suite of available
previous data, to map the stratigraphy and faulting related to the Central
Branch of the NAF and extend stratigraphic age model covering the past 0.5 Ma to
greater depth and age. These data will be used to investigate two fundamental
questions about transform fault systems: 1) what is the interplay between
branches as a transform fault system evolves? And 2) how do cumulative slip and
pre-existing structures affect the evolution of faults and strain partitioning?
The Northern Branch is relatively continuous and single stranded while the
Southern Branch is discontinuous and multi-stranded. By contrasting the slip
history of these branches, the PIs will resolve whether different accumulated
slip can fully account for these different fault properties or whether they are
permanently influenced by pre-existing structure. The project will further
cement international collaboration with Turkey via shared research and personnel
exchanges, including Turkish graduate students. It will also support a female US
postdoc and two undergraduate summer interns. Information relevant to
seismogenic activity beneath the Marmara Sea is highly societally relevant
considering that this seismic gap is home to 25% of Turkey's population and much
of its industry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A continental transform is
expected to originate as a distributed network of small faults with complex
geometries that, with continued slip, gradually coalesce and simplify into a
through-going fault. The North Anatolian Fault (NAF), a young continental
transform, has been proposed as a prime example of this process. In the Marmara
Sea, however, the NAF splits into several branches and forms a transtensional
basin. Most of the strain is associated with the Northern Branch, which spawned
three 1200-m deep basins. It has been proposed that the strain is focusing on
the Northern Branch and that the Central and Southern branches are being
abandoned. However, recent seismic and bathymetry data demonstrate continued
activity of the Central Branch. These new data collected in 2013 and 2014 image
the stratigraphy and numerous individual fault strands on the southern shelf of
the Marmara Sea. The PI will use these data, in combination with a large suite
of available previous data, to map the stratigraphy and faulting related to the
Central Branch of the NAF. The PIs propose to extend our published stratigraphic
age model covering the past 0.5 Ma to greater depth and age. Earliest Pliocene
fill of Messinian (~5 Ma) erosional valleys dated on land will be projected
short distances to our near-shore reflection data to provide a base to the age
model. Based on this stratigraphic framework, they will evaluate fault
kinematics of many strands over the southern Marmara Sea during the last several
million years. Basin modeling will be used to separate the effects of sediment
loading, compaction and tectonic subsidence and test the extension estimates.
These data will be used to investigate two fundamental questions about transform
fault systems: 1) What is the interplay between branches as a transform fault
system evolves? And 2) how do cumulative slip and pre-existing structures affect
the evolution of faults and strain partitioning? The Northern Branch is
relatively continuous and single stranded while the Southern Branch is
discontinuous and multi-stranded. By contrasting the slip history of these
branches, the PIs will resolve whether different accumulated slip can fully
account for these different fault properties or whether they are permanently
influenced by pre-existing structure. The project will further cement
international collaboration with Turkey via shared research and personnel
exchanges, including Turkish graduate students. It will also support a female US
postdoc and two undergraduate summer interns. Information relevant to
seismogenic activity beneath the Marmara Sea is highly societally relevant
considering that this seismic gap is home to 25% of Turkey's population and much
of its industry. The results will also be highly relevant to the southern San
Andreas Fault and other similarly multi-stranded transform fault systems.