* 1537536
* An Innovative Optimization and Computational Framework for Assortment Problems Under Consider-Then-Rank Choice Models
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Retsef Levi, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 08/31/2019
* USD 300,000.00

The challenge of finding an assortment of selected alternatives (e.g., products
or services) that maximize the total revenue, profit or welfare in the face of
heterogeneous customer segments, who have different preferences across
alternatives, has been recognized by an increasing number of industries to be a
major strategic and operational driver of success. This generic class of
problems captures fundamental planning challenges, such as: "What selection of
products should an e-retailer display for each search query?", "How does a brick
and mortar retailer determine the product assortment in each store?" and "What
services should a central planner offer to maximize the social welfare of
heterogeneous population?" In spite of increased awareness to the importance of
assortment decisions, and an increasing number of available commercial software
tools to support them, many if not most firms, still struggle to make effective
and data-driven assortment decisions. A key challenge is how to accurately and
effectively capture a customer choice model, namely the preferences of customers
across alternatives. The increasing availability of `big' data allows us to
build more granular models of how customers choose. Unfortunately, these same
granular choice models give rise to assortment optimization models that are
extremely challenging to solve. The goal of this project is to develop a unified
approach to study the relationship between documented behavioral features
regarding how customers make purchasing choices, and the computational
tractability of the corresponding assortment optimization problems. The grant
aims to significantly advance the theoretical understanding of the learning and
computational limitations of various assortment models, and the development of
effective computational schemes to solve practical assortment problems at large
scale.

This project aims to develop an innovative optimization and computational
dynamic-programming based framework to study and solve assortment optimization
problems under consider-then-rank choice models, which have been studied
extensively in marketing and psychology. Under consider-than-rank choice models,
customers are assumed to make choices in two phases. First they apply various
heuristics to establish a consideration set of products they are willing to
consider, and then they rank within the consideration set. Given an assortment,
customers are assumed to choose the most preferred product available from within
their consideration set. If successful, the framework to be developed would
allow the study of how different assumptions regarding the heuristics customers
apply to form their respective consideration sets and rankings affect the
computational tractability of the resulting assortment problems. This will be
done via an innovative graphical description of the underlying dynamic program
that gives rise to "minimal" enumeration of dynamic programming sub-problems.
The theoretical analysis will focus on developing tight bounds on the number
sub-problems. Moreover, the "minimal" enumeration techniques will be leveraged
to develop efficient practical algorithms to solve large scale practical
assortment problems. Collaboration with industry partners will be used to
enhance the practical impact of this research project, and to enrich the
classroom experience for students.