* 1537184
* RUI: Development of a Textural Weathering Classification for Limestone Using Signal Processing Techniques
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2017
* Nick Hudyma, University of North Florida
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 06/30/2017
* USD 191,346.00

Weathering has a negative effect on the strength and stiffness of rock. When
tunnels and foundations for buildings and bridges are designed to be supported
by weathered rock, it is important to understand the magnitude of the decrease
in strength and stiffness. Currently weathering is assessed using visual
descriptions of rock specimens. Previous studies have shown it is very easy to
visually distinguish unweathered and highly weathered specimens but specimens
with intermediate weathering states are often misclassified. This award supports
fundamental research to develop a measurement based weathering classification
system for limestone rock specimens. The measurement based system will be more
accurate than the visual based system and lead to more economical and
sustainable designs of infrastructure supported by weathered rock. This work can
also be utilized for the assessment of rock joint roughness which can lead to
safer and more economical rock slopes. Therefore, results from this research
will benefit the U.S. economy and society. This research involves undergraduate
students in both civil and electrical engineering. The multi-disciplinary
approach will help broaden participation of underrepresented groups in research
and positively impact engineering education at the undergraduate
level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will develop the first quantifiable
textural based weathering classification system for limestone rock specimens.
The system will be based on the percentage and size of fossilized shells in the
specimens, the micro-topography determined through surface characterization, and
roughness values quantified using signal and image processing algorithms.
Surface characterization will be performed using an industrial profiler, a
three-dimensional laser scanner, and close range photogrammetry. Roughness is
typically characterized using two-dimensional magnitude based algorithms. This
work will incorporate frequency based algorithms and extend roughness assessment
to three-dimensions. The weathering classification system will be based on the
familiar Geological Strength Index system used for rock mass classification.