* 1537015
* Towards Analysis and Control of Dynamic Brain States
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* ShiNung Ching, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Landers
* 08/31/2019
* USD 389,643.00

The study of neural coding asks how the brain converts raw signals into usable
information that allows us to see, hear and think. Studying the mechanisms of
neural coding is a persistent scientific challenge that has important
implications for uncovering the workings of the brain. This award supports
fundamental research that will enable a new approach to studying neural coding
from the perspective of engineering theory. This perspective recognizes that
networks in the brain can be modeled in terms of their physics and, thus,
studied using many of the same tools that are used to study complex engineered
systems such as aircraft and power grids. However, the brain possesses a level
of complexity that far exceeds those of typical engineered systems and,
consequently, existing engineering approaches must be adapted and augmented to
meet biological realities. By addressing these gaps, this research will lead to
new methods in engineering, advances in neural technology, and new ways of
studying human brain function. This research is highly multi-disciplinary,
involving systems engineering, mathematics and neuroscience. As part of the
award, several new initiatives will be pursued to facilitate dialogue across
these disciplines and to foster increased participation of underrepresented
groups in engineering and science through the establishment of summer research
internships for local high school students.

This award approaches neuronal networks through the lens of dynamical systems
and control theory. This approach is based on the premise that understanding the
input-output relationships of neuronal networks, mediated by their dynamics,
will shed new light on fundamental questions in neuroscience, including the link
between neural dynamics and information processing. In pursuit of this goal, the
award focusses on two main objectives: First, neuroscientifically-motivated
adaptions of systems theoretic properties, such as reachability, will be
formulated so as to understand how dynamics govern neural input-output
relationships. Since the connections in brain networks constantly adapt,
emphasis will be placed on the notion of a brain state, which characterizes both
the activity and the network structure at a given time. Second, control methods
will be developed for the modulation of such states. To do so, a new class of
objective functions will be defined in terms of the systems-theoretic properties
conferred by the network. For example, such objectives will involve using
controls to expand a network's reachable space, rather than just controlling its
activity. The control input in this context may be quite general, and several
specific scenarios, including neurostimulation, will be studied.