* 1537440
* High-throughput Nano-Scale Patterning for Large-area Nanomanufacturing
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,04/30/2019
* L. Jay Guo, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 04/30/2019
* USD 320,045.00

There is an increasing interest and a strong need for nanomanufacturing
technologies that are scalable both in processing area and speed. These
technologies are needed to meet the growing markets in a wide range of
applications from electronics to energy to biomedical. Examples include
nanostructures to improve the brightness and power efficiency of flat panel
displays, self-cleaning and anti-reflective surfaces for displays and
photovoltaic devices, and patterned surfaces (for example, mimicking patterns on
shark fins) to resist bacterial growth. Despite progress at various levels, a
versatile nanofabrication technology that can meet the necessary requirements of
high resolution, high fabrication speed, cost effectiveness and large area
processing is lacking. This award will pave the way for future deployment of
high-throughput nanopatterning for such applications for which the deep ultra-
violet photolithography, used by the semiconductor industry, is too expensive to
apply. This research involves several disciplines of science and engineering
including nanomanufacturing, optical design, modeling and simulation,
characterization and process development. These disciplines will be integrated
into curriculum development and development of mini projects to give hands-on
research opportunity for undergraduate and minority
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The resolution of photolithography is limited by
the light diffraction limit. To overcome this limit, the new concept of
plasmonics-based lithography was introduced as early as 2004 and followed later
with the approach of hyperlens by taking advantage of intrinsically small
plasmon wavelength. However there have been critical challenges impeding the
progress of this field. For example, the design of the appropriate structures
for masks is difficult and, due to the near-field nature of the photoresist
exposure, the quality of the nanostructures (shallow depth and rough patterns)
is very low. The research team aims to close the knowledge gap by developing
reliable mask and hyperlens designs and investigate innovative strategies to
produce high quality nanoscale patterns. They will explore unique dispersions of
the hyperbolic metamaterial to achieve nanoscale features with pitch much
reduced from that on the photomask. The proposed techniques, when implemented
with a new roller lithography approach, combines some of the best features of
photolithography, soft lithography, and continuous roll-to-roll and roll-to-
plate patterning technologies toward realizing complex nanostructures for
practical applications.