* 1537769
* The Interannual Variability of the Brazil Current
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2019
* Sang-Ki Lee, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 08/31/2019
* USD 488,321.00

The Brazil Current system is important because: (i) at the surface, it carries
warm Tropical Water and has strong eddy variability, forcing in large extent
regional weather patterns; (ii) it has a unique vertical structure receiving
contributions from several water masses at different levels and latitudes; (iii)
it is a western boundary current that closes the South Atlantic subtropical
gyre; and (iv) its relative weak time-mean flow indicates strong interactions
with the Atlantic meridional overturning circulation. Few investigations exist
of the Brazil Current interannual variability, in part because of a lack of in-
situ observational data. This study aims at improving the understanding of the
Brazil Current system using analysis of a large collection of direct
measurements of the Brazil Current and numerical model experiments. The project
includes support for an early career principal investigator, mentoring of a
postdoctoral researcher, international collaborations with Brazilian
universities, and training of college students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study
investigates the variability of the Brazil Current on interannual timescales,
and its relationship to the large-scale mechanisms that drive it. It involves
analyzing hydrographic, satellite, and ocean reanalysis data, and performing
eddy-resolving modeling experiments. The hydrographic data analysis, which will
include a large number of high-density transects, will examine the structure of
the Brazil Current at different latitudes, the relationship of the Brazil
Current with the location and strength of the gyre, and the effect of the large-
scale wind forcing. Complementary satellite altimetry and model reanalysis data
will provide a quasi-synoptic view of the mean and eddy flow of the Brazil
Current, as well as the impact of Rossby wave mechanisms on the current
variability. A process-based study using global eddy-permitting ocean model
simulations will be performed for separating the influence of local and remote
wind forcing. These runs will be compared against a nested eddy-resolving
regional model of the western South Atlantic domain to investigate how the
mesoscale eddy processes may respond to and feedback on the regional variability
at longer timescales.