* 1537924
* EAGER: Defending Against Visual Cyberbullying Attacks in Emerging Mobile Social Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Robin Kowalski, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 08/31/2018
* USD 255,680.00

Adolescents have fully embraced social networks for socializing and
communicating. However, cyberbullying has become widely recognized as a serious
social problem, especially for adolescents using social networks. Also,
cyberbullying techniques change rapidly. Perpetrators can use the camera-
capacity of their mobile devices to bully others through making and distributing
harmful pictures or videos of their victims via mobile social networks. While
the social and psychological aspects of cyberbullying have been the subject of
intense study, little research has been dedicated to tracing cyberbullying
attacks accurately and automatically using computing technologies. Indeed, the
development of automatic cyberbullying detection techniques is still in the
nascent stages. All state-of-the-art studies in automatic cyberbullying
detection have mainly focused on the content of the text written by the
perpetrators of cyberbullying (a.k.a. textual cyberbullying), while largely
overlooking the misuse of visual media in cyberbullying. This research reveals
that there are great challenges that must urgently be resolved to ensure the
most robust defense against visual cyberbullying attacks.

This project is designing and developing a systematic solution for automatic
detection of and intervention in visual cyberbullying attacks in emerging mobile
social networks. The researchers are identifying new person and situational
factors associated with visual cyberbullying and designing a cross-feature
classifier for automatic visual cyberbullying detection. The project is also
building an adaptive cyberbullying intervention system to continuously monitor
situation changes in cyberbullying and provide specific response strategies for
each associated participant. The proposed methods can be potentially adopted and
implemented in popular mobile social network platforms to prevent visual
cyberbullying. The system designed by this project could be used to curb the
rising trend in instances of cyberbullying among young people and reducing the
myriad harmful effects that follow from it. In addition, since many other common
cyber threats targeting adolescents must also deal with visual media now, the
fundamental results generated by this project could be expanded to cope with
those threats beyond cyberbullying.