* 1537008
* Computational Prediction of Mechanical and Transport Response Evolution in Degrading Porous Scaffolds
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Jian Yang, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 07/31/2019
* USD 395,000.00

Restoring living tissue functionality via tissue engineering is crucial for
transformative advances in medicine. Tissue engineering materials must be
biocompatible and often biodegradable in a controlled manner. For example,
severed peripheral nerves can regrow, but new projections must be properly
nourished and guided via tissue scaffolds. Scaffolds must have the right
morphology for cell growth, the right transport properties for nourishing cells,
and the right mechanical properties to stay compliant and integral during
degradation and tissue regeneration. Biodegradable scaffolds are appealing
because they need not be surgically removed; but they are effective only if
degradation is synchronized with nerve regrowth. This is but one of many
examples illustrating the extraordinary challenges in tissue engineering. This
award will yield a multi-scale approach based on physics, mathematics, polymer
chemistry, and image analysis to predict and interrogate evolving transport and
mechanical properties of porous polymeric scaffolds during programmed enzymatic
degradation. The contribution of the project to the advancement of mechanics is
a new methodology to model, and thus understand, the behavior of multi-
functional materials with evolving microstructure like those in nerve tissue
engineering. An educational component is included to attract underrepresented
minorities to engineering via level-appropriate workshops on applications of
mechanics in neuroscience, and by involving undergraduates in the creation of
coursework for courses in brain biomechanics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Biodegradable
tissue engineering systems are deformable chemically-reacting porous mixtures
with complex fluid-structure interaction. The project integrates specific
existing averaging techniques with an original fluid-structure interaction
approach to determine the coupled mechanical and transport properties of
degrading porous polymer networks subjected to large deformation and mechanical
loadings. The model system of relevance to the project is crosslinked urethane-
doped polyester, a promising scaffold material for nerve regeneration with
highly controllable porosity. This material will be modeled as a random polymer
network. Samples will be analyzed via electron microscopy to quantify the
network's morphology. Microscopic-level transport and mechanical properties will
be determined via a statistical characterization of the polymer network
structure. This process will define microstructurally accurate representative
volume elements whose evolution can then be analyzed via a novel finite element
fluid-structure interaction-based homogenization procedure for evolving
microstructure due to degradation. This numerical scheme will yield effective
mechanical and transport properties at the mesoscale as a function of
degradation. A crucial advancement in mechanics is the framing of the
homogenization problem as a fluid-structure interaction problem, by extending
the immersed finite element method (a state-of-the-art fluid-structure
interaction computational approach) to account for fluid flow through bodies
with evolving microstructure. The project includes experiments to validate
predicted properties. Material samples and full-scale scaffold at different
stages of degradation will be characterized in terms of morphology, elastic
moduli, and diffusivity, and these properties compared to corresponding
numerical estimates.