* 1537080
* Laser-Printed Organic Electronic Devices
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Oana Jurchescu, Wake Forest University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Wells
* 08/31/2019
* USD 323,000.00

Organic electronic materials are versatile candidates for flexible electronics,
but their adoption in consumer applications has been limited by the current
processes which cannot yet deliver high-performance device arrays at
manufacturing scale and low cost. This research project will address the
challenge by using laser printing, a solvent-free, ubiquitous technology that
has never been used to manufacture electronic devices. Here, film deposition is
done from a melt phase, which allows a great control of its structural
properties, while being environmentally friendly, fast, low-cost, high-
throughput, and directly scalable to large-area electronics. By reducing the
cost and complexity necessitated by elaborate, time-consuming traditional
multistep manufacturing processes, results will accelerate the incorporation of
organic opto-electronic devices in consumer technologies, and have a strong,
positive impact on the US economy and society. In addition, this
interdisciplinary research program offers training opportunities for graduate,
undergraduate, and high school students, including nontraditional and
underrepresented minority students, that will position them for leadership in
scientific careers.

This project will introduce an innovative technology for the manufacturing of
organic opto-electronic devices and will answer critical questions about the
structure, processing, and properties in laser printed organic devices. Specific
objectives are: (1) to fabricate high-performance organic thin-film transistors
(OTFTs) by laser printing consecutive layers of different electronic
functionalities, (2) to advance the fundamental understanding of charge
transport at laser printed organic semiconductor / contact and organic
semiconductor / dielectric interfaces, and (3) to establish the relationship
among semiconductor purity, microstructure and device performance. The research
is structured in three phases. Phase 1 focuses on printing commercially
available and custom modified organic semiconductors on conventional transistor
structures. Phase 2 will build on this knowledge to develop OTFTs with printed
semiconductors and polymer dielectrics, and electrodes defined by "Toner
lithography", in which the laser printed patterns serve the role of shadow
masks, subsequently removed by chemical treatment. In Phase 3 we will extend our
findings to encompass all-laser-printed OTFTs.