* 1537173
* Kelvin-Helmholtz turbulence: how much mixing does it generate in the Equatorial Oceans?
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2019
* William Smyth, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 12/31/2019
* USD 534,003.00

Kelvin-Helmholtz (KH) instability is the simplest form of shear instability, and
is arguably the most common mechanism for mixing in the oceans. Despite its
ubiquity, much remains unknown about KH instability and the turbulence it
generates, including the fundamental question of what determines the amount of
mixing accomplished. Two constraints limit our ability to answer this question.
First, much of what is known comes from lab experiments and direct numerical
simulations (DNS) at scales smaller than are typical of the ocean. Second,
observations are sparse due to the high resolution of the required measurements.
In recent years both of these constraints have been relaxed. Petascale computing
now offers the opportunity to execute DNS at greatly increased Reynolds number,
while the introduction of long-term, moored measurements via temperature
dissipation pods provides extended records that both identify KH turbulence and
quantify the resultant mixing. Overall, this project will improve our
understanding of an important class of ocean mixing processes, deliver new
parameterizations for use in observational data analysis and, ultimately,
climate forecasts, and complement ongoing NSF-funded studies of mixing in
stratified shear flows. An existing Ocean DNS code will be upgraded and
distributed for community use, and a postdoctoral scientist schooled in
turbulence theory and numerical simulation will be trained in observational
techniques and data analysis and provided with the opportunity to take part in
seagoing research.

The main objective of this project is to document the mixing properties of
turbulent Kelvin-Helmholtz billows, leading to parameterizations of the net
turbulent fluxes. New DNS will be used in combination with existing and ongoing
measurements to learn how turbulence statistics relevant to ocean mixing change
as the Reynolds number is increased, and to predict the energy released in a
mixing event, the dissipation rate, and the effective diffusivity. The results
will be used to create a multi-decade record of mixing in the equatorial
Pacific, and will serve as a model for application to the Atlantic and to all
near-critical stratified shear flows.