* 1537648
* Ambient Processing and Patterning of Graphene Oxide across Multiple Length Scales
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Jeffrey Mativetsky, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 08/31/2019
* USD 300,000.00

Graphene oxide is an atomically-thin material with a unique set of tunable
properties, making it promising for applications in flexible electronics, energy
storage, sensors, composite materials, and biomedical engineering. The
versatility of graphene oxide lies in its structure that includes regions with
and without oxygen atoms attached to the underlying carbon atom lattice. When
oxygen atoms are removed, the electrical, optical, and chemical properties of
graphene oxide are dramatically altered. Standard methods for oxygen removal,
however, involve highly toxic chemicals or exposure to high temperatures in
humidity- and oxygen-free environments, conditions that are not amenable to
large-scale manufacturing. This award will develop the fundamental knowledge
needed to selectively tune the oxygen content of graphene oxide with
unprecedented spatial control through an environmentally benign and easily
implemented process. Such capabilities will benefit society by enabling the
widespread integration of graphene oxide into devices for energy, healthcare,
electronics, and transportation technologies. The educational component of the
project will promote interest in science among disadvantaged middle school
students though hands-on nanomaterials-themed activities, and sustain interest
in science at higher education levels through participation in laboratory tours
and research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Voltage-induced graphene oxide reduction
offers a means of tuning the properties of graphene oxide and patterning
heterogeneous functionalities into graphene oxide sheets and films under ambient
conditions. At present, little is known about the kinetics, mechanisms, and
limits of the process or the properties of the resulting material. This award
will help gain fundamental insights into the links between processing,
structure, and electrical function for this new reduction method. Nanoprobe-
initiated reduction will be used to determine the spatial resolution limits and
kinetics of voltage-based reduction, while providing a platform for
investigating nanoscale size-effects in reduced graphene oxide. The extension of
voltage-based reduction to mesoscopic and macroscopic length scales will enable
chemical structure and electrical transport characterization of the resulting
material and elucidate the viability of voltage-induced reduction as a large-
scale manufacturing process.