* 1537788
* Enabling Next Generation Hybridized Wood Buildings for Resilient and Sustainable Construction
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2019
* John van de Lindt, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 09/30/2019
* USD 418,054.00

Earthquake damage to buildings, with the potential for substantial economic
losses, highlights a need to focus on developing earthquake resilient and
sustainable buildings. As the result of rapid population growth and urban
densification, there is a need for taller buildings that are also sustainable
and can perform better than simply adequate in moderate to large earthquakes by
sustaining only minimal damage. Further, it is critical that such buildings have
minimal interruption to allow people to remain in their residences and community
following an earthquake event. These types of buildings will be investigated in
this project by considering a new type of seismic force resisting system that
combines a new technology known as Cross-Laminated Timber (CLT) and a
conventional Light Wood Frame System (LiFS). Each of these systems has its own
beneficial features that, when combined, will create a more resilient and
sustainable structural system for buildings in seismic zones in the United
States. This research will address the challenges that arise when combining
these two structural systems into a hybridized wood building system. This
project will contribute toward a fundamental understanding of long-term loading
effects on CLT and develop an optimal combination of CLT and LiFS to produce a
financially viable solution for the seismic design of tall wood buildings. The
research will produce new basic knowledge needed to design safer, more resilient
wood buildings in seismic regions and thus contribute to seismic hazard
mitigation in the United States and in other countries that use similar
construction. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will investigate the seismic
performance and optimization of a hybridized, self-centering wood system termed
"CLT-LiFS," which uses unbonded post-tensioning tendons, CLT rocking walls, and
light-frame wood walls to enable the design of resilient tall wood buildings. In
this system, the CLT panel anchored with unbonded post-tensioning will be
optimally combined with the light wood frame system to utilize the beneficial
features of each. While the unbonded post-tensioning in the CLT will self-center
the system, the connections in the light-frame wood will provide the necessary
energy dissipation. Preliminary studies on CLT-LiFS have shown its excellent
seismic performance with minimal structural damage, but key research challenges
focused on its compatibility remain. In order to make this system a reality,
optimal configurations of CLT-LiFS systems, performance of connection details
between the CLT and the light-frame wood, and long-term behavior of CLT under
sustained loading need to be better understood. The fundamental contributions of
this research will be the following: 1) experimentally validated analytical
models for the creep behavior of CLT under different environmental conditions,
and its inclusion into analytical models for tall wood buildings, 2) the use of
reliability concepts for performance assessment of the hybrid system, 3)
experimental quantification of secondary systems impact on the behavior of tall
buildings with CLT-LiFS systems, and 4) development of connections between the
CLT-LiFS system and secondary systems. This research will lead to a fundamental
understanding of how the hybridized system performs under earthquake loading
compared to each of the individual systems, thereby serving as the foundation to
develop the seismic design methodology and procedures to meet pre-specified
resiliency and sustainability building requirements for this new building type.
This research will facilitate a new generation of improved performance-based
building systems to achieve resiliency and sustainability goals.