* 1537902
* Support for Analog Modeling of Tectonic Processes Workshop
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2017
* Michele Cooke, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* David Fountain
* 03/31/2017
* USD 29,608.00

This project provides funding for travel support for U.S. researchers and
students to attend a workshop on "Analog Modeling of Tectonic Processes" to be
held in Amherst, Massachusetts, in early May of 2015. Analog model experiments
contribute substantially to the understanding of tectonic processes. In these
experiments, weaker materials (sand, clay, etc.) take the place rocks and are
deformed at high strain rates under controlled conditions thus producing scale
models of the development of earth structures (faults, folds) and large-scale
tectonic features (mountain belts, rift systems). The aim of this workshop is to
bring together the structural geology analog modeling community to discuss
exciting innovations in analog modeling research, authentic science curriculum
materials, and future directions for analog modeling. This community includes
analog experimentalists, students, instructors who use analog models in their
classrooms and researchers who are interested in comparing their observations to
analog experiment results. The workshop will promote the analog modeling skills
of early career structural geologists, thereby developing the future workforce
in tectonics. The conference will promote the participation of students, early
career scientists, and researchers from underrepresented groups in the earth
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The past 10 years have seen a revolution within
analog modeling of crustal deformation spurred by systematic rheological testing
of analog materials and use of laser and image processing techniques for data
analysis leading to a strengthening of the quantitative aspect of analog
modeling. The vanguard of this revolution has been in Europe where laboratories
have been implementing new approaches that permit greater control on
experimental conditions, more accurate scaling of deformation and improved
insights into the evolution of deformation and deformation processes. This
multi-day workshop on analog modeling combines discussions on experimental
approaches with presentation of scientific findings. The workshop involves: (1)
running an experiment at the host lab; (2) discussions of various approaches,
techniques and data analysis tools; (3) discussion on needs of the community and
future directions for analog modeling research; and (4) exercises devoted to
bringing analog experiments into the classroom.