* 1537449
* Collaborative research: Generation of internal waves due to the scattering of semidiurnal hybrid Kelvin-edge waves at varying continental shelf topography
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2020
* Alexander Yankovsky, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 08/31/2020
* USD 270,350.00

Sustaining the observed structure of the ocean and its circulation requires a
certain level of mixing. Near the surface, wind is a major driver for mixing but
its effectiveness diminishes with depth. Astronomic forces apply at all depths
of the ocean and induce flows throughout the water column, called barotropic
tides. However, being nearly uniform over large spatial scales, those flows are
not very effective at stirring the ocean. This study explores the idea that
these barotropic tides propagating along a wide shelf undergo a particular kind
of instability near topographic variations and result in flows which vary
strongly with depth, called baroclinic modes. These modes can propagate
obliquely as internal waves and result in mixing on the continental shelf as
well as in the interior of the ocean. They can affect the horizontal and
vertical fluxes of nutrients and pollutants, sediment transport, and the carbon
cycle on continental shelves. Strong internal tides can induce substantial
velocity shear and represent a hazard for oil and gas drilling platforms. The
results of this project may improve a description of the internal wave-induced
mixing in numerical climate and general circulation models, especially in
oceanic boundary regions. The project will support two PhD students (one at
University of South Carolina and one at University of Southern Mississippi) and
will offer training opportunities for undergraduates at the University of South
Carolina Marine Science program through class work and individual research
projects. An early-career scientist will be supported.

In many areas of the World Ocean, barotropic tides exist in the form of long
wave modes trapped by the coastline. Typically, the most energetic is the zero,
fundamental mode, propagating with the coast on its right (left) in the Northern
(Southern) hemisphere. This zero mode resembles a nondispersive Kelvin wave when
the shelf is narrow. For wider shelves, the semidiurnal fundamental mode becomes
a hybrid Kelvin-edge wave (HKEW) with group velocity changing with the
wavenumber. For shelves wider than ~200 km, the HKEW group velocity at
semidiurnal frequency becomes low or even zero. If a tidal wave propagating
along the continental margin encounters topographic variations where its group
velocity decreases, the resulting alongshore energy flux convergence causes the
amplification of tidal amplitude and the radiation of tidal energy in the form
of non-trapped Poincare wave modes. A good example of this phenomenon is the
Patagonia Shelf (Southwest Atlantic) where the propagation of semi-diurnal tides
is seemingly blocked in the vicinity of 40 deg S. The central hypothesis of this
study is that the energy flux convergence in the HKEW mode encountering
alongshore variations of shelf topography results in the energy conversion from
barotropic to baroclinic mode. That is, there should be a strong generation of
internal tides where the group velocity of barotropic tides substantially
decreases in the direction of the fundamental mode phase propagation. A series
of process-oriented numerical experiments will be made using Regional Ocean
Modeling System (ROMS) where this wave scattering process will be studied by
systematically varying the shelf and slope geometry, stratification and the
incident HKEW mode amplitude. A simple parameterization will be sought to
predict the fraction of the incident energy flux converted into baroclinic modes
radiating from the shelf break/upper continental slope both toward the coast and
offshore. The parameterization will be evaluated by comparing its predictions
with state of the art tidal simulations in HYCOM for low-mode internal wave
energy conversion (presumably well resolved by the current version of HYCOM). At
the same time, the study will identify areas where higher mode internal wave
beams can be potentially important, which are unresolved in the current version
of HYCOM. Thus, results of this project will guide a further development of
tidal simulations, especially on continental shelves. Nonlinear dynamics
associated with the semidiurnal HKEW mode scattering into internal waves and
their interaction with mean, eddying currents will also be considered. These
dynamics can result in the generation of low-frequency or stationary mesoscale
flows in the vicinity of the scattering region, a different mechanism for
mesoscale variability than the often invoked instability of mean currents.