* 1537496
* Collaborative Proposal:  Exploring Hypotheses of Southern Hemisphere Westerly Wind Changes on Southern Ocean Circulation and Biogeochemistry
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2018
* John Chiang, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Candace Major
* 09/30/2018
* USD 33,038.00

The circulation of the Southern Ocean plays a prominent role in regulating
Earth's climate, in particular connecting the deep ocean to the surface. This
connection holds particular importance for the Earth's carbon cycle as upwelling
of waters from the deep ocean brings stored carbon of the deep to the surface,
eventually entering into the atmosphere as carbon dioxide. Increased upwelling
is thought to have brought about the initial rise in atmospheric CO2
concentrations during the last deglaciation, caused by changes to the surface
westerlies and resulting changes to the wind-driven upwelling. This project
investigates a recent hypothesis for how the westerlies changed during this time
period affects Southern ocean circulation and carbon cycle, through the use of a
state-of-the-art climate model. The predictions of this hypothesis will be
contrasted against those made by the "annular-mode" view for westerly changes
that dominates current thinking, and both compared against available paleoproxy
observations. The research provides concrete tests&amp;#8232;to each hypothesis,
and the process will help advance our understanding of how southern hemisphere
westerlies affect the ocean climate and carbon cycle. The project will also
enhance collaboration between two US-based scientists with an overseas
collaborator based in Taiwan.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Previous studies have largely
assumed that paleo-westerly changes were zonally uniform, analogous to the so-
called "annular mode" behavior that dominates year-to-year variations in the
southern hemisphere westerlies today. However, in reality there are insufficient
paleoproxy data to confirm this interpretation, and in a recent study one of the
PIs proposed an alternative hypothesis for westerly changes through the
modulation of the South Pacific Split Jet. The Split Jet is a regional feature
of the South Pacific whereby the core of the westerlies split into two around
Australia, and this split extends across the Pacific. Based on dynamical
reasoning and comparison to paleoproxy records, the PI argued that the Split Jet
feature weakened during Heinrich events, in particular Heinrich event 1 that
preceded the last deglaciation. In this study, the consequences for a weaker
Split Jet on the Southern ocean circulation and biogeochemistry will be
investigated through idealized simulations using the ocean component of the
Community Earth System Model version 1 with a simple ocean biogeochemistry
module. Focus will be placed on understanding changes to the ocean surface
temperature and frontal locations, changes to the upwelling and carbon fluxes.
These simulations will be compared and contrasted against simulations where
annular-mode like westerly changes is imposed. Through comparison between these
simulations with available ocean paleoproxies, an assessment can be made as to
which westerly configuration was more likely. If the Split Jet hypothesis turns
out to be more correct, it has strong implications for our conceptualization and
understanding of Southern ocean climate and circulation changes.