* 1537111
* Microbial ecology of sea star wasting disease
* GEO,OCE
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2020
* Ian Hewson, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Sieracki
* 07/31/2020
* USD 564,562.00

Beginning in June 2013 and continuing to present (May 2015), over 20 species of
sea stars (Asteroidea, Echinodermata) have been affected by sea star wasting
disease (SSWD), affecting populations from central Alaska to Baja California.
The disease has lead to greatly reduced abundance or disappearance of these
keystone predators, which may result in profound alteration to benthic community
structure. Recent work has identified the sea star associated densovirus (SSaDV)
as the most likely causative agent of the disease. SSaDV is related to
densoviruses inhabiting other echinoderms worldwide, and has been present in
West Coast asteroid populations for at least 72 years. Hence, there remain
significant knowledge gaps in our understanding of how SSaDV actually elicits
SSWD symptoms, especially how the echinoderm host, densovirus and microbiome
constituents interact. This project will address three major questions: 1) does
viral infection change the composition of the sea star microbiome?, 2) what is
the variation of viral genomes and their associated virulence?, and 3) does
larval dispersal spread the disease between habitats? This project will address
these hypotheses through time-course measurements of host, pathogen and
associated microorganisms, genome-genome comparisons between historical and
contemporary viral strains, and through experiments targeting larvae and
juvenile asteroids in aquaria and in nature. This work will support training of
a graduate student (recruitment targeting an under-represented minority) and
several undergraduates in biological oceanographic and disease ecology
techniques. Information will be disseminated through public outreach activities
at two high-profile Pacific coast public aquariums (the Seattle and Vancouver
Aquariums), through a website dedicated to the project, and through public talks
and media exposure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; This project will address three
fundamental questions relating to Sea Star Wasting Disease (SSWD): 1) How does
SSaDV causes SSWD symptoms and how does the disease progress from primary
infection through animal mortality; 2) How do current genotypes of SSaDV vary
from those present historically, and is virulence related to genome
polymorphisms; and 3) Are larvae and juvenile asteroids differentially affected
by SSaDV, and are broadcast-spawned bipinarria a viable mechanism for SSaDV
dispersal between distant habitats. The first question will be addressed by
experimental inoculation of naïve sea stars with SSaDV, then time-course
monitoring of host transcription (i.e. transcriptomics via RNAseq), microbiome
composition via 16S rRNA sequencing and quantitative PCR, and viral load and
prevalence using quantitatice PCR. The second question will be addressed by
amplifying the entire genome of SSaDV and related densoviruses, then perform
genome-genome comparisons to identify polymorphic DNA in key protein-encoding
regions. The third question will be addressed by collecting bipinarria from
plankton at field locations adjacent to spawning asteroid populations, and by
performing time-course observations of captive juvenile sea stars and monitoring
their bacterial and viral loads using quantitative PCR. This work will be
performed primarily in the Salish Sea region, with SSaDV - naïve asteroids
collected from Alaskan waters.