* 1537565
* Topology Aware Resource Optimization and Uncertainty Quantification Energy Models for the Power Grid
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Naima Kaabouch, University of North Dakota Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 08/31/2020
* USD 325,620.00

The project focuses on the development, implementation, and evaluation of new
and effective policies for topology aware resource allocation of energy
resources under uncertainty. When a malfunction occurs in an electricity
provisioning system, it is vitally important to quickly diagnose the problem and
take corrective action to prevent outages. This project will support fundamental
research to enhance both the proactive and reactive reliable operation of the
smart grid without costly infrastructure investments. Specifically, this
research project will show that controlling the grid's topology can enhance the
grid's reliability and better manage resources. In addition, this research will
develop the procedures required to find the most reliable grid topology in
response to changes in energy demand. Thus, the primary societal impact of this
research is to increase the capability to prevent and resolve unexpected
blackouts, which account for approximately $90 billion in losses each year for
U.S. businesses and consumers. This research involves several disciplines
including power systems, parallel computing and optimization.

Integer Linear Programming models can overcome several limitations in the
current topological aware models such as capacity planning, re-allocation and
scheduling of resources. The research team will study a collection of mixed
integer linear programming models designed to identify optimal combinations of
supply sources, demand sites to serve, and the pathways along which the
reallocated power should flow. The models explicitly support the uncertainty
associated with alternative sources such as wind power. A simulator configured
with multiple intelligent distributed software agents will be developed to
support the evaluation of the model solutions. Applications of interest include
(but are not restricted to) generator and load scheduling applications in energy
management and service systems; pricing and revenue management problems; and
inventory control.