* 1537431
* Structural Response in Transient Winds of Hurricanes and Downbursts
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Teng Wu, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 08/31/2020
* USD 279,853.00

The assurance of public safety and the integrity of bridges and infrastructure
during hurricanes and downbursts require accurate modeling of wind-induced
effects. The transient characteristics of extreme winds are neither well
understood nor characterized, which makes pre-event analysis difficult. This
project pursues fundamental research to develop analytical model to analyze
structural response in hurricane and downburst winds. Results will contribute to
design standards that are used to assess response of flexible structures. A
wind-field simulator will be developed and deployed as an on-line tool to enable
designers, researchers and educators to simulate the effects of hurricane and
downburst winds.

The primary goal of the research is to develop effective analysis tool to
characterize and simulate the nonstationary wind-velocity fields and transient
wind-load effects during non-synoptic events of hurricanes and downbursts. A
systematic time-frequency analysis and synthesis framework, which can integrate
the time-invariant (traditional) and/or time-variant spatial coherence into the
simulated nonstationary wind-velocity fields, will be developed. The framework
will facilitate an understanding of the underlying physics of transient wind-
load effects for wind-structure interaction analysis. The study will assess the
impact of nonstationary wind inputs in terms of their static, quasi-static and
dynamic effects on structural response, and investigate modification of
aerodynamic parameters. Joint acceptance functions, based on the nonstationary
wind fields with various spatial coherences, and their effects on structural
response will be examined. The Hilbert and wavelet techniques will be employed
for the analysis and synthesis of nonstationary wind-velocity fields, and their
efficacy will be assessed. The nonstationary features of hurricanes and
downbursts will be investigated using data from field measurements, experiments,
and numerical simulations. The transient aerodynamics will be illustrated using
flexible bridges, with results also being relevant to the assessment of
buildings and other structures.