* 1537474
* Structured Surfaces for Prevention of Ice Adhesion and Growth
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Chang-Hwan Choi, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Wells
* 08/31/2019
* USD 316,399.00

Materials surfaced with highly ice-repelling (ice-phobic) properties are of
great significance in many applications. This award supports fundamental
research on the understanding of critical surface parameters for super-ice-
phobic efficiency and durability of nanostructured surfaces in well-regulated
environments. The new scientific insights obtained from this study will be of
great importance in the design and development of highly efficient and durable
anti-icing coatings and materials for numerous applications including
commercial/military aircrafts/vessels, wind turbines, and high voltage power
lines. The highly icing-resistant properties of structured surfaces will also
significantly advance current de-icing technologies and efficiency. The
materials engineered with greater ice-phobic robustness and durability will
further influence a broader spectrum of technology issues from energy to civil
infrastructure. The educational and outreach activities integrated with this
research will also enhance undergraduate students' experiential learning, yield
valuable curricular products that can benefit high school students in NJ,
provide professional development opportunities to high school teachers, and
create a scientific awareness in the under-served/represented
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research is to establish
fundamental correlations between hydro-phobicity (non-wettability to water) and
ice-phobicity (ability to repel ice or prevent ice formation) of structured
surfaces. The main hypothesis is that the anti/de-icing efficiency of hydro-
phobic surfaces should be determined by the wetting and adhesion states of
super-cooled water or ice droplets on the structured surfaces and that the
denser (e.g., nanoscale rather than microscale) structures with lower contact
angle hysteresis and greater de-wetting stability should result in more
efficient and durable anti/de-icing properties. To verify the hypothesis, how
the length scale and kinetic/dynamic parameters of structured surfaces determine
the contact angle hysteresis and adhesion/frictional properties against ice via
the development of well-controlled surface structure models will be studied. A
detailed parametric study will also be performed to understand
thermo/hydro/aero-dynamic effects (e.g., temperature, air speed, liquid water
content, and size of droplets) on the anti/de-icing effectiveness of hydro-
phobic surfaces by using a custom-designed icing wind tunnel system integrated
in situ with a centrifugal adhesion tester. For the direct visualization of
wetting and adhesion states during the ice formation, several microscopy and
nanography techniques will also be employed, including reflection interference
contrast microscopy, cryo-scanning electron microscopy, wet scanning
transmission electron microscopy, and small angle X-ray scattering. The methods
and approaches to be used will lead to a new and deeper understanding of the
critical surface parameters impacting ice-phobic efficiency and durability,
revealing the correlation between surface hydro-phobicity and ice-phobicity.