* 1537990
* Collaborative Research:  EAGER: Pathways and patterns of litter chemistry during decomposition
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2017
* Kyle Wickings, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 05/31/2017
* USD 68,273.00

The breakdown of shed plant parts (liter) by microbes, called decomposition, is
a fundamental ecological process integral to the flow of energy and cycling of
nutrients in all ecosystems. Many earlier studies have described how the initial
chemical makeup of litter relates to its decomposition rate. But much less is
known about the later stages of decay, which are important for long-term
stability of soils and ecosystems. If initial chemistry is not in fact related
to long-term decomposition, as is usually assumed, then our understanding is
much more limited than thought. This project takes advantage of a large set of
archived litter samples collected from a wide range of ecosystems over many
years. The investigators will combine existing data on litter chemistry with new
analyses of these archived samples to explore more general patterns of litter
chemistry throughout the entire decomposition process. This project will
integrate research and education with undergraduates at the West Campus of
Arizona State University that serves a very diverse community with a high
percentage of first-generation college students. In addition, a decomposition
module will be developed for K-12 teachers to use in Arizona middle and high
school science classes. The investigators will take advantage of the multiple
institutions involved to coordinate undergraduate student teaching and
involvement in research, while centralized training at the University of New
Hampshire will enable graduate students to learn new techniques in close
collaboration. Finally, in addition to publishing results in peer-reviewed
journals, a special session is proposed for a national meeting to engage a
larger group of scientists in discussions of this important topic.

This project will determine whether diverse plant litter types maintain their
initial chemical differences throughout decay, remaining chemically unique as
often assumed, or if decomposing litter follows different chemical trajectories
to either converge or diverge over the course of decomposition. Further, this
study will determine how these patterns relate to decay rate and identify the
local environmental drivers, including climate and decomposer communities, that
may influence the patterns and temporal variability in litter chemistry during
decomposition. The results of this project will help determine whether the suite
of litter chemical characteristics known to influence decomposition follow
consistent patterns throughout decay across a range of terrestrial ecosystems
that includes forests, deserts and agricultural fields. It will help settle the
issue of whether or not initial litter chemistry is the main determinant of
decay rates. The project will also document and explain differences resulting
from the many analytical methods currently used that should be taken into
account in future studies. By leveraging existing data and a large set of
archived litter samples, the new resources needed to achieve these objectives
are greatly reduced.