* 1537062
* SHF:Small:Collaborative Research:Exploring Energy-Efficient GPGPUs Through Emerging Technology Integration
* CSE,CCF
* 12/01/2014,07/31/2017
* Xin Fu, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 07/31/2017
* USD 226,875.00

Nowadays, graphics processing units (GPUs) have been widely adopted for general-
purpose computing, and are known as GPGPUs. However, current and future GPGPUs
confront power and energy as the dominant constraints. The number of transistors
integrated on a single GPU chip continues to increase due to shrinking feature
size and the demand for massively parallel computing cores to increase
throughput. On the other hand, the continuous decrease of transistor supply
voltage at each new technology node has largely stalled because of leakage
constraints, leading to an ever-increasing power density. Therefore, future
GPGPUs must become more inherently energy efficient to avoid hitting the power
wall. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To meet the increasing demands on performance and
energy-efficiency, emerging technologies such as non-volatile memory, inter-bank
tunneling field effect transistors (TFETs), silicon nanophotonics, and three-
dimensional (3D) integration are being deployed in hardware design and promise
realization of power efficiency at a scale never expected before. The
investigators are exploring a synergetic program to holistically and
hierarchically improve the GPGPU's energy efficiency through emerging technology
integration. The project objectives include (1) non-volatile memory in the GPU
computing cores and low-power mechanisms to substantially reduce leakage and
dynamic power consumption; (2) a hybrid TFET-CMOS (complementary metal-oxide
semiconductor) methodology to effectively address the energy challenge at both
intra- and inter-core levels; (3) a novel 3D-stacked throughput architecture
based on silicon-nanophotonics technology to improve memory access performance
yet reduce power consumption; (4) integration of the key research innovations
and cross-technology optimizations to fully explore the potential of GPGPU
design enabled by these emerging technologies. The proposed research will
facilitate GPGPUs staying on track with deep sub-micron scaling and meeting the
increasing demand for high-performance computing, and will hence benefit
numerous real-life applications. This project will also contribute to society
through engaging high-school and undergraduate students from minority-serving
institutions in research, attracting women and other under-represented groups
into graduate education, expanding the computer engineering curriculum with
GPGPU power modeling and optimization techniques, disseminating research
infrastructure for education and training, and collaborating with the GPU
R&amp;D industry.