* 1537212
* Measurement of Large Freeform Optics using a Small and High-Precision Sensor
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Thomas Raasch, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Wells
* 08/31/2020
* USD 329,424.00

Using freeform optics, the optical industry can provide compact, efficient, and
high performance optical products with many unique features that allow reduction
in both the number and size of lenses in an optical system. These products have
wide applications including scientific research, solar energy harvest, medical,
and military applications. However, manufacturing of freeform optics today
relies on the "trial and error" approach due to the lack of efficient metrology
to measure freeform optical surfaces during and after they are manufactured.
This award supports fundamental research to provide knowledge that is needed to
develop a new freeform optics measurement system that can measure freeform
optical surfaces efficiently. The new measurement system will provide US
companies a competitive edge and can lead to innovations in telecommunication,
aerospace, consumer electronics, automotive, and medical industries.

The new freeform optical metrology is based on subaperture measurements using a
small and high-precision Shack-Hartmann wavefront sensor. These measurements are
then combined using novel stitching methods to reconstruct the entire freeform
optical surface. The first research objective is to establish the dependence of
each stitching method on the system design. Each stitching method will be
characterized by its convergence rate and corresponding residual error. The
design parameters include aperture size, shape, and selection of Zernike
polynomial terms. To achieve this objective, experiments on an Alvarez lens will
be performed by changing the subaperture size between 10-100 percent of the full
aperture. In addition, a square and a sphere shape subaperture will be tested,
and up to 7 Zernike polynomial terms will be used in the experiments. The second
research objective is to establish the relationship between the dynamic
performance of the system and microlens design and lens array configuration used
in the Shack-Hartmann sensor. In experimental investigations, microlens
parameters (including f-number and lens geometry) and lens array configuration
(including non-uniform lens layout and arbitrary base curve where the
microlenses reside) will be varied; dynamic performance of the system will be
evaluated in terms of degree of slop change, measurement time, and measurement
accuracy.