* 1537984
* Hard Coatings: Toughness Enhancement through Responsive Phase Change
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2019
* Daniel Gall, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Alexis Lewis
* 07/31/2019
* USD 325,259.00

Hard coatings are used in a wide range of industries and prolong the life and
increase the performance of components that experience sliding contact. Coatings
on cutting tools represent an annual world market of $20-70 billion, and are
essential for manufacturing in aerospace, automotive, and energy industries.
Research over the last two decades has resulted in a considerable increase in
the hardness of these coatings. However, despite these improvements, a major
shortcoming of these ceramic coatings remains: they are brittle, leading to
crack formation and premature failure in many applications. This award supports
fundamental research in materials science and engineering to address this
shortcoming. New coating materials are explored which are not only hard, but
also tough. The new coating materials are designed such that atoms rearrange
when exposed to large loads. This process stops small cracks from growing into
large cracks, which can prevent failure in current hard coating materials, and
in turn, failure of the component. This research has the potential to transform
industrial coating materials design and facilitate the development of wear-
resistant hard coatings for emerging applications ranging from environment-
friendly lubricant-free cutting tools to high-performance bearings for fuel-
efficient jet engines and high-temperature turbines for gas, wind, or
concentrating solar power plants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This integrated
experimental and theoretical research effort will explore phase-change
toughening mechanisms for hard coating materials. The key idea is to create a
materials system where the stress concentration near crack tips induces a
transformation from a metastable cubic to a stable hexagonal phase, facilitating
plasticity and/or local expansion which, in turn, suppresses crack propagation
and results in a dramatic increase in the fracture toughness. The research
explores if the ductility (and therefore the toughness) in wear-resistant
nitrides and carbides can be increased through stress-induced phase change,
without sacrificing their hardness. Such transformation toughening is well known
for bulk ceramic materials like zirconia and, if successfully applied to coating
materials, has the potential to dramatically increase the wear-resistance of
protective coatings. The study involves (i) first-principles calculations to
predict most promising compositions, (ii) coating synthesis by reactive
sputtering including control of microstructure through ion-irradiation,
epitaxial constraints, and temperature, (iii) high pressure phase transition
studies using a diamond anvil cell, and (iv) materials characterization by
nanoindentation to demonstrate enhanced toughness.