* 1537546
* Dynamic sinking behavior in diatoms: New insights from individual-based high resolution video observations
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Brad Gemmell, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Michael Sieracki
* 08/31/2019
* USD 510,598.00

The sinking of diatoms out of the well-lit upper layers of the ocean is
responsible for transport of material to the deep-sea and is an important factor
in controlling the overall abundance of this grass of the sea. Their sinking
characteristics are important to understand in detail so they can be accurately
represented in models of ocean dynamics. It has been assumed that all members of
these non-flagellated, microscopic cells sink at approximately the same rate, at
a constant rate, and that the direction of motion is downward. However, a re-
examination of sinking rates at an individual cell level indicates that all
three assumptions are incorrect. Using sophisticated optical and computing
techniques, these researchers are examining how individual diatom cells sink,
their ability to start and stop, and assessing what fraction can actually
ascend. This study will yield new insights into how diatoms interact with their
external environment by altering their movement through it. It will also address
what fraction of these populations are actually moving upwards, thereby
enhancing the movement of nutrients upward into the well-lit portions of the
ocean. These are novel insights into how small unicellular species interact with
the ocean around them and will significantly enrich our understanding of a
problem that had been thought to be well understood. The project will train one
graduate student and two undergraduate students in this research. Outreach is
also provided by K-12 activities bringing holographic instruments into the
classroom, and a public lecture series at our institute.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Diatom sinking rates are important life history
characteristics that control both loss rates and nutrient flux to the cell
surface. Positive buoyancy (m per hour rates) is an attribute of the largest
diatom cells and plays a role in a vertical migration life history strategy.
However, rates in smaller diatoms are typically described from a modified Stokes
equation and are generally assumed to uniform and downward. The investigators
previously observed that a species sinking rate is not monotonic within a sample
but is distributed around a mean value, may be both upward and downward, and is
under cellular control from near-zero to maximum velocity over second time
scales. Thus, ascending behavior can be limited to a small portion of a
population with a substantial downward rate. The goal of this project is to
determine how widespread these characteristics are, determine the role of this
unique start-stop sinking behavior, and examine how pervasive positive buoyancy
is using a series of carefully controlled laboratory studies and a broad suite
of diatom species. These characteristics will be considered within a framework
of the complex form/function patterns that occur in diatoms. Boundary layers
around cells differ vastly during the stop/start sequence and can be directly
visualized by our techniques. Nutrient diffusion to the cell is accelerated
during fast sinking; the investigators hypothesize that diffusion to cellular
surfaces has been underestimated by using a constant bulk sinking rate. This
work is only possible with the advent of high resolution cameras and advanced
processing that allows particle and fluid flow to be quantified in a dynamic
water column.