* 1537121
* Collaborative Research: Fatigue Damage Prognosis for Slender Coastal Bridges
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2021
* Wei Zhang, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 08/31/2021
* USD 299,672.00

Infrastructure of slender coastal bridges is critical for the economy and the
quality of life for people living in that region. Coastal bridges are subjected
to hazardous conditions including salt water and high winds. Corrosion of steel
is one of the items that deteriorates the bridges and reduces their capacity to
carry the load. Accurate prognosis and integrity evaluation of bridges will
significantly enhance the nation's economic development and public safety. The
fundamental understanding of the complex degradation process will enable
reliable prediction of structural deterioration and enable the systematic
decision-making for maintenance of bridges. The proposed research will also
benefit the safety evaluation of many other types of infrastructures, such as
power plants, offshore structures, and pipelines. Outcome of this research has
potential to reduce the economic and social losses due to structural failures in
many aging infrastructure systems. In addition, this project can have impact on
education, such as cultivating interests of graduate, undergraduate and K-12
students in structural and coastal engineering. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A novel
maximum entropy-based Bayesian network for multi-scale corrosion-fatigue damage
prognosis for slender coastal bridges is proposed. The proposed framework fuses
the information and knowledge from the material level, the structural level, and
the system level for the probabilistic prognosis and reliability assessment. The
inter-correlations among different levels of nodes in the network are developed
by using coupled dynamic analysis and corrosion-fatigue damage analysis.
Advanced experimental testing for fatigue and simulation methods will be
combined together for the physics-based prediction of remaining useful life of
costal bridges. Uncertainties will be propagated through the proposed Bayesian
network and the system level reliability will be updated and reassessed. The
Bayesian network can update itself with information from experimental
measurements, field observation, and historical experiences. In the proposed
methodology, coupled structure dynamics model will capture the realistic service
and environmental loads during the lifetime span of the bridges.