* 1537210
* Uncertainty Characterization and Robust Control of Blood Glucose in Type 1 Diabetic Patients
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Tarunraj Singh, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Robert Landers
* 08/31/2019
* USD 268,000.00

The objective of this project is to develop a framework to account for
variability across type 1 diabetes patients and develop an insulin delivery
paradigm which is insensitive to such variability. Developing solutions to
manage type 1 diabetes are challenging for a variety of reasons including lack
of well calibrated long-lived sensors, variability in how people of different
ages, sex, and body mass index respond to insulin, and reliability of automated
insulin delivery system that ensure the well-being of the patient in the
presence of glucose sensor and insulin pump faults. A comprehensive approach
spanning the disciplines of modeling, uncertainty quantification, forecasting
and control will allow controller designs that promise robustness to patient-to-
patient variability, leading to the transition to animal and human testing. With
the projection that one in three children born this century will develop
diabetes, the potential savings in health care costs associated with improved
treatment of the disease is substantial.

Mathematical tools will be developed that will provide a new way of synthesizing
controllers to regulate blood glucose in type 1 diabetic patients. The results
will provide a unified framework for representing time-invariant model
uncertainties in conjunction with stochastic inputs and measurement noise which
can subsequently be used in controller design. The polynomial chaos approach to
representing time-invariant uncertainties, coupled with a mapping to Bernstein
polynomials, permits determining bounds on the evolving states. A probabilistic
constraint to cater to the stochastic input in conjunction with the evolving
bounds on the states will permit controller design which is robust to variations
across type 1 diabetes patients.