* 1537194
* Mechanics-based Service-life Prediction of Natural-Fiber Composites
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,06/30/2020
* Wil Srubar III, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 06/30/2020
* USD 336,737.00

With applications in the automotive, packaging, and construction industries,
natural-fiber composites have gained in relevance over the past few decades as
sustainable alternatives to synthetic-fiber composite materials. However,
widespread application of natural-fiber composites remains limited due to
concerns regarding their durability in high-humidity and wet environments.
Previous moisture-related durability research has been empirical in nature. This
award will support fundamental research to model the environmentally assisted
degradation of natural-fiber composites. The mechanics-based modeling approaches
will be used to elucidate relationships between composite composition,
hygrothermal exposure, mechanical degradation, and environmental sustainability.
The research activities will advance the science and engineering of materials
that are fully biorenewable and economically viable on a global scale. The
complementary education and outreach efforts will help foster a more inclusive
generation of female engineers who will become technical leaders in engineering
mechanics and materials sustainability. The primary objective of this research
is to use micromechanics to predict moisture- and frost-induced damage in both
short- and continuous-fiber natural-fiber composites that are exposed to
fluctuating hygrothermal conditions. In addition to composite synthesis, the
experimental work includes meso- and nano-scale mechanical testing to correlate
moisture content and temperature with reductions in mechanical properties of
fibers, matrices, and composites thereof. The computational work includes
formulation of diffusion-based moisture transport models; formulation of
micromechanical damage models to account for internal strains from fiber
softening and expansion; and model validation using data obtained from the
accelerated weathering of composite samples. Once calibrated with experimental
data, the mechanics-based service-life models will be used to predict in-situ
degradation and to estimate functional obsolescence (end of life) in several
applications in a variety of geographic locations. These service-life estimates
will be integrated into a probabilistic lifecycle assessment modeling framework
to calculate true environmental impacts across variable spatial and temporal
domains.