* 1537379
* Sampling Criteria for Monitoring Influenza Emergencies Under Constrained Testing Capabilities
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Elise deDoncker, Western Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 08/31/2020
* USD 204,646.00

Influenza viruses create emergencies almost every year, and existing
surveillance systems are important for addressing uncertainty in the disease
detection, monitoring and control. An essential tool for monitoring influenza
activity is the trend of cases confirmed with an influenza virus type. Confirmed
case trends are useful to estimate when the season starts and which viruses are
circulating, as each flu virus targets different age groups and produces
symptoms of different types and severity. During influenza emergencies,
specimens from infected cases massively arrive at the testing laboratories,
which leads to chaos and increased operational costs as the labs increase their
capacity in response to the overwhelming testing demand. Moreover, confirmed
case data produced under this chaotic environment is being used intently by
decision makers and the research community. This award supports fundamental
research to understand how conventional and non-conventional methods for
specimen sampling minimize the publication delay and uncertainty in the daily
number of influenza confirmed cases. The new findings and methods will not only
improve sampling and testing practices, but will also guarantee quality of data
to its users. The research promotes diversity, as female graduate students will
be recruited for the project. In addition, the research promotes knowledge
dissemination, as training materials will be prepared and delivered to public
health policymakers, and graduate students in engineering and
medicine.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Analysts use the reported trend of confirmed
influenza cases to identify the epidemiological features of a circulating virus.
However, there is uncertainty about the extent to which confirmed cases are
representative of the properties of the virus. To address this concern, several
methods have been suggested but they present significant limitations. For
example, the methods require information that is hard to estimate, they do not
consider constrained lab capacity, and they do not account for the uncertainty
in the outbreak evolution and the specimen collection process. The research team
will develop a Method for Operations during Disease Emergencies in the Lab
(MODEL). MODEL is an algorithm for real-time sampling and Bayesian learning of
epidemic parameters that accounts for the uncertainties in the course of the
disease and in the specimen collection process. It is expected that MODEL
features will contribute to the theory of dynamic sampling. Research efforts
will also focus on a framework to evaluate any type of specimen sampling
criteria during an influenza emergency. The results derived from the framework
will contribute to the theory of management and surveillance of viral infectious
diseases.