* 1537425
* Collaborative Research: A New Framework for Prediction of Buckling and Other Critical Transitions in Nonlinear Structural Mechanics
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Lawrence Virgin, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 08/31/2019
* USD 295,994.00

In addition to the conventional concern of stability and collapse in large-scale
engineering structures, buckling phenomena play a key role in many other natural
and engineered systems, e.g., plants responding to stimuli, deformations of
macro-scale engineering structures, patterning of periodic porous materials, and
design of 3D shapes from 2D nanostructures. More generally, predicting the
escape from a potential energy well is a universal exercise, and governs
behavior in many physical systems that are unable to maintain stability in the
face of disturbances. All these situations are essentially dominated by the
large-scale organization of system states, as the system finds a way to exit one
state (i.e., behavior) and get to another. Often this transition is sudden, and
the consequences of this escaping behavior may be catastrophic. Focusing
attention on low-order experimental buckling systems is the key intermediate
step in transitioning from an abstract theoretical concept to practical and
design-oriented guidelines. This award supports an effort to apply a new
paradigm, by way of a fresh theoretical-computational approach, to assess the
ways in which the problem of escape can be tested experimentally, in a
statistical sense, and hence provide a framework for prediction, design, and in
some cases prevention, laying the groundwork for more sophisticated design and
control of such systems. This project brings together two researchers from
complementary backgrounds. Although the framework will be developed within the
realm of nonlinear structural dynamics, there are many other potential
applications of the mathematics: chemical reactions, nanostructures, earthquake
engineering, ship dynamics, to name a few, and even possible utility beyond
engineering: certain biological and ecological systems. The broad range and
reach of this research project will provide a strong training environment for
undergraduate and graduate students. The research team will also develop an
active outreach program to excite young minds about dynamics through snap-
through phenomena and self-guided inquiry using 3D printer technology at high
schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will support an effort in theoretical
and applied mechanics to develop an innovative unified approach to experimental
nonlinear structural buckling, using high dimensional cylinder-like phase space
structures as the fundamental basis for understanding the dynamics governing
motion between potential wells (equilibrium states) in phase space. These tube
features organize the evolution of trajectories in phase space in a global
sense. This point-of-view will be applied to understand the behavior of a number
of axially loaded slender mechanical structures, of varying degrees of
complexity. Criteria and routes of escape from a potential well have previously
been considered and determined for one degree of freedom systems with time-
varying forcing, with reasonable agreement with experiments. However, when there
are two or more degrees of freedom, the situation becomes more complicated. Yet,
even for the higher dimensional case, recent work suggests the beginnings of a
theoretical-computational framework for determining the boundary of those
trajectories which will soon escape (or equivalently, transition between wells
in multi-well systems). These methods are geometric in nature for deterministic
systems, merging naturally into a probabilistic framework when noise and
stochastic effects are incorporated. The research develops a consistent approach
to a deeper understanding of an important class of structural mechanics
problems, with potential applications to buckling prediction for traditional
engineered structures, and emerging opportunities to design adaptive structures
that can bend, fold, and twist, i.e., controllably morphing structures into a
desired shape to achieve some objective.