* 1537712
* Alternate Direction Method: A New Recipe for Non-Convex Quadratic Programming with Applications
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Jiming Peng, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 08/31/2019
* USD 220,000.00

Quadratic programming comprises optimization problems where the objective
function is a quadratic function. Such problems arise in a broad range of
applications from manufacturing systems and service systems. Although there
exists a large literature on quadratic programming, most existing optimization
techniques are either not scalable or work effectively only for convex quadratic
programming and cannot provide useful solutions to non-convex quadratic
programming. This award supports fundamental research to develop an integrated
approach that can effectively solve classes of non-convex quadratic programming
problems. The new approach can be applied to non-convex problems from many
domains such as energy systems and communications. The project involves graduate
students from underrepresented groups and positively impacts engineering
education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will primarily address
quadratically constrained quadratic programming optimization problems of a form
that arises in many applications. Besides being non-convex, these problems are
known to be NP-hard. The approach is based on several simple and effective
optimization techniques in convex programming such as linear approximation,
alternate direction method, multi-starting techniques, linear search and convex
relaxation. However, new concepts and procedures need to be introduced to
establish the convergence of the algorithm and ensure the global optimality of
the obtained solution. The research team will explore the theoretical properties
of the Lagrangian function to select the desirable Lagrangian multipliers in
nonconvex quadratic programming, new reformulation models for non-convex
quadratic programming to facilitate the design of new effective alternate
direction method, introduce new concepts in optimization to characterize the
generated sequence from the algorithm, and new line search procedures based on
convex relaxation and initialization strategies to search for the global optimal
solution to the underlying problem. The research team will also conduct
theoretical investigations to analyze the behavior of the new algorithm,
implement the new algorithm and test its performance on synthetic test problems
and instances from real-world applications. The developed models and
methodologies will be applied to several applications such as energy system
design.