* 1537136
* Subpolar-Subtropical Connectivity of the North Atlantic Circulation
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2019
* Eric Chassignet, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 08/31/2019
* USD 451,170.00

The ocean, through its large capacity to store heat, plays a critical role in
Earth's climate and climate variability. Warming of the world's oceans since
1955 accounts for approximately 93% of the warming of the Earth system. However,
this warming is neither spatially uniform nor temporally constant. Superimposed
on the global long-term trend is climate variability on inter-annual to inter-
decadal time scales and regional to basin scales. Satellite altimeters and
hydrographic observations show that the North Atlantic, including the sub-polar
region, has rapidly become warmer and saltier since the early 1990s. An emerging
picture is that the most recent 20 years or so of warming in the North Atlantic
represents, in part, a transition of the Atlantic multi-decadal variability
pattern from a cold to a warm phase. These decadal climate transitions involve
changes both laterally in the sub-tropical and sub-polar gyres of the North
Atlantic and vertically in the Atlantic Meridional Overturning Circulation
(AMOC), a key component of the global heat and freshwater circulation system.
This study of the North Atlantic circulation concentrates on a transition region
around the Grand Banks of Newfoundland, where the effects of boundary currents
and jets, recirculations, and mesoscale eddies (length scales typically less
than 100 km) are dominant. Strong interactions occur in this transition region,
laterally between the subpolar and subtropical gyres and vertically between the
cold and warm limbs of the Atlantic Meridional Circulation (AMOC). There is
evidence that this relatively compact region plays a key role in altering and
even modulating the AMOC over a much larger scale and thus is important for the
long-term, decadal variability of the Atlantic Ocean. Yet, despite many
observational field programs, the dynamics and impacts of this region are not
well understood. The project will contribute to understanding the variability of
the AMOC by addressing the connectivity of the sub-polar and the sub-tropical
gyres. The results of this model-data synthesis will be of particular
significance to coupled climate models, which are central to understanding and
predicting global climate change. The educational/outreach components of this
project will be focused on cultivating scientific literacy with regards to ocean
climate research in K-12 schools, at the university level, and in the local
community through a variety of online resources/interactive tools for educators,
the Florida State University Young Scholars program for high school students,
and the "Scientists in the Schools" program. Finally, the requested funding will
support a junior faculty member and a graduate student who will be trained in
ocean modeling, data analysis and interpretation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through
ongoing major observation programs in the sub-polar and sub-tropical North
Atlantic Ocean, oceanographers are making great strides toward a better
understanding of the structure and variability of the AMOC within these sub-
basins. The work proposed here complements these observations by focusing on key
questions pertaining to what controls the circulation in between and how much
the sub-polar to sub-tropical connectivity modulates the larger scale AMOC. This
project aims to elucidate the physical dynamics that controls circulation in the
transition region, especially the relative importance of the eddies and the deep
western boundary current, and document the role and impact of the transition
region on the larger scale circulation, especially the variability of the AMOC
and water properties in the sub-polar and sub-tropical North Atlantic from
inter-annual to decadal and longer time scales. The interaction of eddies and
time mean circulations represents one of the greatest challenges to prediction
of global climate variability, and it can be studied with the fine-grid
resolution model included in this project. These objectives will be met by
performing a detailed model-data synthesis study, combining numerical results
from a suite of high-resolution Atlantic simulations using the HYbrid Coordinate
Ocean Model (HYCOM) and existing observations (satellite altimetry,
drifters/floats, hydrography, tracers, and mooring arrays). The three-
dimensional Atlantic circulation will be quantified by performing analysis of
water mass transport and transformation, passive tracers, and potential
vorticity and momentum fluxes. It has been demonstrated that the eddy-resolving
HYCOM represents the basic circulation features in the transition region and
larger scale North Atlantic Ocean, including both time mean structure and
temporal variability.