* 1537483
* EAGER: Collaborative: Design, Perception, and Action - Engineering Information Give-Away
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2015,02/29/2020
* Eytan Adar, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 02/29/2020
* USD 224,675.00

The design of social media interfaces greatly shapes how much, and when, people
decide to reveal private information. For example, a designer can highlight a
new system feature (e.g., your travel history displayed on a map) and show which
friends are using this new addition. By making it seem as if sharing is the norm
-- after all, your friends are doing it -- the designer signals to the end-user
that he can and should participate and share information. This research focuses
on two broad themes: what are the effects of design choices on changing what
users think is appropriate to share and with whom? and how do norms interact
with design to impact these decisions? Understanding how disclosure decisions
are made and manipulated is critical as corporate and individual interests can
be quite different. This is because norm-shaping can be used for benevolent
purposes, such as guiding the end-user through an unfamiliar interface, but can
also be used to manipulate the end-user and cause him or her to share
information he or she would have preferred to keep private. The fact that such
design patterns can be used both ways makes them particularly interesting: the
user has no way of inferring the designer's intent, and policy makers and well
intentioned designers have no mechanism for assessing the norm-shaping
properties of their design choices. This research contributes to the development
of tools to study user interfaces as embodiments of social norms as well as
contributing more broadly to the discourse of privacy and sharing
online.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific research goals are to (a) identify
design patterns that shape disclosure norms, (b) experimentally determine the
mechanisms by which they work (e.g., how patterns modify perception of norms and
thus behavior), and (c) integrate these observations into existing theoretical
frameworks (e.g., the "privacy calculus") that model how disclosure decisions
are made. The PIs plan to use experiments to identify the impact of design on
the perception of social norms and subsequent information divulging behavior.
The experiments combine methodologies from experimental economics with Human
Computer Interaction (HCI) methods. Additionally, the PIs will test
econometrically an extension of the privacy calculus model that includes a
preference for norm compliance, estimating an individual's willingness to trade-
off between privacy preserving behavior and compliance with sharing norms. This
research will demonstrate how tools from different disciplines can be used to
enhance understanding of design in privacy and HCI. The results would feed back
to the privacy, economics, and HCI communities.