* 1537197
* PFI:AIR-RA: Commercializing Pharmaceutical Process Modeling for Continuous Manufacturing
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2019
* Rajesh Dave, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 09/30/2019
* USD 833,533.00

This PFI: AIR Research Alliance project focuses on the translation and transfer
of pharmaceutical process modeling for continuous manufacturing, derived from
the Engineering Research Center for Structured Organic Particulate Systems (ERC-
SOPS). The high cost of pharmaceuticals has a direct effect on healthcare costs
and is a financial burden on uninsured or underinsured populations in the US. In
the developing world, people suffer or die from curable or treatable diseases
and illnesses due to a lack of affordable pharmaceuticals. Reducing
manufacturing costs through innovations and technology transfer represents an
opportunity to significantly bring down the cost of pharmaceuticals. At the
present most pharmaceuticals are produced using batch manufacturing technology.
In a batch process all of the material is processed at the same time leading to
typical equipment that is meters in size that would process hundreds of
kilograms of material. Not only is it problematic to process so much material at
once, many pharmaceutical manufacturing processes have changed little in
decades, and are expensive and difficult to scale. Replacing batch manufacturing
of pharmaceuticals with continuous manufacturing is a major technology advance
that can change the landscape of pharmaceutical manufacturing in the next
decades. In a continuous process, material flows continuously through the system
so typical equipment would be tens of centimeters in size and would process a
few hundred grams of material at a time. Continuous manufacturing of
pharmaceuticals has the potential to be transformative by simplifying
development and scale up, and allowing major changes in production. This will
result in lower development and production costs for the pharmaceutical
industry, and higher quality products and more robust manufacturing processes
that will reduce manufacturing costs and benefit society as a whole.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;An industry/academic innovation ecosystem will be established for the
development and commercialization of pharmaceutical process modeling for
continuous manufacturing. The innovation ecosystem that will be created includes
Janssen Supply Group, Patheon and Control Associates/QbD Process Technologies. A
framework for connecting the process models will be established, and these will
be linked to available control models in an integrated system. The potential
economic impact is expected to be development of process models and commercial
modeling software and creation of new jobs in the next 3-5 years. Students and
post-doctoral fellows will gain entrepreneurial and technology translation
experience through training materials, seminars and meetings with entrepreneurs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An essential part of the development of continuous
pharmaceutical processes and the implementation of continuous manufacturing of
pharmaceuticals is modeling of these processes. In this project, integrated
models will be developed to replace the current mode of trial-and-error design
of a continuous manufacturing system. The integrated models will allow for model
guided experiments and state-of-the-art process design and will be developed as
part of the ecosystem and then commercialized. In this ecosystem, a repository
of unit operations will be developed that can be used to model continuous
manufacturing of pharmaceuticals. The end product will include a process model
library consisting of unit operations, a controller model library that includes
different kinds of controllers, and finally the capability of connecting all of
these libraries of process templates.