* 1537078
* Collaborative Research: Engineered Earth Masonry for Affordable Seismic Resistant Low-Rise Buildings
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,10/31/2018
* Michele Barbato, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 10/31/2018
* USD 174,983.00

There is a continuing demand in the United States for sustainable and hazard-
resilient but highly affordable low-rise buildings for households and
businesses. The goal of this research project is to investigate the feasibility
of high-quality reinforced earth masonry (REM) for seismic resistant low-rise
buildings. This goal will be achieved by transforming sustainable and locally
appropriate but brittle unfired earth masonry into a stronger and more ductile
system by using non-biodegradable recycled plastic fibers combined with internal
steel reinforcement. This research will investigate REM as a low-cost option for
low-rise industrial buildings and sheds, with a vision of fostering the
development of small plants and warehouses by reducing construction and
maintenance costs, thus promoting economic development.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical objectives of this research are the
following: (1) to engineer, prototype, and verify an affordable and high-quality
REM system for seismic resistant low-rise buildings, and (2) to formulate,
verify and implement a new numerical model to accurately and efficiently predict
the structural response of REM walls. The hypotheses are:v(1) engineering of
earth blocks and mortar stabilized with nine percent or less cement, and
reinforced with one percent or less volume fraction of recycled plastic fibers,
combined with internal steel reinforcement, will change the strength and
ductility of REM, making it suitable for seismic resistant buildings, and (2)
computationally efficient numerical models based on newly developed nonlinear
macroelements (MEs), whose kinematics are described by the smallest possible
number of degrees of freedom, will enable the accurate prediction of the
response of REM structures subject to static and dynamic loads. This research
will be conducted in three phases. First, selected prototype block-mortar
combinations (unreinforced, fiber reinforced, and fiber reinforced with grouted
steel bars) will be characterized through load testing of materials and
assemblages. A candidate reinforced system will be selected for the second
phase. Three-dimensional (3D) digital image correlation (3D-DIC) will be used to
measure full-field deformation maps and inform the development of numerical
models. The resulting constitutive models for materials, mortar joints, and REM
assemblages will serve to formulate detailed finite element (FE) models. Second,
performance data will be obtained through large-scale testing and 3D-DIC
monitoring of REM walls subject to quasi-static cyclic loading. The results will
inform the formulation and validation of new structural ME models and their FE
code implementation. Third and final, ME-based FE models of the large-scale
specimens will be developed based on the comparison between numerical and
experimental results. The resulting first-generation ME models will be used for
a preliminary estimate of seismic design coefficients and factors to establish
feasibility. In addition, a preliminary quantification of sustainability-related
parameters and construction cost for representative REM materials and buildings
will be performed to provide a basis for comparison with alternative systems,
for example, light-framed wood, as well as life-cycle cost analysis.