* 1537468
* Enhanced Superalloys via Mesoscale Engineering
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Sammy Tin, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Alexis Lewis
* 08/31/2019
* USD 325,034.00

Superalloys are critical structural materials ideally suited for high
performance gas turbine applications due their excellent resistance to
deformation and environmental degradation at elevated temperatures. Although
many of the intrinsic characteristics of superalloys can be attributed to the
underlying alloy chemistry, in many instances the properties of these alloys can
be enhanced through engineering control of the structure at very fine scales.
Because many of the advanced turbine engines now operate at temperatures
approaching the limits of existing superalloy capabilities, these engineering
techniques can potentially extend the life and impart higher a higher degree of
damage tolerance to many of these superalloy structures. This award supports
fundamental research to understand how the process parameters employed during
metal forming and heating operations effect the development of morphology and
fine structure. This research will impact advanced gas turbine technologies for
power generation, space exploration, and aerospace/marine propulsion, with
significant economic and environmental benefits, such as the reduced fuel
consumption, minimization of carbon dioxide and nitrous oxide emissions. The
award will also support educational outreach programs at local Chicago high
schools and assist in the training and education of US graduate students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research funded by this award aims to understand the
fundamental mechanisms that govern the formation serrated grain boundaries in
polycrystalline Ni-based superalloys containing a high proportion of Sigma-3
twin boundaries, and assess their combined effect on grain boundary sliding. The
extent and effectiveness of coherent and semi-coherent precipitates to induce
grain boundary perturbations will be assessed in two commercial superalloys. In
addition, bi-crystal samples possessing controlled misorientations will be
fabricated to systematically quantify the effect of grain boundary
misorientations on the formation and growth of perturbations. Finally, nano-
scale assessments of the compositional and mechanical attributes along the
serrated boundaries will be combined with 3D microstructural characterization
and in situ strain mapping to quantify the effectiveness of the serrations on
grain boundary sliding. These studies will contribute to the development of
innovative thermal-mechanical processes that can be effectively used to tailor
or engineer the mechanical properties of the alloy though the presence of meso-
scale features.