* 1537943
* Tracking the temporal and spatial variability of dissolved organic matter, its diagenetic state and bioavailability during various bloom states in the North Atlantic
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2021
* Craig Carlson, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 08/31/2021
* USD 661,501.00

Tracking the temporal and spatial variability of dissolved organic matter, its
diagenetic state and bioavailability during various bloom states in the North
Atlantic&lt;br/&gt;Craig Carlson&lt;br/&gt;ID: 1537943&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
North Atlantic phytoplankton bloom is among the most conspicuous biological
events annually recorded. This bloom represents a hot spot of biological
activity during which a significant amount of dissolved organic matter is
produced through bloom-associated food web processes. While recent work has shed
some light on the spatial distribution of dissolved organic matter during the
North Atlantic bloom, temporal resolution of dissolved organic matter
variability in the context of the North Atlantic bloom is lacking. This project
aims to understand the temporal and spatial dynamics of dissolved organic
matter, its compositional variability, as well as the mechanisms that control
its accumulation, persistence and export in the North Atlantic. This project
will leverage a large, recently funded, NASA field-program called the North
Atlantic Aerosols and Marine Ecosystem Study (NAAMES) designed to evaluate the
fundamental controls of the north Atlantic phytoplankton bloom initiation, its
magnitude and interannual variability. Results from this research will provide a
mechanistic understanding of carbon cycling in the context of the North Atlantic
phytoplankton bloom. The research will be carried out at the University of
California ? Santa Barbara, a Hispanic-serving institution, and will involve
educational opportunities for students from elementary through graduate
school.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent work examining the spatial distribution of
dissolved organic matter in the North Atlantic coupled to measurements of water
mass ventilation rates has estimated that a significant amount of carbon is
vertically exported out of the surface ocean to deep waters as dissolved organic
matter. However, an overarching gap in dissolved organic matter knowledge is the
lack of valuable temporal resolution necessary to investigate the mechanisms
that control dissolved organic matter production, accumulation, or its change in
quality and bioavailability as a result of changing bloom phases and
phytoplankton cycles. This research will examine the temporal and spatial
variability of dissolved organic matter dynamics along a repeated meridional
transect during four distinct phases associated with the North Atlantic spring
phytoplankton bloom including 1) pre-bloom, mixing phase, 2) nutrient-replete,
increasing biomass phase, 3) nutrient-stressed decreasing biomass phase, and 4)
post bloom stratified phase. This will be accomplished by coupling continuous
water column and surface layer ecosystem properties from autonomous in situ
sensors, and satellite observations with four 26-day coordinated ship and
airborne field campaigns.