* 1537239
* Force Transduction Mechanisms At Adherens Junctions
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Frederick Sachs, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Laurel Kuxhaus
* 08/31/2020
* USD 443,000.00

Mechanical forces are major determinants of cell and tissue development. During
tissue development, cells experience numerous mechanical forces including
tensile or compressive forces from shape change of the surrounding tissues and
shear force from fluid flow in tubular structures. In the lining of the lungs,
blood vessels and the kidney cells that line tubular structures adhere directly
to their neighbors by junctions that join the fibrous internal cellular
cytoskeleton. The cell-to-cell connections transmit forces between the cells.
The intercellular connections are part of how lung, kidney and vascular lining
cells can measure the forces of fluid flow or air pressure. The objective of
this research is to mimic how the forces of fluid flow are coupled to the cell-
cell junctions and how they cause cell structural changes in the cells that make
them function properly. Failure of cells properly to sense and transmit
mechanical signals can cause progression of diseases of the kidney, vasculature
and lung.

Our understanding of force transmission pathways has been limited due to a lack
of tools to measure forces in specific proteins in live cells. This research
will use a novel approach of combining FRET based force sensors with
microfluidics that presents an opportunity to establish the link between flow-
induced cytoskeletal forces and adherens junction (AJ) dynamics responsible for
cell remodeling. The distribution of cytoskeletal force and its time-dependence
for specific proteins will be mapped using FRET probes in cells subjected to
flow stimuli. Adherens junction dynamics will be measured simultaneously with
fluorescently labeled junction proteins. The outcome of this research will be a
new understanding of the dynamics of shear force transduction in living cells,
and perhaps most importantly, a measure of the cause and effect relationships of
energy flow in the cell. The FRET force probes would also provide a new research
toolset to the scientific community to study cell mechanics. The educational
broader impacts will be accomplished through a unique program on Education
through Experimentation or E2E