* 1537926
* Life-cycle Management of Civil Infrastructure Considering Risk and Sustainability
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Dan Frangopol, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 08/31/2020
* USD 474,067.00

Civil infrastructure systems play a crucial role in supporting economic and
social welfare of communities. However, in the U.S., these systems are under
continuous aging and deterioration hindering their ability to properly function.
Changing Climate may exacerbate this functionality problem. For the proper
performance assessment of structural systems during their life-cycle, it is
necessary to take into account not only functionality but also economic, social
and environmental indicators. Therefore, formulating methodologies to quantify
the effects of changing climate on infrastructure vulnerability and to identify
optimal life-cycle management strategies for civil infrastructure considering
risk and sustainability is of paramount importance. This project pursues
fundamental research to provide needed knowledge for the development of an
integrated risk and sustainability informed decision making framework for
optimum life-cycle management of civil infrastructure systems. Results from this
research will benefit the U.S. economy and society. This research involves
several disciplines including structural reliability and risk, bridge
engineering, life-cycle engineering, optimization, and decision theory. The
multi-disciplinary approach will help broaden participation of underrepresented
groups in research.

Most of the previous research on life-cycle management of civil infrastructure
systems focused on formulating methodologies to enable understanding the effects
of changing climate on the performance of these systems. Additionally, no clear
integration of risk and sustainability metrics in the management of
deteriorating infrastructure has been provided. This research is to create a
risk and sustainability based decision making framework capable of optimizing
life-cycle management of civil infrastructure systems. The outputs of this
framework are the risk and sustainability based performance profiles and the
optimized life-cycle intervention strategies taking into account conflicting
budgetary and safety constraints. The developed risk and sustainability based
life-cycle management framework will facilitate the real-world implementation of
life-cycle management methodologies.