* 1537727
* The Importance of Diagenesis upon the C, S, and B Isotopic Composition of Carbonates: Implication for Reading the Rock Record
* GEO,OCE
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2020
* Peter Swart, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Candace Major
* 07/31/2020
* USD 496,869.00

The study of diagenesis in carbonates uses classic tools of C and O isotopes and
trace elements and now there are a number of additional geochemical proxies and
methods that are potentially available. The PI proposes to examine the influence
of diagenetic process upon the isotopic systematics of two of these proxies,
sulfur and boron, as well as take a new look at factors controlling the carbon
isotopes of organic material and inorganic carbonates. This work will be carried
out mainly in Plio-Pleistocene sediments using material collected by shallow
water and land drilling as well as the ODP. Material will include unaltered
samples as well as those affected by diagenesis involving freshwater and marine
fluids. In addition to the more Modern samples, the PI will also study B within
older, Neoproterozoic, sections which have been proposed by some to have both
retained their original geochemistry and by others to have been influenced by
diagenesis. The PI will test one of the most established criteria for
determining that the carbon isotopic signals are original, rather than
diagenetic, mainly the presence of a correlation between the carbon isotopes of
organic and inorganic material, which has recently been questioned. The work has
implications for paleoclimatic and paleoceanographic studies. Other broader
impacts include graduate and undergraduate training, outreach to high school
students and collaboration with the Miami-based Creative Learning and Engagement
Opportunities program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI suggests that the
study of diagenesis in carbonate rocks using geochemistry is at an exciting
point. Not only have the classic tools of C and O isotopes and trace elements
continued to improve in terms of their accuracy, sensitivity and microsampling
ability, but there are a number of additional geochemical proxies and methods of
applying these proxies potentially available. Some of these proxies need to be
refined while others wait to be discovered and developed. The PI will examine
the influence of diagenetic process upon the isotopic systematics of two of
these, sulfur and boron, as well as take a new look at factors controlling the
carbon isotopes of organic material and inorganic carbonates. This work will be
carried out mainly in young carbonate sediments (Plio-Pleistocene) deposited on
the flanks and surface of carbonate platforms using material collected by
shallow water and land drilling as well as the ODP. Material will include
supposedly unaltered samples as well as materials which have been unequivocally
affected by diagenesis involving freshwater and marine fluids. The rationale for
this proposal is that the isotopes of C, B, and S have already been used over a
wide ranges of geological time scales to interpret changes in the Earth?s
geochemical systems. Such work is being undertaken without some of the
fundamental understanding of the processes which may alter these proxies. In
addition to the more Modern samples, the PI will also study B within
Neoproterozoic sections which have been proposed by some to have both retained
their original geochemistry and by others to have been influenced by diagenesis.
Finally, one of the most established criteria for determining that the carbon
isotopic signals are original, rather than diagenetic, mainly the presence of a
correlation between the carbon isotopes of organic and inorganic material, has
recently been questioned. Hence there is a need to establish to what extent such
correlations indicate that the signals are original or whether in fact the
presence of a correlation indicates that diagenesis has actually occurred. The
work has implications for paleoclimatic and paleoceanographic studies. Other
broader impacts include graduate and undergraduate training, outreach to high
school students and collaboration with the Miami-based Creative Learning and
Engagement Opportunities program.