* 1537512
* Laser Deposition Joining of Composites for Wind Turbine Blade Repair
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,02/28/2019
* Hongtao Ding, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Steve Schmid
* 02/28/2019
* USD 350,000.00

Cost-effective repair methods for composite blades are critically needed for the
wind energy industry. Wind turbine blades are subject to considerable wear and
degradation, and their repairs are often necessary. Currently, most blade
repairs are performed using wet epoxy resins. Such repairs have low joining
strength and require long processing time. The research supported under this
award will establish the foundation for a novel laser-based process to repair
composite blades. During the process, a repair patch of glass fibers is joined
employing a laser-deposition joining method utilizing fine glass powders as
filler material. Laser-deposition joining repair of fiber-reinforced composites
will also have applications where repair of composite structures is needed; for
example, those in defense, aerospace, automotive, and compressed gas storage
industries. Consequently, the results of this research will benefit the U.S.
economy and society.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The research objectives are: (1)
establishing the relationship between glass powder stream temperature and
operational parameters (such as laser power density and powder flow rate), (2)
quantifying the effect of the glass powder stream temperature on the glass
viscous flow behavior through the repair patch of glass fibers, and (3)
establishing the relationship between glass powder stream temperature and
deposition joint quality (in terms of infiltration depth, porosity, flexural
properties, and delamination resistance). To achieve these objectives, three
research tasks will be completed. First, numerical modeling of coaxial powder
flow and laser-particle interaction will be performed to predict glass powder
stream temperature. The modeling results under various operational conditions
will be verified using experimental measurements of powder stream temperature.
Second, multi-physics modeling will be performed to evaluate the effect of
powder stream temperature on the glass melt viscous flow through the random
arrays of fibers media. The infiltration depth of the glass fill and porosity of
the cooled deposition joint will be predicted and validated against optical and
scanning electron microscopy measurements. Finally, the effect of glass powder
stream temperature on the joint integrity will be experimentally determined
based on microscopy measurements of infiltration depth and porosity and
mechanical testing of flexural properties and delamination resistance.
&lt;br/&gt;