* 1537959
* Collaborative research: Is hybridization among threatened Caribbean coral species the key to their survival or the harbinger of their extinction?
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2020
* Webb Miller, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 09/30/2020
* USD 699,677.00

Reef-building acroporid corals form the foundation of shallow tropical coral
communities throughout the Caribbean. Yet, the once dominant staghorn coral
(Acropora cervicornis) and the elkhorn coral (A. palmata) have decreased by more
than 90% since the 1980s, primarily from disease. Their continuing decline
jeopardizes the ability of coral reefs to provide numerous societal and
ecological benefits, including economic revenue from seafood harvesting and
tourism and shoreline protection from extreme wave events caused by storms and
hurricanes. Despite their protection under the U.S. Endangered Species Act since
2006, threats to the survival of reef-building acroporid corals remain pervasive
and include disease and warming ocean temperatures that may lead to further
large-scale mortality. However, hybridization among these closely related
species is increasing and may provide an avenue for adaptation to a changing
environment. While hybrids were rare in the past, they are now thriving in
shallow habitats with extreme temperatures and irradiance and are expanding into
the parental species habitats. Additional evidence suggests that the hybrid is
more disease resistant than at least one of the parental species. Hybridization
may therefore have the potential to rescue the threatened parental species from
extinction through the transfer of adapted genes via hybrids mating with both
parental species, but extensive gene flow may alter the evolutionary trajectory
of the parental species and drive one or both to extinction. This collaborative
project is to collect genetic and ecological data in order to understand the
mechanisms underlying increasing hybrid abundance. The knowledge gained from
this research will help facilitate more strategic management of coral
populations under current and emerging threats to their survival. This project
includes integrated research and educational opportunities for high school,
undergraduate and graduate students, and a postdoctoral researcher. Students in
the United States Virgin Islands will take part in coral spawning research and
resource managers will receive training on acroporid reproduction to apply to
coral restoration techniques. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current models predict the
demise of reefs in the next 200 years due to increasing sea surface temperatures
and ocean acidification. It is thus essential to identify habitats, taxa and
evolutionary mechanisms that will allow some coral species to maintain their
role as foundation fauna. Hybridization can provide an avenue for adaptation to
changing conditions. Corals hybridize with some frequency and results may range
from the introduction of a few alleles into existing parent species via
introgression, to the birth of a new, perhaps better adapted genetic lineage.
The only widely accepted coral hybrid system consists of the once dominant but
now threatened Caribbean species, Acropora cervicornis and A. palmata. In the
past, hybrid colonies originating from natural crosses between elkhorn and
staghorn corals were rare, and evidence of hybrid reproduction was limited to
infrequent matings with the staghorn coral. Recent field observations suggest
that the hybrid is increasing and its ecological role is changing throughout the
Caribbean. These hybrids appear to be less affected by the disease that led to
the mass mortality of their parental species in recent decades. Hybrids are also
found thriving in shallow habitats with high temperatures and irradiance
suggesting they may be less susceptible to future warming scenarios. At the same
time, they are expanding into the deeper parental species habitats. Preliminary
genetic data indicate that hybrids are now mating with each other, demonstrating
the potential for the formation of a new species. Further, hybrids appear to be
capable of mating with both staghorn and elkhorn coral, perhaps leading to gene
flow between the parent species via the hybrid. Research is proposed to address
how the increase in hybridization and perhaps subsequent introgression will
affect the current ecological role and the future evolutionary trajectory of
Caribbean acroporids. Specifically, this collaborative project aims to answer
the following questions: 1) What is the historic rate, direction, and degree of
introgression across species ranges and genomes? Linkage block analysis based on
genome-wide SNP genotyping across three replicate hybrid zones will answer this
question. 2) What is the current extent and future potential of later generation
hybrid formation? Morphometric and genetic analyses combined with in vitro
fertilization assays will be used. 3) What mechanisms allow hybrids to thrive in
hot, shallow waters? A series of manipulative in situ and ex situ experiments
will determine whether biotic or abiotic factors favor hybrid survival in
shallow waters. 4) Are hybrids more disease resistant than the parentals
species? Disease transmission assays in reciprocal transplant experiments and
histological analysis to determine the extent of disease will be conducted. A
multidisciplinary approach will be taken that combines traditional and cutting
edge technology to provide a detailed analysis of the evolutionary ecology of
Caribbean corals.