* 1537720
* A Design Framework for Programmable Manufacturing of Customized Knitted Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,03/31/2020
* David Breen, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 03/31/2020
* USD 549,730.00

Knitting is the intermeshing of yarns into loops that leads to the creation of
fabrics. Fabrics knitted with several different yarns constitute a modern class
of advanced engineering materials. Additionally, computer-controlled knitting
offers great promise as a digital manufacturing technology because of the
ability to make novel materials from multiple yarn types and varying loop
patterns. Given the enormous flexibility of modern knitting equipment and the
variety of yarn materials currently available, knitted structures can now be
viewed as a versatile, programmable, multi-scale and microstructure-based
engineering material system that can be designed and manufactured to meet a wide
range of functional and mechanical requirements. While the current state of the
art in commercial knitting technology is quite capable of designing and
manufacturing a variety of materials for consumer clothing, many significant
technological gaps exist that prevent knitting from becoming a general process
for digital manufacturing. The critical barrier to the production of these
versatile material systems is the lack of validated comprehensive design tools
and accurate predictive modeling methods. This project will develop an
integrated design framework that addresses these barriers in order to enable the
programmable manufacturing of customized knitted materials. Developing advanced
technologies in this field has the potential to create new, revitalized economic
activity in an American industrial sector that has mostly known decline in
recent decades. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project has several technical
objectives. They are: a) the creation of a design framework that determines yarn
specifications and processing commands given the performance requirements for a
knitted material, b) the development of a data-driven algorithm for computing
inverse mappings from low-dimensional requirements space into high-dimensional
control data space that utilizes efficient nearest-neighbors search and
scattered data interpolation techniques to find viable design solutions for
knitted materials, c) the definition of an objective function capable of
determining if knitting design requirements have been fulfilled, d) the
utilization of information pathways that allow for an inverse-forward simulate-
manufacture-evaluate-validate feedback loop in the design process, and e) the
integration of design/simulation processes with the production, testing and
evaluation of actual materials to provide an accelerated, programmable
manufacturing capability for novel, customized knitted materials.