* 1537406
* Using Functional Gels and Surfaces to Understand and Control Microbial Activities
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Yan-Yeung Luk, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 08/31/2018
* USD 355,803.00

Microbes (bacteria and fungi) attach and reside on a wide range of materials
through their ability to change their surface molecules, and to form a film that
hosts a community of microorganisms. Understanding the interactions among
microbes and surfaces will allow for control of the attachment and adhesion of
microbes on surfaces, with the potential to bring new insight into mechanisms
for defeating unwanted film growth. This award supports the development of
materials and surfaces with chemistries that can be controlled at the resolution
of molecular bindings, by first understanding the chemical processes responsible
for the adhesion. This approach integrates organic chemistry, materials science,
and microbial biology, to achieve a common goal of understanding and controlling
microbial activities. The results can be used to help control and defeat
undesirable surface films, and to identify potential microbial surface molecules
for drug development for infectious diseases.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;To adapt and
reside on different man-made or animal host surfaces, microbes carry out phase
variations to change their surface molecules, and alter their activity to form
biofilms. To understand these complex biology-surface interactions with a
temporal and spatial control, this research will include synthesis of bioinert
hydrogels with a wide range of porous structures that present only active
ligands on the surfaces. The background of the gel will be engineered to prevent
all unwanted molecular interactions from the microbes (bacteria and fungi), and
thus isolating the specific binding events to the ligand presented on the
surface. This biocompatible materials approach will allow unambiguous
identification of (i) whether the ligand-receptor binding can trigger a specific
microbial activity, and (ii) whether a molecule can block a specific microbial
activity, and will also separate and isolate different types of stains or
phenotypes from a mixture of bacteria.