* 1537894
* Scalable Nanomanufacturing of Hierarchical Inorganic-Polymer Hybrid Electrodes for Next Generation High-Energy Lithium-Ion Batteries
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Guihua Yu, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 08/31/2019
* USD 322,421.00

Developing electrochemical energy storage devices with high energy and power
densities as well as long cycle life at an affordable cost still remains a major
scientific and technological challenge involving the fundamental chemistry and
properties of radically new electrode and electrolyte materials and their
scalable manufacturing for cost effectiveness. This award explores the scalable
manufacturing of a new class of high-energy battery electrodes that incorporate
functional nanostructured polymers with ultrahigh-capacity inorganic particles
for high performing next generation lithium-ion batteries. This award research
will provide a better fundamental understanding of chemical and electrochemical
properties of hybrid inorganic-organic materials, and significantly advance the
next generation of energy storage systems that are crucial to the renewable
energy future of our society. Moreover, fundamental knowledge and manufacturing
strategy gained will be useful for designing other electrochemical devices and
systems such as fuel cells, photoelectrochemical cells, and electrochemical
sensors. The education and outreach objective is to tightly integrate the
renewable energy-centered research efforts and results with graduate,
undergraduate, and K-12 education and to globally disseminate both research and
education outcomes. The integrated research and education in this project will
promote students, active learning and their excitement for sustainable energy
research and future engineering career, and increase critically-needed efforts
in education and workforce development related to sustainable energy.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;New approaches towards the development of novel electrode
materials with high capacity, low-cost, long cycle life and the ability to be
produced at large scale, are critically needed in order to significantly advance
the progress towards high energy/power density next-generation energy storage
systems. This project focuses on rational design and scalable solution-based
synthesis and device fabrication of a novel hierarchical battery electrode
system that synergistically integrate nanostructured conductive polymers with
inorganic particles to address fundamental challenges faced by ultrahigh-
capacity inorganic electrode materials. The approaches are focused on (i) design
and scalable synthesis of hierarchical inorganic-polymer electrodes (HIPE) with
tunable structures for greatly enhanced energy storage capabilities, (ii)
understanding their electronic and electrochemical properties, as well as
studying the critical design issues including scalability and manufacturability,
and (iii) fundamental investigation of electrochemical dynamics at the nanoscale
hybrid interface through microscopic characterizations and mechanistic
simulations. This research aimed from both scientific and engineering
perspective will establish a new class of hybrid battery electrode systems for
next-generation lithium battery technologies. The expected results will improve
the knowledge of structural design at the molecular level for optimized
electrochemical properties of these novel materials, and provide a deeper
understanding of electrochemical dynamics at the nanoscale hybrid inorganic-
organic interface. The partnership of academic researchers with national
laboratory and technology company will help focus this fundamental research on
practical issues and accelerate the nanomanufacturing scale-up.