* 1537898
* Collaborative Research: Active Statistical Learning: Ensembles, Manifolds, and Optimal Experimental Design
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Eugene Tuv, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 08/31/2018
* USD 175,000.00

In numerous industries such as manufacturing, health care or energy production,
current sensor technology can generate enormous quantities of measurements of an
object at low cost. Each measurement consists of several instances of
interrelated variables, and the goal is to use the data to build a computer
model that permits one to predict the class of an object (such as the health
condition of a patient or the quality of a manufactured part). Along with the
sensor data, the class labels for some objects are needed to train the computer
model. While the sensor variables can frequently be obtained rapidly and
inexpensively (e.g., medical images or chemical analyses) the class label
associated with each object might require human effort that is time-consuming
and expensive. Therefore, care should be taken to select the objects to label
that are most informative for building the predictive computer model. Often one
selects objects iteratively, where the class labels from the previously selected
batch guides the next batch of objects to label. This is the purpose of a so-
called active learning strategy. The purpose of this research is to find new
active learning methods that accelerate model building and provide better
predictions in systems where large datasets of attribute measurements are
available. This will result in more efficient and productive systems that will
benefit the U.S. economy and society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Existing active
learning methods are often based on strong assumptions for the joint
input/output distribution or use a distance-based approach. These methods are
susceptible to noise in the input space, assume numerical inputs only, and often
work poorly in high dimensions. In applications, data sets are often large,
noisy, contain missing values and mixed variable types. In this research, a non-
parametric approach to the active learning problem is proposed to address these
challenges. The algorithm is based on a batch diversification strategy applied
to an ensemble of decision trees. A novel active learning strategy that
considers the geometric structure of the manifold where the unlabeled data
resides will also be considered. The geometric properties of the data space may
result in more informative active learning solutions. This is a collaborative
effort between Arizona State University, Pennsylvania State University, and
Intel Corporation with complementary expertise in machine learning and optimal
design. The participation of Intel will help ensure the successful dissemination
and broad applicability of the results.