* 1537846
* High Performance Machining of Brittle Materials by Controlled Crack Propagation
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Shuting Lei, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 08/31/2019
* USD 317,159.00

Precision parts made from a wide variety of brittle materials have broad
applications in healthcare, biomedical, energy, photonics, and automotive
industries. A big challenge with high speed machining of brittle materials is to
achieve high surface quality. A major problem encountered in machining these
materials is random crack propagation into the workpiece, resulting in
surface/subsurface cracks and thus strength degradation of the machined parts.
Existing techniques rely on polishing, a very slow and costly process, to
achieve high surface quality. This award supports fundamental research to
provide needed knowledge for the development of a novel machining process to
overcome this main limitation. The new process will enable high efficiency
machining of brittle materials without compromising part quality. The results
from this research will generate economic and societal benefits for the U.S.
This research involves several disciplines including manufacturing, laser and
optics, fracture mechanics, and biomaterials. The multi-disciplinary nature will
help enlist underrepresented groups to conduct research and thus positively
impact engineering education.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The objectives of this
research are twofold. First, the relationship between femtosecond laser
parameters (e.g., pulse energy, spot size, number of pulses) and microcrack
geometry (e.g., crack length, crack orientation, crack gap) will be established.
This objective will be achieved by performing laser micromachining experiments
to generate seed cracks inside the workpiece material. Knowledge gained from
this research will be used to inject seed cracks into the cutting zone of a
workpiece. Second, the relationship between process parameters (e.g., machining
conditions, tool geometry, crack geometry) and part quality (e.g.,
surface/subsurface damage, surface roughness) will be determined. This objective
will be accomplished by conducting machining experiments, assisted by numerical
modeling, and assessing part quality using surface profilometery, optical
microscopy, scanning electron microscopy, and three-dimensional optical
profilometry. This basic research will advance the knowledge base in machining
brittle materials and enable new process developments based on controlled crack
propagation.