* 1537827
* Confined Self Assembly of Semiconducting Polymers in Nanofibers
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2016,09/30/2021
* Vibha Kalra, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Wells
* 09/30/2021
* USD 373,125.00

Ninety percent of the world's energy is derived from non-renewable carbon
resources, resulting in 32 billion metric tons of carbon dioxide emissions every
year. The objective of this project is to investigate the morphology within
novel polymeric materials for use in plastic (or organic) solar cells that
convert clean and abundant solar energy to usable electricity. Organic solar
cells are particularly attractive due to their low cost compared to the
conventional silicon-based solar cell devices. However, their low efficiency has
been a key impediment in their broad deployment. Precise control over material
structure between the different semiconducting functional components of plastic
solar cells is critical for efficient conversion of solar energy to electricity.
The novel polymers in this work will be processed in the form of nanofibers,
which will not only allow us to better control and tailor these structures at
the nanometer length scale for enhanced device efficiency, but will also enable
light and breathable smart fabrics with integrated solar cells. This project
will provide one graduate and several undergraduate students with an
interdisciplinary educational experience in nanomaterials and renewable energy.

The specific objective of this project is to combine experiments and simulations
to investigate self-assembly of conjugated rod-rod block copolymers within
electrospun nanofibers (diameter = 50-500 nanometers). Owing to the rapid
solvent evaporation and short residence time during electrospinning (on the
order of milliseconds), the microstructure in the initial solution is likely to
have a significant influence on the final assembly in as-made nanofibers.
Therefore, the role of each of the three stages of nanofiber fabrication
(solution phase, drying/solvent evaporation and the post fabrication annealing)
in defining the final hierarchical self-assembly structures will be
investigated. Multi-scale simulations will be conducted to understand the
thermodynamic and kinetic principles that direct self-assembly in confined
systems. Optical property and performance characterizations of the materials
will be conducted in plastic solar cells in the final stage of the project. This
work will serve as the first ever study on self-assembly of conjugated block
copolymers in nanofibers, with the potential to develop wearable smart fabrics.