* 1537169
* Collaborative Research: Evolution of South Atlantic Oceanic Crust: A Seismic Transect
* GEO,OCE
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2019
* Gail Christeson, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Candace Major
* 07/31/2019
* USD 389,405.00

Although the nature of oceanic crust has been studied for decades, many
questions remain unanswered, owing to a paucity of data from crust formed more
than a few million years ago. With ocean basins containing crust up to 200 m.y.
in age, the history of Earth's largest tectonic plates remain to be studied. Key
questions relate to chemical exchange between the crust and ocean-- does this
continue beyond 7 m.y. or not, and, if so, for how long? Recent work shows that
irregular seafloor on older crust can be the site of geothermal circulation that
transfers material from crust to ocean. Another fundamental question is how long
does an oceanic spreading segment behave in the same way- in terms of amount of
magmatic activity versus tectonic rifting?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will use seismic imaging to measure the properties of the crust from the Mid-
Atlantic Ridge, where new crust forms today, out to 70 m.y. old crust on the
western flank of the spreading center. These data will answer questions about
oceanic crustal evolution and they will provide information about where future
seafloor drilling by the Integrated Ocean Discovery Program could be safely
accomplished, to address questions about the evolution in ocean chemistry over
long time scales. The field experiment will serve as a training platform for
graduate students and early career scientists. Former veterans in a university
network will be involved in aspects of the
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Seismic and drill core data from crust accreted
at less than 30 mm/yr, or older than about 8 Ma are particularly sparse. This
precludes assessment of whether oceanic crustal Layer 2A seismic velocities
reach mature values in 7.5 Ma, or instead do they continue to evolve to older
ages? Its not possible to know if the seismic structure of slow-spread crust is
uniform in a magmatic segment, or if heterogeneity exists and is associated with
a past change in spreading rate. This project provides geophysical data for a
continuous characterization of slow-to-intermediate spread oceanic crust from
the active spreading center to crust formed up to ~70 Ma, including &gt;1500 km
of seismic reflection data and collocated ocean bottom seismometer refraction
data at 5 sites targeted for future scientific drilling. The resulting data will
address questions about the evolution of oceanic crust on million-year
timescales, the evolution and stability of slow-spreading ridges over time and,
via future drilling, hydrothermal contributions to global geochemical cycles.