* 1537284
* Collaborative Research: Navigating through space in turbulence tubes: Copepod responses to Burgers' vortex
* GEO,OCE
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2020
* Jeannette Yen, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 07/31/2020
* USD 348,423.00

Copepods are ubiquitous animals in marine environments and play a critically-
important function in the food web of the world's oceans. The ability of a
copepod to sense fluid motion provides an advantage for critical survival
tactics such as finding food, finding mates, and avoiding predators. This
project will examine the capability of copepods to detect turbulent flow. A
turbulent-like flow will be mimicked in a laboratory aquarium as a small vortex
(i.e., swirling motion like a tornado), and copepod swimming behavior will be
observed in and around the vortex. The goal is to understand the variations in
the sensory ecology of three species of copepods with three representative
sensor arrays to better explain their temporal and spatial distribution in the
ocean in response to turbulence conditions. The project also has a strong
education and outreach plan. It will provide interdisciplinary training for
graduate and undergraduate students in fields such as engineering, biology, and
computational sciences. Further, research results will provide context for
planned outreach efforts to educate the general public at local high schools and
aquariums.

The project will deconstruct the turbulence-copepod interaction by performing
detailed kinematics analysis of swimming in three species of copepods in and
around a laboratory realization of a Burgers' vortex that mimics in situ
turbulent vortices in the dissipation range of scales. The goal is to test the
hypothesis that the copepods Acartia tonsa, Temora longicornis, and Calanus
finmarchicus detect hydrodynamic cues related to vortices in turbulent flows and
actively respond via changes in swimming kinematics. Using a custom designed and
calibrated apparatus, a turbulent-like vortex will be created in the laboratory.
By holding the turbulent vortex stable in space, cameras will be focused on a
small region of the feature to record the animal behavior relative to well-
quantified flow characteristics. The approach has the advantage of eliminating
the time-varying and stochastic nature of turbulent flows that make such
mechanistic understanding so challenging to achieve. Hypotheses will address
questions about the influence of swimming style, setal array architecture, and
the interaction of chemical and hydrodynamical cues on the turbulence-copepod
interaction. Specifically, the investigators will examine how copepod species
with different sensory structures and swimming orientation respond to a stable
well-defined laboratory stimulus to determine how copepods exploit the shape and
orientation of turbulent features. The species of copepods chosen for this work
provide a range of sensory architectures, swimming orientations, sizes, and mate
tracking abilities.