* 1537435
* Collaborative Research: The effect of sand fraction and event evolution on fine-sediment transport and the depositional record in wave-supported mud flows
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Andrea Ogston, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Candace Major
* 08/31/2020
* USD 509,562.00

Part 1&lt;br/&gt;Offshore delivery of fine sediment on the continental shelf via
wave supported gravity currents (WSGC) is a key component of sediment transport
fromsource to sink, yet it remains poorly understood. Current models of this
process focus on suspension and transport of silt and clay sized particles.
However, recent laboratory experiments show that even a small amount of sand in
the sediment layer may exert a dominant control on the dynamics of the transport
layer. The proposed effort will investigate the effect of sand fraction on
sediment transport in WSGC, particularly, the transition between transport
modes, the downslope transport and the depositional signatures. The objectives
will be addressed using a comprehensive series of laboratory experiments, 3D
turbulence-resolving numerical simulations, and re-analysis of existing field
data from WSGC on active continental margins. The work is relevant to a broad
range of fields, from fluid mechanics and water resource engineering, to studies
of biogeochemical cycles. Outreach include introduction of the relevance of
sedimentary processes to K-12 students with hand-on experiments in the
university labs, and invited presentations to local schools. Undergraduate and
graduate students will be involved. In addition to journal papers and conference
presentations, open-source codes will be disseminated through Community Surface
Dynamics Modeling System (CSDMS) framework.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part
2&lt;br/&gt;Offshore delivery of fine sediment on the continental shelf via wave
supported gravity currents (WSGC) is a key component of sediment source to sink,
yet it remains poorly understood. Current models of this process focus on
suspension and transport of silt and clay sized particles. However, recent
laboratory experiments show that even a small amount of sand in the sediment
layer may exert a dominant control on the dynamics of the transport layer. The
proposed effort investigates the effect of sand fraction on sediment transport
in WSGC, particularly, the transition between transport modes, the downslope
transport and the depositional signatures. The project is formed around two main
objectives: 1) Determine the role of the sand fraction in controlling dynamics
and transport within WSGC and the bed deposits associated with them. 2) Evaluate
impacts of event evolution (surging and waning of a storm) on the sediment and
flow dynamics within a gravity flow and the resulting depositional signatures
These will be addressed using a comprehensive series of laboratory experiments,
3D turbulence-resolving numerical simulations, and re-analysis of existing field
data from WSGC on active continental margins. The work is relevant to a broad
range of fields, from fluid mechanics and water resource engineering, to studies
of biogeochemical cycles. Outreach include introduction of the relevance of
sedimentary processes to K-12 students with hand-on experiments in the
university labs, and invited presentations to local schools. Undergraduate and
graduate students will be involved. In addition to journal papers and conference
presentations, open-source codes will be disseminated through Community Surface
Dynamics Modeling System (CSDMS) framework.