* 1537491
* Influence of Particle Size Distribution on Density State of Soil
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Ching Chang, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 07/31/2019
* USD 279,747.00

Soil generally consists of particles of different sizes, and particle size
distribution is the main factor that affects the mechanical properties of soil.
However, in soil mechanics, the influence of particle size distribution on
mechanical properties is only considered in an emperical manner. There is no
analytical method that can explicitly account for the effect of particle size
distribution. Thus, the ability to analyze the effect of particle size
distribution is an important step in the understanding of mechanical behavior
due to the heterogeneity of soil. This award supports fundamental research to
develop the necessary knowledge for modeling the effect of particle size
distribution. Results from this research will be useful for analyzing
geotechnical engineering problems, such as liquefaction of silty sand, land
slides of weathered soil, levee failure due to erosion of fine particles, and
dam instability due to grain crushing. The method developed in this research can
help reducing the future risks of failures, developing more robust design
methodologies, and better targeted mitigation works. Therefore, results from
this research has potential benefits to the U.S. economy and society. The resuts
and activities of this research are incorporated into courses on soil mechanics
contributing to the integration of engineering education and research.

The main goal of this research is to develop a theory of a supplementary
descriptor for the packing structure of soil based on its particle size
distribution. Using this supplementary descriptor, a method is developed for
predicting the density state of soil with arbitrary particle size distributions.
To aid in the theoretical development, a series of numerical simulation tests
using discrete element method and a series of laboratory tests are performed on
soils with various types of particle size distribution. The intellectual merit
of this research is twofold: (1) This investigation is based on a novel
approach, which can mathematically categorize the packing structures of a soil
based on its particle size distribution. This offers a rational way to predict
the density state and other mechanical properties, (2) This investigation
provides a useful methodology to analyze the behavior of heterogeneous material,
which pushes forward the knowledge boundary of continuum mechanics.