* 1537294
* Collaborative Research: Science and Engineering of Topological Acoustics and Mechanics
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,10/31/2016
* Alexander Khanikaev, CUNY Queens College
* Standard Grant
* kara peters
* 10/31/2016
* USD 227,043.00

Propagation, interference and scattering are basic manifestations of the wave
nature of acoustic and other mechanical waves. For centuries, humans have used
these properties to control and manipulate sound to a certain degree, for
instance to realize musical instruments, music halls and whispering galleries.
However, a new principle of organization of matter based on advanced topological
concepts has been recently discovered in condensed matter physics. Scientists
working in different branches of physics and engineering are motivated by these
concepts. By exploiting topological constraints in the dispersion of suitably
engineered composite material systems, it is possible to realize highly nonlocal
responses with unusual stability to perturbations in their wave propagation
characteristics. The aim of this project is to translating these concepts to
acoustic and mechanical systems. The goals are to redefine the understanding of
wave phenomena and to dramatically expand the ability to manipulate mechanical
and acoustic waves. Results from this research will expand the engineering
toolkit, improving the architecture of mechanical and acoustic devices, for
instance by reducing undesirable interactions between different components,
including transducers, receivers, and resonant elements. This approach will
endow mechanical wave propagation with topological protection, enabling one-way
guiding along arbitrarily shaped pathways without back-reflection, and making it
robust to defects and disorder. Since this project bridges several disciplines,
including material science, physics and engineering, its multi-disciplinary
character will have positive educational impact. The project will widen the
background and improve the preparation of students involved into this project,
and, due to the broad overlap with diverse disciplines, including engineering of
music and sound, it will broaden participation of underrepresented minorities in
research and education.

The idea of applying the concepts of topological order to sound and mechanical
waves opens venues in a multitude of scientific fields of research, from basic
science to applied physics and engineering. The research plan, inspired by the
unique properties of topological robustness discovered in quantum systems,
envisions topological acoustic waves that can be engineered in artificial
acoustic lattices and synthetic elastic media, and that are immune to unwanted
scattering and back-reflection caused by imperfections in device fabrication or
impedance mismatch. The approaches to topological order for sound and mechanical
waves exploit two advanced concepts based on synthetic gauge fields. The first
approach relies on breaking time-reversal symmetry by applying an angular
momentum bias based on mechanical or spatio-temporal modulation, emulating the
effect of a dc magnetic field. The second approach relies on the principle of
synthetic spin-orbital coupling, acting on a pseudo-spin engineered in
mechanical systems with preserved time-reversal symmetry. Building upon these
two mechanisms, the engineering of acoustic systems and devices with one-way and
helical edge transport is advanced. Thanks to the inherent robustness against
local defects and disorder, a variety of novel devices with topological
protection will be engineered to steer sound and mechanical waves along
arbitrary pathways in two and three dimensions, leading to increased bandwidth,
multiplexing, reconfigurability and novel architectures for acoustic systems.