* 1537701
* Collaborative Research: Exploring Dynamic Complex Behaviors in Many-Degree-of-Freedom, Coupled Micro- and Nano-systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2019
* D. Dane Quinn, University of Akron
* Continuing Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 08/31/2019
* USD 159,524.00

Resonant micro- and nano-electromechanical systems provide unique opportunities
in application spaces ranging from chemical sensing to signal processing due to
their superior sensitivity and selectivity metrics in relation to more
conventional systems. Unfortunately, despite three decades of research efforts,
these devices still suffer from significant limitations on throughput, or on the
amount of information they can sense/process. One attractive solution to this
constraint is to design large arrays of small-scale, coupled resonators, and
subsequently exploit the inherently complex behavior that can arise within such
systems. However, this technical solution presents difficulties in terms of both
analysis and predictive design, especially with an increasing number of
individual resonators. Classical engineering approaches tend to break down when
applied to many-degree-of-freedom systems, particularly in the presence of noise
and device-to-device variations. This project will provide a new framework for
understanding various collective and emergent behaviors exhibited by these
resonant micro/nano systems, which could lead to new functionalities that
inspire the development of new sensors, such as artificial "noses" (multi-
analyte chemical sensors), filters, mechanically operating signal processing
units as well as artificial memory devices based on mechanical operation. The
project leverages modeling, analysis, and predictive design within a framework
that will be validated through microscale experimentation. In addition, the
project will integrate its research into the core undergraduate curriculum,
using engineering applications to motivate beginning students, with a goal of
increasing retention in engineering programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The creation
of a new modeling, analysis, and design framework for coupled, resonant
micro/nanosystems will enable efficient analysis strategies capable of
characterizing the linear and nonlinear dynamics of large, coupled
micro/nanoresonator arrays (comprising of hundreds, thousands, and millions of
constituent resonators) operating in the presence of noise, parametric
uncertainty, and accompanying electronics. The research team will validate these
analytical techniques through targeted microscale experimentation with locally-
(mechanically) and globally- (electromagnetically) coupled arrays and determine
the influence of unintentional parameter variations, noise, and the random
failure of constituent elements on observed dynamics. The analysis will be based
on integro-differential models for the many-degree-of-freedom systems that will
allow for arbitrarily large numbers of constitutive resonators, together with
accompanying perturbative analysis methods, leading to a predictive description
of the coupled, global dynamics. The award will also support the development of
new topical modules emphasizing the relationship between foundational
mathematical topics and engineering analysis and design, as well as the
deployment of these within the core mathematics curriculum at The University of
Akron, which is guided by the desire to enhance retention and matriculation
rates within engineering programs. Finally, new course materials and streaming
video lectures associated with coupled micro/nanoresonator arrays will be
developed and distributed (via open access channels). These materials will
explore the systems? use in practical application.