* 1537514
* Modeling Coupled Dynamic Processes in Landfills: Holistic Long-Tern Performance Management to Improve Sustainability
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Krishna Reddy, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 08/31/2019
* USD 356,431.00

Many engineered landfills that accept municipal solid waste are classified as
"dry tomb landfills" because waste degrades very slowly due to low moisture
conditions. As an alternative, bioreactor landfills have emerged to counter
those conditions. In bioreactor landfills, leachate recirculation systems
increase moisture and accelerate degradation. The performance of bioreactor
landfills results from coupled hydro-bio-mechanical processes; however, industry
lacks a comprehensive, holistic mathematical model that considers and
effectively analyzes these coupled processes in landfills. This project will
develop a new coupled mathematical tool to enable the design and operation of
stable, effective and sustainable engineered landfills, thereby minimizing long-
term risks to the surrounding environment and public. The tool will enable
practitioners and regulators to predict the highly complex landfill
stabilization period, and allow for the planning of beneficial reuse of landfill
space, such as recreational facilities, by accurately accounting for a
differential settlement and stabilization period. With controlled, predictable,
rapid municipal solid waste decomposition and a reduced stabilization period:
(a) non-degradable municipal solid waste may be mined and processed, reducing
the amount of landfill mass encapsulated within a landfill; (b) post-closure
monitoring can be shortened and associated expenditures considerably reduced;
and (c) concerns about the long-term performance of geosynthetic liners and
related environmental risks can be addressed. This research involves multiple
disciplines, including geoenvironmental engineering, sustainable engineering,
biology, and computational mechanics. The multi-disciplinary research will
provide a unique opportunity to underrepresented groups to participate in
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed modeling tool will combine and
simultaneously solve a two-phase flow model, a large-strain explicit mechanical
model, and a first-order decay biodegradation model. The model will account for
concurrent changes in waste properties to predict coupled processes in
landfills. Specifically, the project scope will include: (a) development of a
new mathematical model that can account for heterogeneous waste, two-phase flow,
and coupled hydro-bio-mechanical processes, and effectively predict spatial and
temporal behavior of landfills, (b) model validation with laboratory and field
studies to attain a confidence level in the accuracy of the modeling results,
(c) prediction of spatial and temporal landfill settlement, slope stability and
shear response of liner systems due to coupled processes, (d) assessment of the
major system variables that control the performance of landfills based on
probabilistic analysis, and (e) application of the tool for forensic
investigation of past landfill failures. The project will provide a tool for
designing stable and effective engineered landfills and optimizing existing
landfills using coupled hydro-bio-mechanical processes.