* 1537222
* Time Effects in Sand: Delayed Micro-Cracking, Contact Fatigue, and Aging
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Radoslaw Michalowski, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 08/31/2019
* USD 423,585.00

The strength of soils can change over time, and therefore affect the performance
of structures resting on them. Silica sand, after a disturbance caused by
natural events such as earthquakes, or after compaction by vibratory means, can
exhibit a weakening-like behavior. However, a gradual improvement of strength is
observed in time following the disturbance. There is no consensus among
researchers as to what the key causes of such behavior are, and this research
addresses some of the fundamental questions regarding time effects. The
immediate impact of this research will be on the broad area of physical
infrastructure; it will allow for better planning of construction processes and
more educated predictions of civil infrastructure behavior, and thus will
benefit society at large. This research will also have a broader impact, for
instance in chemical and pharmaceutical industries,where operations involve
powders and granular materials. Finally, material aging is an important process
in extraterrestrial environments. Aging and contact fatigue caused by thermal
cycling is believed to be responsible for the elevated density of the near-
surface layer of lunar soil (regolith). The knowledge of this phenomenon will be
important in planning for exploration of the Moon and Mars environments.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is to address the fundamental issue: what
causes time-dependent behavior in silica sand? A hypothesis is explored that
identifies fracturing of microscopic textural features on grain surfaces at
inter-granular contacts as the key cause of this behavior. This fracturing does
not stop at the end of the loading process, but continues at constant load, with
a decaying rate. Experimental evidence will be gathered from tests on individual
contacts. Custom-designed testing equipment will be constructed. Sand grain
surfaces will be characterized using atomic force microscopy and scanning
electron microscopy. The process of delayed fracturing finds its justification
in the rate process concept, and it is expected to answer some of the
fundamental questions regarding factors affecting crack propagation and healing.
Mathematical description of the contact fatigue process will be sought through
constructing a model with individual grains comprised of sub-particles fused
together with bonds capable of carrying both forces and moments. Cracking in the
model will be simulated by the stress corrosion process causing debonding of
sub-particles within the contact regions between grains. The model will mimic
the physical behavior of contacts in silica sand.