* 1537394
* Stochastic Optimization Models and Methods for the Sharing Economy
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* David Shmoys, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 08/31/2018
* USD 200,000.00

The US economy is undergoing a dramatic change with the introduction of a wave
of industries based on the sharing of resources. Prominent examples include
vehicle-sharing services like ZipCar and Motivate, "taxi-like" services like
Uber and Lyft, and Airbnb. Such services rely not just on real-time information
flow between dispersed users, but also on ensuring high reliability levels to
ensure that users remain loyal to the service. For example, in vehicle sharing
it is important that subscribers are able to obtain vehicles when and where they
want them with high reliability. This proposal explores stochastic optimization
models and methodology for logistical questions associated with the sharing
economy, with particular emphasis on vehicle sharing. Central questions relate
to fleet sizing and fleet deployment across a city. These questions are
complicated by the heavily time-dependent and stochastic nature of vehicle
usage.

A suite of models and methods for tackling these problems is proposed that
includes both long-term planning methodology for capacity sizing and short-term
planning methodology for near real-time alignment of supply and demand of
vehicles. The long-term planning methods are based on constructing stochastic
models that simultaneously accurately model vehicle-sharing operations and
provably possess mathematical structure that can be exploited through efficient
optimization techniques, particularly integer linear programming. These
properties will be established through combinatorial arguments to establish a
set of sufficient conditions that allow one to apply linear programming on
problems that are defined on integer lattices (since the number of vehicles at a
location, and the capacity of locations are integral). These sufficient
conditions will then be established for the stochastic models in question
through the use of stochastic coupling techniques. This combination of
combinatorial and coupling arguments may be broadly applicable beyond problems
arising in the sharing economy, as evidenced by a plethora of similarly
structured problems in a repository of simulation-optimization test problems. In
addition to these long-term planning tools, short-term tools will be developed
that enable a near real-time response to conditions on the ground. In vehicle-
sharing systems, such tools would guide the repositioning of vehicles to better
align with current and anticipated demand, using the results from long-term
planning tools as a guide. A unifying principle in the proposed work is to
develop methods that optimize expected performance under usual operating
conditions to ensure efficient operation, while hedging against worst-case
events to provide an important level of robustness to unexpected developments.
The goal of this is work is provide practical solutions supported by new
theoretical results that establish both strong average-case and worst-case
guarantees.