* 1537196
* Additive Manufacturing of Conformal Solar Cells via Xenon-Light-Assisted Sintering
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2015,01/31/2018
* Rajiv Malhotra, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Steve Schmid
* 01/31/2018
* USD 299,999.00

Solar cells that conform to the shape of a three-dimensional object are
desirable as a renewable energy source for self-sustaining devices (e.g., smart
windows in buildings, and sensors for monitoring structural integrity in
automobiles and airplanes). The conventional route for manufacturing conformal
solar cells is to fabricate their functional layers onto a flexible intermediary
polymer sheet, and attach the sheet onto the desired three-dimensional object.
During attachment, the sheet is deformed so that it conforms to the object's
three-dimensional shape. This deformation of the sheet frequently causes
cracking of the cell's functional layers and a loss in the cell's functionality.
This award supports scientific investigations on a new additive manufacturing
process for fabricating conformal solar cells onto a three-dimensional object,
without using any intermediary polymer sheet. Results from this research will
enable wider use of solar cells as a renewable energy source for self-sustaining
devices in energy, communications, aerospace, and automotive
industries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to develop the new additive
manufacturing process for conformal solar cells by integrating inkjet deposition
and xenon-light-assisted nanoparticle sintering. The research objective is to
understand the interaction between physio-chemical mechanisms (i.e., optically
induced nanoparticle heating, temperature rise induced mass transport between
nanoparticles, and mass transport induced chemical reactions) that underlie the
relationship between nanoparticle characteristics (size and stoichiometry) and
sintered material properties (density and chemical composition). A physics-based
model will be developed by coupling optical heating of nanoparticles (via
electromagnetic Finite Element Analysis), nanoscale mass transfer and reaction
kinetics (using analytical models), and mesoscale evolution of temperature and
stress (via mesoscale Finite Element Analysis of sintering). Certain model
parameters (e.g., nanoparticle size distribution and melting points) will be
calibrated by measuring nanoparticle characteristics using calorimetry,
spectrophotometry, and spectroscopy. To validate the model, nanoparticles with
varying characteristics will be sintered using the new process, and sintered
material properties (measured using electron microscopy, X-ray diffraction, and
infrared imaging) will be compared to model predictions. This validated model
will be used to predict the effects of nanoparticle characteristics on sintered
material properties, and on key indicators of physio-chemical mechanisms during
the process (e.g., rate of temperature rise of deposited nanoparticles,
shrinkage and stresses in deposited nanoparticles, and ratio of unreacted
material to material with changed phase in deposited nanoparticles).