* 1537055
* CONFERENCE PROPOSAL: Eighth International Conference on Fluvial Hydraulics: River Flow 2016
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2015,10/31/2016
* George Constantinescu, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Torgersen
* 10/31/2016
* USD 23,967.00

This project will provide a forum for presentations and discussions on fluvial
hydraulics that will foster interdisciplinary research, collaboration and rapid
dissemination of latest findings. It will provide an opportunity to discuss how
novel methods and techniques can be used interchangeably in various fields of
fluvial hydraulics. The conference will also address broader themes dealing with
the societal impacts of rivers. As such, this conference will help increase
public awareness of the importance of rivers for the society. By facilitating
the attendance of graduate students and young career scientists, the program
support is directed principally at its outreach and educational contributions.
Several 1-day Master Classes and Short Courses will be organized and led by
recognized international experts on well-focused topics in river mechanics,
morphodynamics, transport processes and eco-hydrology/river restoration, as well
as flood prediction and mitigation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
partially fund specific outreach and education aspects of the 8th International
Conference of Fluvial Hydraulics to be held in Saint Louis, Missouri July 11-16
2016. This meeting historically has attracted scientists and engineers with an
environmental hydraulics and environmental fluid mechanics&lt;br/&gt;background,
as well as scientists whose major focus areas include watershed hydrology,
turbulence&lt;br/&gt;and mixing processes, sediment transport, geomorphology,
geology, geography, freshwater plant&lt;br/&gt;and fish biology, and river
ecology and sustainability. This is the major international meeting in the area
of river processes and fluvial hydraulics. This will be the first time the
meeting is held in the U.S. The conference is co-organized by IIHR Hydroscience
&amp; Engineering, the University of Iowa, the Ven Te Chow Hydrosystems
Laboratory of the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, and the Saint
Louis University, in partnership with the National Great Rivers Research and
Education Center at Alton, Illinois. The main objective of the conference is to
provide a forum for exchanging ideas and discussions on the latest advances in
experimental, theoretical, and computational tools in the field of fluvial
hydraulics. A selected group of recognized international experts and one leader
of an US governmental agency playing a major role in national projects aimed at
flood protection will be invited to present plenary talks