* 1537768
* EAGER: Leveling the Digital Playing Field for the Job Seeker
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Raquel Hill, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 08/31/2018
* USD 289,786.00

This project aims to assess how online data impacts the hiring process. In an
ideal situation, one might imagine that employers hire the most skilled
applicant, but sociological research indicates that this may not be the case. A
job applicant's similarity to the interviewer in class background and class-
based leisure activities often matters as much or more to employers than a job
applicant's skills or work experience. The ability of a recruiter or employer to
learn such information from seemingly unrelated data has led researchers to
express concerns about privacy, job relevance, and the potential for
discrimination. This is the first stage in a larger project that aims to
illuminate how online information impacts the ability of job seekers to find
employment in post-recession United States. The project creates a framework for
identifying systematic patterns of discrimination in regionally specific job
markets, and also provide a fuller picture of precisely when in the hiring
process are certain forms of discrimination likely to take place (upon
submission of resume, at interview stage, and so on). In addition, the collected
data will enable job seekers to discover how online information affects their
employability, and aid the development of strategies to align online data and
professional profiles. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers will develop a
novel mixed-methods framework to better understand the hiring process and study
hiring discrimination by combining ethnographic studies of employers and
companies that aggregate applicant profiles; surveys of applicants' background,
skillset, and job-seeking history; online profile aggregation; and traditional
data mining techniques. This project will contribute to the understanding of how
employment works in the United States, and the types of online information that
may limit employability. The problem will be addressed across populations that
have varying demographic profiles and skill sets, and whose primary industries
vary greatly. The proposed analysis will capture regionally specific hiring
practices and reveal insights into the kinds of demographic indicators that work
for or against job seekers in different regions.