* 1537372
* Stable Isotopic Constraints on Nitrogen Transformations in Low and High Temperature Hydrothermal Fluids
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Scott Wankel, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Candace Major
* 08/31/2018
* USD 379,746.00

Part 1&lt;br/&gt;This project will address deficiencies in our understanding of
Nitrogen transformations under hydrothermal conditions with implications for the
fate of bioavailable Nitrogen in the modern subsurface biosphere and of reduced
Nitrogen on pre-biotic Earth. Through the PIs the project will advance the
utility of Nitrogen isotopic composition in active submarine hydrothermal
systems. Three hypotheses will be tested concerning: the reaction temperature
and redox state of hydrothermal reaction zones; NH4+ in high temperature vent
fluids; and NH4+ and NO3- in low-temperature vent fluids. To address these
hypotheses, the PI's plan combined experimental and observational approaches.
Well-constrained laboratory experiments will be conducted to determine operative
reaction pathways and associated N isotopic fraction during redox dependent
reactions involving dissolved N species under hydrothermal conditions. In
addition, measurements will be made in high and low temperature hydrothermal
vent fluids from existing samples spanning a range of hydrothermal environments
to constrain abiotic and microbially mediated processes that influence the
abundance of aqueous N species in submarine hot springs. The broader impacts
consist of educational opportunities for students at various levels.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part 2&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to address existing
deficiencies in our understanding of nitrogen transformations under hydrothermal
conditions with implications for the fate of bioavailable nitrogen in the modern
subsurface biosphere and of reduced nitrogen on pre-biotic Earth. Through the
examination of the controls on reaction pathways, rates, and associated stable
isotope systematics, this project will advance the utility of nitrogen isotopic
composition in active submarine hydrothermal systems, and help to constrain
geologic records of nitrogen isotopic composition. This research is guided by
the hypotheses that 1) reaction temperature and redox state of hydrothermal
reaction zones regulate the geochemical conversion of nitrate (NO3-) and
possibly dinitrogen (N2) to ammonium, that 2) the stable nitrogen isotopic
composition of NH4+ in high temperature vent fluids will record the relative
roles of these reaction processes and that 3) variations in the abundance and
isotopic composition of NH4+ and NO3- in low-temperature vent fluids in concert
with their corresponding high temperature endmember source fluids can be used to
constrain the nature and extent of subsurface biological processes. To address
these hypotheses, the PI?s plan combined experimental and observational
approaches. Well-constrained laboratory experiments will be conducted to
determine operative reaction pathways and associated N isotopic fraction during
redox dependent reactions involving dissolved N species under hydrothermal
conditions. In addition, the abundance and N (and O) isotopic composition o NH4+
(and NO3-) will be measured from high and low temperature hydrothermal vent
fluids from a rich archive of samples spanning a range of hydrothermal
environments to constrain abiotic and microbially mediated processes that
influence the abundance of aqueous N species in submarine hot springs. The
broader impacts consist of educational opportunities for students at various
levels.