* 1537715
* Collaborative Research: A Combustion-Powered, Flapping-Wing Micro Air Vehicle
* ENG,CMMI
* 11/01/2015,10/31/2018
* Robert Wood, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Irina Dolinskaya
* 10/31/2018
* USD 225,849.00

This project will demonstrate an insect-sized flying robot powered by
combustion, with a hard exoskeleton and integrated soft actuators. The premise
is that structure, propulsion, snd control inspired by the insect
musculoskeletal system will produce more efficient and robust microrobots. The
analogy becomes even more clear with the realization that, like most animals,
insects chemically burn glucose (a hydrocarbon) for muscle actuation.
Conservative estimates suggest that the use of combustion to power flying
microrobots will allow untethered and autonomous operation for greater than 30
minutes in idealized conditions, enabling vastly more effective application to
search and rescue, inspection of infrastructure, and distributed sensor
networks. In addition, this project will have broad impacts in education,
harnessing children's natural interest in insect biology towards a STEM outcome
of understanding robotics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The combustion of hydrocarbons
can have up to fifty times the volumetric energy density of lithium polymer
batteries and is a potential power source for untethered robots, even at the
scale of insects. This research is to show how combustion-powered actuation of a
soft, artificial muscle can generate sufficiently high frequencies and forces to
power flapping-wing micro-aerial vehicles. Typical combustion-powered machines
require heavy and complex transmission systems to effectively use chemical
energy. Instead, this research will develop soft, elastomeric bladders that
expand during combustion, and serve as both engine and transmission --
drastically reducing complexity and weight. Flying robots are the target
application for this project due to the extreme energetic demands of flight at
small scales but the results will be broadly applicable to other power-demanding
autonomous systems. Furthermore, the small scale of the envisioned robot will
produce innovations in multi-scale multi-material manufacturing. The work will
take place in three tasks: (i) fabrication and testing of a microscale soft
engine; (ii) integration of the combustion chamber with a flapping-wing robot
platform; (iii) development of additional technologies required for autonomous
flight and performing tethered controlled flight experiments.