* 1537700
* Collaborative Research: Transportation Network Identification: Information Fusion via Stochastic Optimization
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2015,02/28/2017
* Xuegang Ban, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 02/28/2017
* USD 144,500.00

Knowledge of the traffic network state, in terms of, for example, network-level
traffic flow and travel time, is critically needed for network monitoring and
effective transportation system management and control under both normal and
extreme conditions. Recent technological advances, such as mobile sensing and
connected vehicles, can generate big data. In general, this research aims to
address challenges on how to best use these inherently large-scale, dynamic, and
heterogeneous (multi-source) data streams. More specifically, the project seeks
an innovative systems approach for estimating the statistical properties of
traffic flow and travel time via integrating various traffic data pieces over a
complex network structure (such as traffic counts collected by fixed sensors and
individual "urban digital footprints" collected by Bluetooth tag reader logs,
cellular phone records, and global positioning system traces). A successful
outcome of this project will directly benefit society through more effective
utilization of information, and thus more sustainable and efficient
transportation system planning and operations. This project includes curricula
development and student mentoring activities that help better prepare next-
generation transportation professionals for challenges brought by the big data
era.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mathematically, the question addressed in this project
is: Given directly measurable network parameters x, which tend to be localized
and incomplete, how can one infer global network parameters y that are often
difficult to be measured directly, with the mapping between y and x built on a
complex network structure? This problem category has broad applications in
transportation, communication, and energy networks; although, the focus in this
project is on transportation networks. Built on knowledge in transportation
network science, stochastic optimization, variational analysis, and non-
parametric estimation, the research team will pursue the following main tasks:
(1) Creation of an optimization framework for network identification based on
stochastic optimization and non-parametric estimation; (2) Integration of multi-
source traffic data (hard information) with domain-knowledge-based soft
information via constraints and functional mapping; (3) Linking historical-data-
based offline estimation with real-time information for online estimation and
decision support through Bayesian methods; (4) Testing and validating the
project's methods using both real-world data and computer simulations. This
research establishes a unifying theoretical framework for traffic network
identification that integrates knowledge in transportation network science and
data analytics. By providing greater modeling flexibility than existing methods
in handling various types of hard and soft information and in capturing
transportation network physics, this new method ushers a paradigm-shift in
traffic network system identification. The project also creates a real-world
engineering platform for strengthening connections between optimization and
statistics.