* 1537423
* Changing Lanes - Using Advance Sensor Technology to Understand Driver Behavior
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2020
* Benjamin Coifman, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Yueyue Fan
* 07/31/2020
* USD 399,716.00

Traffic congestion impedes US competitiveness, needlessly slowing the movement
of most persons and goods. The impacts of congestion are diverse, ranging from
safety issues to increased costs of goods and services. The total financial cost
of congestion in 2011 was $121 billion. To address this challenge we need a
deeper understanding of how traffic flows (and at times does not flow). Freeway
traffic is inherently difficult to study because there are thousands of vehicles
interacting over several miles. While it is clear that lane change maneuvers are
an important factor generating turbulence that impedes traffic, the details of
how this turbulence forms and grows are beyond the resolution of existing
traffic monitoring tools. This research will advance sensor technology to
develop the right tools to understand and model the lane change process in
detail. With this better understanding, operating agencies will be able to
manage the freeways more efficiently and reduce congestion without building more
facilities. Thus, using the existing infrastructure more efficiently to reduce
the costs of congestion.

This research seeks to greatly advance the understanding and microscopic
modeling of where, when, how and why vehicles undertake lane change maneuvers on
freeways. A lane change maneuver can take over a mile from start to finish
before the traffic stream fully adjusts to the change, with driver behavior
dependent upon only a few feet difference in the spacing between vehicles. Given
the large number of vehicles interacting over long distances it has been
virtually impossible to observe the microscopic details of the lane change
maneuver process with conventional tools. This research will use advanced
sensing technology to develop a deeper understanding of the microscopic factors
that give rise to congestion. The work will use hundreds of hours of
instrumented probe vehicle data that include positioning and ranging data for
the ambient vehicles around the probe out to 80 m, collected on an urban freeway
during peak periods with recurring and non-recurring congestion. Preliminary
review indicates that these data include over 10,000 lane change maneuvers. This
large quantity of microscopic vehicle interactions will be used to develop a
deeper understanding and more accurate models of the lane change maneuver
process to help develop the right tools necessary to mitigate traffic
congestion. Models of lane changing behavior will be crucial as connected
vehicle infrastructures are constructed and autonomous vehicles are introduced
into manually operated traffic streams.