* 1537626
* Development of High Performance Control Systems for Wind Response Mitigation
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Partha Sarkar, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 08/31/2019
* USD 399,034.00

In recent years, there has been an increased shift towards the performance-based
analysis and design of buildings to resist natural hazards such as earthquakes
and wind. The new paradigm of incorporating high performance control systems to
increase building performance under these hazards is promising. Control systems
are adaptable devices capable of high energy absorption that would significantly
reduce the structural response. However, their design is not holistically
integrated into the structural design process in a way that would ensure
attaining the targeted performance level of response. This is mostly due to the
high range of variability in available control systems, the uncertainties
associated with the performance of the control systems and the building,
variability in the type of loading in a multi-hazard scheme, and unclear
definition of performance measures when it comes to wind loads. The goal of this
research is to develop a holistic integration control systems directly at the
design stage, with particular attention to structures subjected to a variety of
wind hazards, including thunderstorms, hurricanes, gust-fronts, and tornadoes.
This methodology will empower the design engineers with technical and financial
arguments supporting the integration of control systems within the structural
system. By validating the potential benefits of control systems, there will be
an increasing number of applications of these systems, enabling an integrated
design approach for meeting the performance criteria set for structural response
in windstorms. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The focus of this project is to develop a
probabilistic performance-based methodology for structures equipped with high
performance control systems. The objective of the project is twofold: (1) to
establish a performance-based methodology that includes the variability of
control systems and (2) to support the integration of control systems for wind
response mitigation. Loads and response data will be produced using physical
models of structures subjected to a variety of wind loads using a boundary-layer
wind tunnel, and tornado and microburst simulation facilities. The notion of
control system performance, including sensor failure, power failure, and
controller sub-performance will be integrated in the procedure using an
integrated probabilistic approach. Control systems will be developed following
the procedure, which will include a novel variable friction device. Physics
based numerical simulations will be developed to validate and demonstrate the
performance-based methodology for control systems. These simulations will enable
the analysis of life-cycle performance of a structure equipped with control
systems under a set of scenarios. Novel quantitative metrics will be formulated
to characterize structural performance versus performance of the control
systems.