* 1537304
* Low Frequency Intrinsic Variability in the Eddying Ocean
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2015,02/29/2020
* William Dewar, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 02/29/2020
* USD 504,094.00

The aim of this study is to assess uncertainties in climate predictions due to
intrinsic ocean variability, as well as explore modes of ocean variability that
may feedback on the atmosphere. The analyses that will be conducted are
essential for advancing our understanding of climate predictability, and for
clarifying what forms of ocean dynamics coupled climate models must accurately
capture to address the questions of decadal-scale climate variability. The
findings will be disseminated in publications and in various meetings,
workshops, summer schools as well as via the internet. International connections
between Florida State University and European scientists will be strengthened.
The project will support a young researcher and a graduate student. The
investigators will also work with existing outreach and education programs at
the University and state level to support K-12 science teachers with materials
that assist them in teaching to the Florida Science, Technology, Engineering and
Mathematics standards.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broad objective of this study is
to dissect North Atlantic variability in the 1-to-10 year range with respect to
its dynamics and origins. This variability will be simulated using a high-
resolution ocean general circulation model of the North Atlantic and analyzed to
categorize the variability as forced or intrinsic, and local or remote in
origin. The contributions of these various kinds of variability to well-known
observational indices, like the Atlantic Meridional Overturning Circulation,
will be estimated. This analysis using novel methods that emphasize potential
vorticity diagnostics, ensemble averaging and data reduction, will provide
quantitative information on the contribution of intrinsic variability to such
critical measures of the ocean climate as the Atlantic Meridional Overturning
Circulation and the mass transport of the Gulf Stream. The dynamics supporting
the intrinsic variability will be diagnosed, and the projection of subsurface
variability onto the surface, where the bulk of ocean observations are currently
obtained, will be computed. Additionally, the extent to which remote mesoscale
dynamics influence North Atlantic variability will be assessed; doing so will
help understand the behavior of planned classes of eddy-permitting
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change models.