* 1537956
* Scalable Laser Printing of Three-Dimensional Living Tissue Constructs
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Yong Huang, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 07/31/2019
* USD 312,000.00

The rising success rate of transplants has resulted in a critical need for more
tissues and organs. Approximately 95,000 people are on the waiting list for new
organs in the US alone, and some die every day waiting for transplants. Organ
printing provides a promising solution to the problem of organ donor shortage.
This award supports fundamental research to generate knowledge that enables the
scale up of a jet-based, orifice-free laser bioprinting technique for organ
printing. Results from this research will enable the wider use of laser printing
for the fabrication of living tissue constructs for implantation. In addition,
this award will promote the development of bioprinting technologies for cell and
organ printing and provide three-dimensional engineered tissues for cell
behavior and pharmacokinetics studies.

In this new laser bioprinting technique, an optical scanner will be incorporated
into the laser beam delivery system to optically guide laser pulses to
efficiently transfer bioinks of a ribbon instead of mechanically moving the
ribbon. The objective of this research is to understand the effects of the
interaction of laser pulses-induced adjacent fluid jets on the jettability and
printability during optical scanner-enabled laser-induced forward transfer
bioprinting. The jettability will be evaluated based on whether two adjacent
well-defined jets can be formed during jet formation, and the printability will
be assessed based on whether a well-defined line can be formed from well-defined
jets. The formation of each laser-induced jet will be modeled using the existing
homogenous nucleation-based phase explosion theory. The governing fluid
continuity and Navier-Stokes equations for droplet formation under the jet
interaction will be solved numerically using a finite element method with mixed
interpolation for spatial discretization as well as an implicit finite
difference method for time integration. In order to derive a reduced system of
equations and boundary conditions containing the governing physics, a scale
analysis of the governing equations and interfacial conditions will be
performed. The scale analysis results will be used to validate the numerical
simulation on the onset of instability (droplet formation) under the effects of
two adjacent jets. The resulting knowledge of the interaction of adjacent jets
will be used to predict the influences of printing conditions such as the
scanning speed of optical scanner on the jettability and printability and
further validated during the laser bioprinting of cellular tubes.