* 1537314
* Quantifying nitrogen fixation along unique geochemical gradients in the southwest Pacific Ocean
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Angela Knapp, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 07/31/2019
* USD 300,971.00

The availability of nitrogen in the surface ocean plays a critical role
regulating rates of primary productivity in the ocean, and thus through
modification of the carbon cycle, nitrogen has the capacity to influence
climate. The dominant source of biologically available nitrogen to the ocean is
through a process known as di-nitrogen (N2) fixation, which involves the
reduction of N2 gas dissolved in seawater to ammonium by microbes referred to as
diazotrophs. While significant progress has been made identifying a diversity of
marine diazotrophs in recent years using molecular tools, quantifying global
rates of N2 fixation, and identifying which ocean basin supports the highest
fluxes, has remained a vexing question. This research will quantify rates of N2
fixation as well as its importance for supporting production in the southwest
Pacific Ocean. Results from this research will shed light on the sensitivities
of N2 fixation (temperature, iron concentrations) as well as the extent of
spatial and temporal coupling of nitrogen sources and sinks in the ocean. The
work will be carried out by an early career scientist, and involve mentoring of
young women, middle school girls and minorities, training of undergraduate and
graduate researchers, and international
collaborations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Identifying the spatial distribution of the
largest di-nitrogen (N2) fixation fluxes to the ocean remains a critical goal of
chemical oceanography. The spatial distribution can inform our understanding of
the environmental sensitivities of N2 fixation and the capacity for the dominant
marine nitrogen (N) source and sink processes to respond to each other and thus
influence the global carbon cycle and climate. In addition to temperature, two
factors are at the heart of the current debate over what influences the spatial
distribution of N2 fixation in the ocean: 1) the presence of adequate iron to
meet the needs of N2 fixing microbes, and, 2) the absolute concentrations as
well as ratios of surface ocean nitrate and phosphate concentrations that are
low relative to the "Redfield" ratio, which are thought to favor N2 fixing
microbes. This project will test the effects of gradients in atmospheric dust
deposition on N2 fixation rates when surface waters have relatively constant but
favorable nitrate to phosphate concentrations. The work will be carried out in
the southwest Pacific, a region highlighted by new modeling work for its unique
geochemical characteristics that are expected to favor significant N2 fixation
fluxes. Nitrate+nitrite d15N as well as total dissolved nitrogen (TDN)
concentration and d15N will be measured in water column samples collected on a
French cruise and sediment traps were deployed to capture the sinking
particulate N flux. The results will be compared with published work to evaluate
which ocean regions support the largest N2 fixation fluxes.