* 1537528
* EAGER: Understanding the Strategic Values of Privacy Practices in Organizations
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Ye Xia, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 08/31/2018
* USD 239,138.00

As companies collect consumer data in increasingly larger quantity and mine the
data more deeply, trade-offs arise with respect to companies' practices about
information privacy. A company may choose practices that augment targeted
advertisements or services. However, the financial rewards associated with
privacy practices are highly uncertain, since they are affected by a company's
competition with rivals. Moreover, such practices expose the company to privacy
risks, in that it is burdened with safeguarding sensitive data against theft,
and may suffer negative consequences from data loss such as revenue decrease,
public outcry and penalty by governments. This research aims to help companies
make strategically valuable and socially responsible decisions about privacy
practices. The researchers develop a broadly applicable analytical framework on
making decisions about information privacy under uncertainty by companies,
organizations, governmental agencies, and individuals. In particular, the
framework provides the first risk-based analysis on a company's decision-making
about privacy practices. It is also among the first to analyze the strategic
values of privacy practices and how such practices affect the relative
performance of competing companies. The results of the research will lead to new
conversations and provide a better understanding about the interplay among (1)
companies' practices and attitudes toward privacy; (2) companies' competitive
behavior and outcome; and (3) new technologies. The broader impact of the
research lies in the development of new methodologies for companies to evaluate
their privacy practices and better position themselves in a competitive
environment in a socially responsible way. It also lies in helping policy makers
understand the trade-offs faced by companies when proposing privacy regulations
to balance company performance and consumer welfare. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
framework builds on the risk theories in economics, which provide formulations
and general tools for analyzing preferences, valuations and choices among risky
alternatives. The analysis is distinct by its formulation of choice under
privacy risks, where the risk-model parameters cover the set of consequences,
states of nature, set of actions, and the probabilities. It is useful for
studying the effects of privacy-related investments, policies and technology
adoptions by examining how they alter the parameters. The analysis is also
augmented with elements from behavioral economics, but focuses on companies'
behavioral patterns. More importantly, the analysis extends the choice under
privacy risks by incorporating strategy research on competitive advantage and
competitive interactions among rival companies. It asks whether and how privacy
practices can be a source of competitive advantage and affect company
performance.