* 1537410
* Mechanics of Stimuli-Responsive Membrane-Based Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Eric Freeman, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 08/31/2019
* USD 284,664.00

Membrane-based materials possess fluid compartments separated by thin bilayer
membranes. These membranes are capable of mimicking cell membranes, and
carefully arranged membrane networks have been considered for use in engineering
applications ranging from hearing aids to actuators. This award supports
fundamental research on the ability of the membrane to convert mechanical force
into meaningful outcomes such as energy conversion and controlled diffusion
through the material network. The goal of this work is the advancement of a low-
cost material that is simple to assemble while still useful for industries
ranging from pharmaceuticals to renewable energy. The research is highly
interdisciplinary, combining mechanical, electrical, biological, and chemical
engineering. Results from this award will be used to promote interdisciplinary
research projects and to develop open-source educational tools and predictive
modeling software. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is evidence that these membrane-
based materials may be activated and controlled by mechanotransduction,
harnessing the unique emulsive elasticity of the material. The multiphysics
interactions between applied mechanical force and the response of the internal
membranes are not well characterized, requiring new models and experiments for
their study. This hypothesized link between material deformation and membrane
activity is investigated in detail through this award, creating mechanical
models linking the deformation of the bulk material to subsequent deformations
of the internal membranes. This task is accomplished through coupled
experimental and theoretical work. First, large networks of the membrane-based
material will be created. Then these networks will be deformed through various
methods including bulk displacement, magnetic forces, osmotic shocks, and high-
frequency vibration. Each of these methods for material excitation produces
different responses in the interfacial membranes, and will allow for the
determination of parameters such as the bulk modulus, stiffness, and damping of
the material components. These values will be used to populate models for the
material deformation, wherein the material will be simulated as collections of
fixed-volume compartments with variable surface elements and contours, examining
the dynamic changes in material morphology. This project is designed to address
the gaps in current models for the mechanical deformation of the material, and
will illustrate the necessary parameters for meaningful mechanotransduction in
membrane-based materials.