* 1537985
* Collaborative Research: Development of a Novel Strategy for Using Waste Concrete to Mitigate Industrial Nitrogen Dioxide Emissions and to Inhibit Corrosion
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,11/30/2020
* Alexander Orlov, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Caglar Oskay
* 11/30/2020
* USD 299,170.00

Cement kilns are a significant contributor to anthropogenic nitrogen oxides
emissions. This study seeks to demonstrate a promising and novel approach to the
air pollution mitigation. A collaborative study will investigate an innovative
approach to utilizing waste concrete material which, based on preliminary
investigations, can economically and sustainably strip nitrogen dioxide from
flue gas. The concrete waste containing sequestered pollutants can then be
recycled as either set-accelerating or corrosion-inhibiting admixtures in new
concrete. As a result, the approach can potentially turn waste materials into
valuable products. The broader applications of the solution are not only in
cement manufacturing, but also in incineration plants, boilers, process heaters,
glass furnaces, and power plants. This project will be supported by an
interdisciplinary team from Stony Brook and Clarkson Universities with highly
complementary expertise in materials science, environmental chemistry and
engineering, and civil engineering. The educational components of this project
will focus on achieving the following objectives: (1) Expanding the
undergraduate concentration in environmental engineering and chemistry; (2)
Developing case studies that will allow students to grasp the fundamentals in
environmental and civil engineering; (3) Increasing the number of
underrepresented minority students who will be exposed to environmental
chemistry, civil engineering and sustainability topics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
technical approach to achieve the above mentioned outcomes will include several
experimental strategies. The nitrogen dioxide absorption capacity of the
demolished concrete as a function of particle size, age, type of aggregate,
composition, moisture content and ambient relative humidity and temperature will
be determined using state of the art experimental methods, including advanced
spectroscopic techniques, reactor studies, and microscopy. Subsequently, the
newly acquired properties of nitrogen dioxide sequestered concrete, such as set-
accelerating and/or corrosion-inhibiting properties, will be analyzed for
application in new concrete. More specifically, comprehensive studies focused on
hydration kinetics, microstructure development, volumetric porosity, chloride
binding capacity, chloride diffusion resistance, and corrosion rate will be
conducted using various analytical techniques such as isothermal conduction
calorimetry, nano-tomography, and potentiodynamic polarization. The intellectual
merits of these approaches are in distinct novelties of the applications and
characterization strategies. Moreover, this project will create new knowledge
specifying mechanisms of nitrogen dioxide interaction with concrete surface,
environmental conditions needed to maximize the uptake, the chemistry of the end
products, and the potential utilization of the end products as constituents in
new concrete.