* 1537262
* Far-From-Equilibrium Processing of Ferroelectric Thin Films on Glass and Polymeric Substrates
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Nazanin Bassiri-Gharb, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Wells
* 08/31/2020
* USD 386,342.00

Ferroelectric materials are multifunctional materials exhibiting large response
to external mechanical, electrical and thermal fields. As devices are driven
towards miniaturization and multifunctionality, ferroelectric thin films become
increasingly important as a multifunctional means for actuation and sensing,
non-volatile memories, and energy harvesting, integrated within micro and nano-
electromechanical systems. However, ferroelectric thin films typically require a
high-temperature processing step, incompatible with microelectronic component
fabrication, required for the full miniaturization of the device and control
units. This award supports the investigation of a novel, far-from-equilibrium
processing method, enabling direct processing of ferroelectric materials on
polymer and other flexible substrates. This processing method will enable fully
integrated, miniaturized, multifunctional sensors and actuators, with a wide
range of applications in healthcare (imaging pills, self-powered implanted
sensors), automotive (vibration energy harvesting powered pressure sensors,
accelerometers, thermal cameras), security (mm-sized autonomous robots),
flexible electronics, and high-resolution conformal, peel-and-stick
sensors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of this work is to enable
direct integration of ferroelectric thin films with CMOS-compatible and flexible
substrates, through understanding of processing-structure-property relationships
in ferroelectric thin films manufactured through far-from-equilibrium processing
conditions. Such a processing method (specifically pulsed thermal processing,
PTP) allows direct crystallization of perovskite thin films on polymeric and
flexible substrates. It is expected that both the large concentration of defects
arising from the very far-from-equilibrium processing conditions as well as
minimal residual stresses in these electroceramic films processed on glass and
polymeric substrates will significantly influence their ultimate functional
response. The samples will be synthesized through chemical solution deposition
and crystallized through PTP. Structural and microstructural characterization
will be coupled with micro- and macroscopic functional response evaluation of
the films. Understanding mesoscale processing-structure-property relationships
will enable transformative new device applications, and pave the way for a
fundamental understanding of the atomistic defect landscape correlation with the
macroscopic response of these functional materials.