* 1537722
* GOALI/Collaborative Research: Precision Control of Nanopositioners
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Garrett Clayton, Villanova University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Landers
* 08/31/2019
* USD 113,433.00

The goal of this collaborative Grant Opportunities for Academic Liaison with
Industry (GOALI) research project between the University of Utah (UU), Villanova
University (VU), and industry partner Molecular Vista, Inc. (MVI) is to study
new design and control system approaches for the development of advanced
nanopositioning systems for nanoscale science and engineering applications.
Specifically, the research outcomes will lead to improvement in the performance
of nanotechnologies, such as video-rate scanning probe microscopy, desktop nano-
rapid prototyping and nanomanufacturing systems, precision advanced additive
manufacturing systems, and micro rapid inspection and repair systems. The
research collaboration and the proposed education plan will expose engineering
students (graduate and undergraduate), K-12 students, and the community to
cutting-edge research and findings in control, nanotechnology, and high-impact
industry applications. Additionally, students involved in the research will be
encouraged to pursue graduate studies and industry positions in control and
nano-scale science and engineering.

The scope of this research is to study new design and control paradigms for
dual-stage nanopositioners that consider both spatial and temporal constraints.
Emerging dual-stage nanopositioners have the unique ability to achieve long-
range and high-speed operation, as well as operating bandwidths two- to three-
orders of magnitude higher than existing systems. However, typical control
strategies rely on temporal (frequency-based) information to split the control
effort between the two actuators, which results in some precision positioning
trajectories being unachievable. Specifically, low-speed trajectories are
assumed to be long-range and diverted to the long-range, low-speed actuator
while high-speed trajectories are assumed to be short-range and diverted to the
short-range, high speed actuator. Thus, short-range, low-speed inputs are
diverted to the long-range, low-speed actuator, which can be problematic since
the long-range actuator has a lower positioning resolution than the short-range,
high-speed actuator, which is better suited to track the short-range trajectory
(regardless of speed). Therefore, dual-stage nanopositioners cannot achieve high
positioning resolution when range and frequency are not inversely correlated. To
advance the state-of-the-art, a control-centered design approach is planned to
establish the guidelines and requirements for creating high-performance dual-
stage nanopositioners. To enhance the understanding and control system design
process, detailed input-output models that capture the dynamics of the system
(nonlinear and dynamic effects) and sensor characteristics will be obtained. An
innovative control algorithm which systematically considers both spatial and
temporal information will be developed to effectively allocate the control
input. Finally, with support from the industry partner, the research team will
evaluate the technology on a commercial atomic force microscope (AFM) system and
consider future commercialization opportunities.