* 1537756
* Using Ultra Violet Light to Produce Layered Fiber Reinforced Materials Derived from Biological Sources
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2019
* Beshah Ayalew, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Wells
* 07/31/2019
* USD 349,999.00

The goal of this project is to study ultra violet (UV) processing as a viable
pathway towards a sustainable method of manufacturing layered fiber reinforced
materials derived from biological sources for structural applications. A key
challenge in the processing of these biobased composite materials is that
traditional thermal curing approaches cannot be employed since the constituent
natural fibers, which are primarily made of cellulose and hemicellulose, start
to degrade with prolonged exposure to high temperatures. UV curing is a fast,
low temperature photopolymerization process that uses significantly less energy
than thermal curing. If successful, the study will enable a cost-effective and
greener process for making high-strength thick laminates that are highly
critical for lightweighting automotive and aerospace structures. Lightweighting
is tied to achieving improvements in fuel-efficiency and reducing pollution. The
PIs will engage graduate and undergraduate students in this interdisciplinary
research project and train them in understanding the integral role of process
modeling, experimentation, optimization, and control in advanced sustainable
manufacturing. The PIs will also leverage collaborations and interactions with
industrial partners to broadly influence industrial practices for processing
biobased composites.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific technical objectives of
the project are to, first, extract physically motivated and experimentally
verified process models for UV processing of biobased composites, and then apply
them in new layering, scale-up optimization and process control schemes for
building thick structural parts with these materials. The basic phenomena to be
characterized by the modeling and experimental efforts include: 1) the nature of
the attenuation of UV intensity as it passes through the biobased resin and
fiber systems, and 2) the nature of the coupled evolution of the spatially
distributed cure and temperature state. The project will also investigate the
potential of a stepped-concurrent curing and layering scheme that will exploit
knowledge of the cure kinetics, thermal evolution and UV attenuation in these
materials. The project will apply a new hybrid modeling perspective that treats
the addition of layers as discrete events on the otherwise continuous physical
processes involved in curing. This perspective will help generalize the scale-up
optimization of the scheme with the goal of building ever-thicker parts of
highest cure quality with minimal time/energy needs. The project will also
address process robustness considerations via uncertainty handling in the scale-
up optimization as well as with online feedback compensation.