* 1537890
* Wave Breaking in High Winds and its Effects on the Air-Sea Exchange of Gases of Varying Solubility
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2015,01/31/2018
* Christopher Zappa, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 01/31/2018
* USD 264,458.00

The ocean is a major player in the storage and transfer of many greenhouse
gases. Understanding the amount of these gases going through the interface
between ocean and atmosphere, known as the air-sea flux, is of upmost importance
to accurate biogeochemical and climate predictions. The mechanisms which move
the gases through the interface are too small to be resolved by most coupled
ocean atmosphere models, and are therefore parameterized to account for the
effect of the small scale processes. Air-sea fluxes are largely dictated by wind
speed, but are sensitive to many other environmental factors such as surfaces
waves and surfactants. In situ observations have shown large variability between
observed and parameterized air-sea fluxes, especially under high wind speed
conditions, suggesting wind speed alone cannot capture all of the factors that
influence air-sea gas exchange. This project will analyze a dataset collected
during a NSF-funded research project near the southern tip Greenland. This
dataset is unique and may offer insight into some previously unmeasured
mechanisms with control on air-sea gas flux such as breaking waves and bubble
formation under high winds. The findings could help to refine gas transfer
parameterizations which, in turn, would help to constrain regional and global
estimates of climate sensitive gases. The project will support the training of a
PhD student and the development of stimulating teaching materials about research
into gas exchange, storms, breaking waves and climate change, available to K-12
teachers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Global air-sea gas flux estimates are based on
parameterizations of the gas transfer velocity k. To first order, k is dictated
by wind speed (U) and is typically parameterized as a non-linear function of U.
There is, however, a large spread in k predicted by the traditional
parameterizations, especially at high wind speed. This is due to a large variety
of environmental forcings and processes that actually influence k, suggesting
wind speed alone cannot capture the variability of air-water gas exchange. At
high wind speed, breaking waves become a key factor to take into account when
estimating gas fluxes. Wave breaking results in additional upper ocean
turbulence and generation of bubble clouds. Here, we propose to analyze the
diverse data set collected during the High Wind Gas exchange Study experiment in
2013 to understand and quantify the control of breaking waves on gas transfer
velocities. This will be a first study linking turbulent kinetic energy
dissipation rates resulting from wave breaking to gas transfer velocities.
Insights gained from observation will be incorporated into physical gas transfer
models. Whitecap coverage and breaking wave statistics will be determined from
visible imagery acquired from the port and starboard side of the flying bridge
of the Research Vessel Knorr. Both very soluble (Methanol and Acetone) and less
soluble (Carbon Dioxide, Dimethyl Sulfide) gases will be considered, allowing to
contrast the degree of wave breaking mediated transfer. Sea state conditions
will be computed from laser altimeter and wave rider buoy measurements. Eddy
covariance fluxes and sea water concentration of Carbon Dioxide, Dimethyl
Sulfide, Methanol and Acetone allow for direct calculation of transfer
velocities.