* 1537256
* Mechanical and Genetic Regulation of Multi-Timescale Airway Smooth Muscle  Contractions that Drive Lung Development
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Jason Gleghorn, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Laurel Kuxhaus
* 08/31/2019
* USD 343,433.00

Embryonic lung development is a poorly understood process involving the
coordination of cellular growth and organization to give rise to functional
airways that are critical for survival. Recently, contractions of the smooth
muscle that surrounds the developing airways was discovered to have a critical
role in the branching of new airways during embryonic development. Two types of
smooth muscle contractions - fast and slow - occur in the developing lung. This
research will determine the connection between fast and slow airway smooth
muscle contractions, their role in airway branching, and the cellular activity
underlying these processes. Deeper understanding of the mechanisms that cause
the growth of the airways is of importance for understanding lung development in
general and also for predicting, preventing, and repairing structural birth
defects. The methods created in this research to study lung development could
have application to development of other organs where muscular contractions
change development. This project will offer a basis for undergraduate and
graduate training in the mechanics of development and serve to engage and
inspire students in the STEM fields with the creation of modules and lesson
plans for dissemination to secondary schools about microfluidic approaches to
treat disease.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Spatially uncoordinated, fast peristaltic
contractions and newly identified, coordinated slow contractions of the airway
smooth muscle are both active in the lung and regulated by the fluid pressure
within the airways. This work focuses on documenting the kinetics of airway
smooth muscle contractions across multiple time and length scales and developing
an understanding of its molecular regulators. To explore these events and the
underlying molecular mechanisms, the objectives of this project are: (1) use
video microscopy to characterize the multi-timescale contraction kinetics; (2)
determine the role of contractile proteins ex vivo, utilizing
immunohistochemical and adenoviral techniques; and, (3) determine the role of
mechanics on inducing contraction events, utilizing a newly developed
microfluidic smooth muscle in vitro platform. By understanding these
developmental mechanisms, we can use them as tools to guide de novo production
of tissue for regenerative medicine and enable future studies interrogating the
role of specific genetic and/or structural factors.