* 1537087
* Mechanistic Models of the Mechanical Response of Self-healing Hydrogels
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2019
* Alan Zehnder, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 07/31/2019
* USD 425,001.00

A hydrogel is a network of molecular chains into which water is absorbed and
trapped, forming a material that is typically 90 percent or more water.
Hydrogels have a wide range of current and potential applications such as
scaffolds for laboratory grown tissue, drug delivery systems, biosensors, and
consumer products. Hydrogels typically break at low levels of stretching,
limiting their use in load bearing applications. Newly developed hydrogels
consisting of stiff and soft interpenetrating networks can stretch like rubber.
However, once they start to tear the damage is irreversible. By replacing the
stiff network's covalent bonds with bonds that can reform, the material can
become self-healing. This project seeks to understand the physics and mechanics
of such gels and to develop mathematical models that will explain the self-
healing behavior. Such models will establish connections between molecular scale
features and mechanical response and enable researchers to build simulation
models of engineered hydrogel systems. The model will be embedded in the context
of an analysis code widely used in mechanics. We envision that such models would
aid in the engineering of potential load-bearing applications of self-healing
gels such as artificial cartilage and actuators for soft machines. The project
will also provide opportunities for us to reach out to prospective students
through hands-on discovery of the unexpected properties of self-healing
hydrogels. In recent years polymer chemists have made tremendous strides in the
synthesis of biocompatible, tough, low friction, self-healing hydrogels.
Currently, models are lacking that link fatigue resistance, fracture, and time
dependent, self-healing behavior to the underlying, rate dependent bond breaking
and reformation processes. This research bridges this gap by: (a) designing and
executing experiments to measure these mechanical behaviors using a model
material system, (b) defining quantitative models relating these behaviors to
bond breaking and reformation kinetics. Experiments will include tension
testing, measurements crack growth rate tests and crack healing under monotonic
and cyclic loading. The research will provide understanding of how the observed
macroscale properties (strength, time dependence, fracture, fatigue and self-
healing) are related to underlying deformation and separation mechanisms at the
molecular level. The constitutive and failure models will also provide a
quantitative link between these observable mechanical properties and relevant
microscale parameters such as the different types of physical bonds, their
strengths, and breaking/healing kinetics. The project will advance the field of
mechanics by building a framework for constitutive and fracture models that are
linked directly to the microstructure and that can be used in structural finite
element simulations.