* 1537762
* Collaborative Research: Multi-Perspective Evacuation Performance Measurement
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Praveen Edara, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Walter Peacock
* 08/31/2020
* USD 110,455.00

If successful, the research will provide a point of departure from current
viewpoints on evacuation planning by representing an evacuation as a network
composed of transportation and household perspectives by considering systems,
and systems containing processes linked through performance metrics. Given that
the information and data of this research will be grounded in household
responses and transportation occurrences calibrated in realistic scenarios
suggests that the derived performance targets could be more readily incorporated
by both transportation agencies and households. Project funding will support a
minimum of one University of Delaware School of Public Policy and Administration
Summer Scholar. The PIs will develop age appropriate activities for middle to
high school students to participate in camps at Virginia Tech sponsored through
the Center for Enhancement of Engineering Diversity. In terms of under-
represented groups, a PI will seek to fund and recruit a student through the
William A. Anderson Fund, a 501c.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research approach
begins with the assertion that "performance" is a socio-technical process that
requires both scientific measurement and an understanding of social systems that
empower, inform, and constrain views on what makes a good or bad evacuation. The
research approach requires unpacking the basic phenomena of evacuation and
rethinking how good or bad outcomes of that phenomenon are evaluated and
measured. This suggests that it is neither appropriate to use a single
performance measure nor to consider only a single point of view. This research
adapts and augments dynamic network performance measurement approaches to
conceptualize and model the relationships between transportation agencies and
households and the performance of these groups as a "system" that co-produces
the outcomes of an evacuation. The team defines and computes multiple measures
of performance at different points in time. Analytical approaches are used to
evaluate transportation strategies.