* 1537396
* WORKSHOP: Organizational Communications and Information Systems Doctoral Consortium
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2015,02/29/2016
* Mary Beth Watson-Manheim, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 02/29/2016
* USD 25,259.00

The Organizational Communication and Information Systems (OCIS) doctoral
consortium at the 2015 Academy of Management meeting in Vancouver, British
Columbia, Canada, will bring together approximately 25 dissertation-stage OCIS
doctoral students for one and a half days of talks and interactions with
distinguished OCIS researcher faculty. The Academy of Management is a well-
established professional organization for scholars, social scientists, and
management leaders, and OCIS is a division of the Academy. The OCIS division at
the annual AOM meetings provides a leading international forum for the
presentation and discussion of research and practical issues related to the use
and impact of information and communication technologies in
organizations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The doctoral consortium provides highly-
talented students with feedback on their work from other students and faculty
members, allowing them to enhance their own research proposal. As well, because
of the diversity of the communities involved, the consortium will allow students
to make connections beyond their own disciplines. Both faculty and students are
diverse on several dimensions, notably research topics, methodological
approaches, and cultural background. As a result, participation will allow
students to develop a better understanding of the different research
communities, which will facilitate their participation in future inter-
disciplinary research. This event has helped to launch the careers of many
outstanding OCIS researchers, in the past. It provides feedback to students in
order to develop higher quality and more relevant research in the field of
organizational communication and information systems.