* 1537824
* Collaborative Proposal: Resource Allocation with Learning in Dynamic and Partially Observable Networks
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Ozlem Ergun, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 07/31/2019
* USD 161,344.00

This collaborative project will research restoration of connectivity of
interdependent road and service networks under uncertainty and learning. Real-
life applications include post-disaster debris clearance to enable disaster
response activities and interdependent infrastructure recovery and repair after
a disruption. For example, when the road network is (partially) disrupted, edges
(roads) need to be restored (e.g., through repair and debris clearance). The
goal is to establish connectivity between supply and demand nodes in a timely
manner to satisfy demand. Under uncertainty (about network conditions, and
supply-demand levels), decision-making can be improved by collecting situational
spatial data. However, data collection consumes time and resources. Furthermore,
a common set of resources may perform both restoration and learning activities.
Hence, under resource and time constraints, decisions on dynamically
prioritizing edge recovery and resource allocation between recovery and learning
are crucial for operational efficiency and effectiveness. This project considers
the trade-off between learning and restoration activities, and decisions on
(equitable and timely) resource allocation and frequency of information updates.
The project will leverage the outreach network established by the Center for
Health and Humanitarian Systems at Georgia Tech to disseminate results and
interact with practitioners during project execution.

Previous research on network connectivity in stochastic networks with learning
is limited. If successful, this project will introduce network repair models
that are characterized by limited resources, uncertainty, ability to reduce
uncertainty by deploying resources, and the need to maintain fairness in service
access. It will contribute to a deeper understanding of how to solve dynamic
multi-stage decision problems in stochastic networks that offer an opportunity
to update information and in which learning and recovery actions share the same
resources. This research will lead to efficient solution approaches for finding
optimal or near-optimal solutions. The research team will perform structural
analysis of underlying problems on simple networks, evaluate different
information update mechanisms, and use those to derive insights and generate
customized solutions.