* 1537289
* Solar Responsive Asphalt for Sustainable and Environmental Friendly Pavements
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Xiong Yu, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 08/31/2018
* USD 283,247.00

Over 5.64 million miles of the U.S. roads are built with asphalt. The black
color of asphalt can make the road unpleasantly hot during summer due to its
large solar absorption. The associated heat and smell contribute to urban heat
island effects and negatively impacts the health of road users (drivers, bikers,
pedestrians). The high road temperature also reduces pavement life due to
bleeding of asphalt binder and accelerated pavement rutting. This project will
study innovative solar responsive thermochromic asphalt to manage the thermal
loads to pavements. This new material will feature high solar radiation at high
temperature and high solar absorbance at low temperature. Therefore, it will
make the road cooler during summer and warmer during winter. Both aspects will
improve the durability of asphalt roads. This research could lead the current
paving industry into a sustainable practice by promoting longevity and
environmental friendliness. It will train undergraduate and graduate students
through a tailored curriculum and research program that increases the
interdisciplinary competencies of young researchers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
objective of this research is to understand the scientific principles enabling
effective design, production and assessment of multifunctional thermochromic
asphalt. In the material design aspects, research activities aim to formulate
and implement a performance-driven design matrix by understanding the
microscopic interactions that determine the multifunctional properties of
thermochromic asphalt. In the material processing aspects, the activities aim to
understand the effects of processing conditions on the microscopic interactions
between asphalt binder and thermochromic powders. This will determine the
unscalability for plant production. 3) In the performance assessment aspect, it
aims to assess the multifunctional performance of thermochromic asphalt and
include into life cycle cost benefits analyses. This research project will
advance the current design philosophy of structural materials from a primarily
mechanical focus to a multifunctional design matrix. The innovation from this
research will provide a long lasting and environmental friendly construction
material. The process of knowledge discovery will also expand the current
knowledge on optical and thermal interactions of composite materials.