* 1537364
* DOCTORAL DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Sophisticated Rejection of Scientific Evidence
* SBE,NCSE
* 09/01/2015,05/31/2017
* Caitlin Drummond Otten, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Mark Fiegener
* 05/31/2017
* USD 14,999.00

Scientific findings and innovations have shaped American life in countless ways,
but not all scientific advances have received a warm reception by the public.
This project investigates the factors that predict public acceptance or
rejection of scientific evidence, focusing on ?sophisticated rejectionists,?
individuals who possess the ability to evaluate scientific evidence critically,
but still reject the scientific consensus on key issues. The results of the
proposed research will identify situations where sophisticated rejection of
science is likely, understand how people maintain beliefs contrary to the
scientific consensus (e.g., childhood vaccinations) and suggest ways to
communicate about science so that it receives a fair
hearing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scientists take rigorous precautions to ensure the
validity of their research and the accuracy of its reporting. However, the
public may reject the scientific consensus on an issue (e.g., genetically
modified foods) based on factors other than those employed by scientists. This
research program examines one possible contributor to such rejection:
individuals may lack the skills needed to understand and evaluate scientific
evidence. In earlier work, the researcher developed and validated a novel scale
measuring nonscientists? scientific reasoning skills (SRS), defined as those
needed to assess the validity of scientific results. The present research uses
this scale to understand a group of individuals identified in the research to
date: ?sophisticated rejectionists,? defined as individuals who have high SRS
scores yet still reject the scientific consensus on key issues. The first study
will analyze data from the National Center for Science and Engineering
Statistics? Survey of Public Attitudes Toward and Understanding of Science and
Technology, looking for evidence of such sophisticated rejectionists. The second
study will investigate how they reject science. Do they fail to apply their
skills to dissect spurious scientific arguments or is their interpretation of
scientific evidence biased by their belief in claims that most scientists would
consider false or incomplete? Two additional studies will test strategies to
reduce sophisticated rejection of science by varying how science is
communicated. As a whole, this research furthers scientific understanding of how
nonscientists evaluate, and sometimes reject, scientific evidence.