* 1537879
* Collaboration Cosmopolitanism and Scientific and Technical Human Capital: Implications for Women and Underrepresented Minorities
* SBE,NCSE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Barry Bozeman, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Mark Fiegener
* 08/31/2018
* USD 249,811.00

The research asks the question "What STEM career routes lead to more diverse and
cosmopolitan research collaborations?" This question is important because
previous research has found that greater collaborator diversity and
cosmopolitanism (e.g. collaborators from different institutions, different
fields, or different countries) is positively related to publishing productivity
and development of research capabilities among STEM researchers. The contributes
directly to the NSF mission to promote the progress of science by studying
factors related to enhancing increased research and publishing productivity, as
well as considering a variety of additional career success indicators important
to the health and well-being of the nation's STEM workforce.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;We examine race and gender as key dimensions in our study because
previous work suggests that women and underrepresented minorities will tend to
have less diverse and cosmopolitan collaboration patterns, due to diminished
professionally relevant social capital and network contacts. The research uses
the 2006 and 2010 National Survey of College Graduates (NSCG) and examines
changes in collaboration patterns over time (2006-2010) for a wide variety of
STEM workers, including doctoral level but also persons with bachelors and
masters' degrees. The study focuses on six distinct measures of career success:
team versus individual work organization, number of employees supervised, job
satisfaction, promotion, salary, and skill augmentation. In each case, the
research asks "how does research collaborator diversity and cosmopolitanism
affect success?"