* 1537659
* Continuum Robots for Multi-Scale Manipulation
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Nabil Simaan, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Irina Dolinskaya
* 08/31/2019
* USD 417,384.00

This project will demonstrate a new class of continuum robots capable of multi-
scale manipulation, that is, the ability to achieve large motion with
millimetric precision and to achieve small motion with micrometer-scale
precision. Existing robots are typically designed to function properly only at a
single operational length scale. The envisioned class of robots will provide
micro-precision while traversing macroscale sinuous pathways to access the
operational site, thus enabling new technologies for micro-surgery, such as
image-based biopsy (high resolution tissue inspection), and micro-surgery in
deep surgical fields. Potential benefits include precise tissue reconstruction
and complete surgical eradication of tumors. Such robots will also enable new
abilities for micro-manufacturing, leading to greatly improved quality-control
inspection methods for micro-fluidic and microelectromechanical devices mass-
manufactured on large substrates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research
is to provide modeling and control frameworks for new types of parallel
continuum robots for multi-scale manipulation, based on the concept of
equilibrium modulation. These robots will use direct actuation of their links to
achieve large workspace with macro (millimetric scale) precision and indirect-
actuation to perturb the equilibrium pose of the continuum robot to achieve
minute (micrometer scale) motions. This concept differs from existing approaches
for multi-scale manipulation by offering one robotic architecture capable of
both micro and macro manipulation. The modeling approach will provide a
formulation supporting calibration, system identification and control. This
project will use a direct variational approach for modeling the statics and
kinematics of these robots, and a framework for micro-motion modeling and
parameter identification using support vector regressors to overcome friction
and parameter uncertainties. Optical coherence tomography (OCT) as a means for
micro-inspection, and control feedback approaches using mixed joint-space and
OCT feedback will be used to enable semi-automated scans of the target
inspection site.