* 1537782
* Collaborative Research: Model-Based Multidisciplinary Dynamic Decisions in Design
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Brian German, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 08/31/2018
* USD 199,998.00

The complexity of engineered systems such as aerospace vehicles, automobiles,
and advanced materials systems has reached a tipping point that challenges
existing design and analysis methods. Simplified design models, applied in
traditional paradigms, are inadequate for capturing complex system behaviors.
Moreover, high-fidelity computer simulation models and experimental tests cannot
be fully applied in many situations, due to their high costs. As a result, there
is a great need for systematically fusing information from multiple sources,
including simulation models with multiple levels of fidelity, and for deciding
how best to conduct further simulations at each stage of the design process.
This research will create a new decision-making framework to address this need
and to guide the design of complex engineered systems. The resulting method is
expected to increase the value of the design process in industries such as
aerospace, automotive, energy, and consumer electronics by reducing the
occurrence of undiscovered problems that occur late in a development cycle and
decreasing the budget and schedule required for the design process. The project
will also provide interdisciplinary research training and education across
aerospace, mechanical, and industrial engineering.

The intellectual significance of this research is to approach the design of a
complex system as an information-seeking and knowledge-generation (learning)
process that can be modeled as a stochastic discrete-time dynamical system.
Information theory and decision science are integrated to make design decisions
that involve not only selection of system attributes, but also choices about
subsequent information-seeking actions in a design process. An overarching
Bayesian spatial random process modeling framework will be established to fuse
heterogeneous information from multifidelity simulations and experiments with
uncertainty quantification, where the fidelity of models can be either clearly
ranked (hierarchical) or not (nonhierarchical). Approaches based on
multidisciplinary statistical sensitivity analysis and multidisciplinary
uncertainty analysis will be established for managing the couplings and
complexity inherent in fusing information across fidelities and disciplines,
while maintaining disciplinary autonomy in distributed analyses. The dynamic
decision making framework will provide a uniform accounting for many different
types of uncertainties, and decision functions grounded in expected utility
theory are formulated to guide subsequent design actions. A further critical
contribution of this research is to develop heuristic-based strategies for
managing the complexity in solving the daunting optimal decision making problem.
The framework will be assessed on a testbed problem involving the design of a
distributed electric propulsion aircraft concept.