* 1537021
* Smart Manufacturing of Hybrid Materials with an Exceptional Combination of Strength and Toughness
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Xiaodong Li, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Alexis Lewis
* 08/31/2019
* USD 348,684.00

Traditional engineering materials frequently compromise strength for toughness,
limiting the reliability and safety of many materials. A material that could
break this paradigm would find applications in critical high loading
environments where failure from either mode is not an option. Such a novel
material could be used for medical implants with a smaller form factor, smaller
and more precise surgical instrumentation, and even strengthen automotive and
aircraft structures.  By combining high strength and high toughness properties,
this material would fit into many existing applications and enable new
engineering advances to across the medical, aerospace, automotive, and many
other industries.  This award will support research to develop high strength,
high toughness metallic materials, which mimic structures found in nature. This
research has the potential to establish a new area of materials engineering and
processing devoted to the discovery of similar hybrid materials and foster
interest in related fields among university students and industry engineers.

The objective of this research is to investigate smart manufacturing processes
that employ shape memory alloys to transcribe the "J-curve" mechanical response
and uniform molecular/atomic level deformation of the organic biopolymer in bio-
inspired hybrid materials. The research approaches are to: (1) replicate nacre's
architecture in engineering composites with shape memory alloy and intermetallic
lamellae through eutectic solidification, (2) unveil the deformation mechanisms
of individual lamellae by in-situ synchrotron high-energy X-ray diffraction and
high resolution transmission electron microscopy mechanical testing, (3) uncover
the load transfer mechanisms between shape memory alloy and intermetallic
lamellae by mapping local strain fields with digital image correlation, and (4)
establish a smart manufacturing strategy for a new class of high-performance,
bio-inspired hybrid materials of exceptional mechanical prowess. The anticipated
outcome will be the coupling of bio-inspired materials design strategies with
smart manufacturing techniques to enable the discovery of material systems with
exceptional properties and to enable their rapid insertion into existing
manufacturing processes. This transformative research has the potential (1) to
generate new paradigms of design, development, and implementation of smart
manufacturing processes and (2) to accelerate the development and use of high
performance, bio-inspired materials.