* 1537203
* Marine energy harvesting for remote sensor systems
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2021
* Daniel Costa, Northern Arizona University
* Continuing Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 08/31/2021
* USD 633,703.00

There is a growing community of scientists, ranging from biologists to chemical
oceanographers, that rely on data collected from marine animal mounted remote
sensors (known as bio-loggers) or autonomous unmanned vehicles (AUVs). The
scientific capabilities of these remote sensor platforms are inherently limited
by the amount of energy stored within their batteries. This research leverages
the expertise of an interdisciplinary team to develop ambient energy-harvesting
technology for marine environment electronic sensor nodes, which will extend
operational lifetimes, enhancing observational and experimental capabilities for
the ocean science research community. The research will benefit society in
several ways. Primarily, the effort will result in an enabling technology that
will be used by multiple ocean science communities. The research results of many
of these users are critically important and inform areas ranging from fishery
sustainability to wildlife conservation and climate change. Additionally, the
program will actively participate in outreach efforts to engage the public in
this technology development and science therein.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Energy
harvesting is used in terrestrial sensor applications, but is largely absent in
the marine sensor field despite several possible harvesting methods and calls
for use by the ocean science community. This program focuses on the development
of a peripheral energy harvester device for small marine sensor systems such as
animal mounted tracking and data-logging tags. The first objective of the
research is to quantify potential energy sources and select that which has the
broadest impact potential. The team plans to develop a harvesting module and
conduct lab-based tests to verify the functionality. The second objective is the
integration of this system with a data collection system for use during on-
animal deployment testing. The third objective of the program is a significant
outreach effort, including local and regional visibility. To meet these
objectives, a team of mechanical engineers, electrical engineers, biologists,
and private industry personnel has been assembled to focus on individual
technological challenges. Initial work will focus on the development of energy
harvesting technology matched to marine wildlife activity. The research will
consider variables such as energy requirements, transducer efficiencies, and
potential effects on the host when determining the viability of each potential
energy source. Concurrent efforts will include circuit development and
programming associated with data collection for use during the deployment tests
occurring in the last year. In-lab testing will be performed in simulated
environments and final demonstration tests will be performed on northern
elephant seals using a standard translocation and recovery method. A leading
marine tag manufacturer has been included in the project as a member of an
advisory panel. This panel will help ensure systems develop through this
research will be applicable to device manufacturers in the future. Products from
this research will include publications detailing theoretic models and
experimental system results, as well as the prototype mechanical and electrical
systems comprising the energy harvesting device.