* 1537257
* NRI: Collaborative Research: A Dynamic Bayesian Approach to Real Time Estimation and Filtering in Grasp Acquisition and Other Contact Tasks (Continuation)
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2015,05/31/2019
* Siwei Lyu, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 05/31/2019
* USD 220,997.00

A current weakness of robots is their inability to quickly and reliably perform
contact tasks in unstructured environments. The goal of this project, which
represents a collaboration between faculty at two partner institutions, is to
alleviate this shortcoming by developing techniques that will afford robots
accurate real-time perception in tasks exhibiting intermittent contact. Project
outcomes will have a strong impact in manipulation tasks, as robots become more
capable and autonomous. The PIs also expect successful applications in other
areas, for instance to drive real-time haptic displays in augmented reality
systems, to extract human manipulation strategies from observed kinesthetic
demonstrations, and to identify model parameters to improve simulation accuracy,
not to mention in advancing the level of autonomy for space and undersea
exploration. Additional applications outside of robotics are anticipated in
situations where a system experiences abrupt state transitions and the goal is
either state estimation or real-time feedback control (e.g., chemical,
financial, and geological systems). The PIs' labs have a track record of
supporting women and under-represented minorities, and the research will be
integrated into a variety of pedagogical activities at the graduate and
undergraduate level on both campuses.

In previous work the team proposed the DBC-SLAM framework, in which continuous
states (i.e., poses, velocities and contact impulses), and discrete contact
states (i.e., contact-noncontact and stick-slip) of the manipulated objects, are
tracked and important model parameters are estimated. In this research, they
will extend that work significantly in two directions. First, they will design
new parallel, anytime complementarity problem (CP) solvers in order to attain
real-time performance. Second, they will enhance the dynamic Bayesian models in
DBC-SLAM to allow the use of point-cloud observations and more complex geometric
models of the objects, robot links, and environment. The intellectual merit of
the project lies in three main activities: first, the creative, yet rigorous,
technical process of designing perception algorithms based on fundamental first
principles of nonsmooth mechanics and Bayesian estimation in a way that can
utilize point-cloud data; second, achieving real-time performance by exploiting
the mathematical structure and properties of both the nonsmooth multibody
dynamics and CPU/GPU computing systems; and third, pursuing the first two
activities in a way that sheds light on the trade-offs between estimation
accuracy and speed.