* 1538559
* A new approach to equatorial inertial instability
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Rudolf Kloosterziel, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 08/31/2018
* USD 494,608.00

By undertaking this investigation of equatorial inertial instability the
understanding of the role that the instability plays in the destabilization and
equilibration of ocean currents in equatorial regions will be significantly
improved. New theories will be developed to help in improving our understanding
of inertial instability in the near-equatorial regions. Results obtained through
this research can have an important impact on the future development of ocean
models. Small-scale, near-equatorial instabilities are not resolved in ocean
models, but their role in developing and maintaining large-scale currents is
very important. By studying these instabilities, their effects can be predicted
and, hence, be parameterized in ocean models. Improvement in ocean modeling can
have important impact on climate research because of the essential role that the
equatorial ocean plays in controlling the climate.

A comprehensive study of symmetric instability of parallel shear flows for the
equatorial beta-plane will be conducted by incorporating the full Coriolis
force. Results will be contrasted with the commonly used traditional beta-plane
approximation. The potentially extremely rapid downward mixing resulting from
the instability with the 'true' Coriolis force suggests that the traditional
approximation is a very poor one. Under terrestrian circumstances the horizontal
scales are disturbingly small and therefore never resolved in global ocean
circulation models. The correct redistribution of momentum, downward buoyancy
flux and energy dissipation are thus not accurately accounted for. The proposed
research will help in determining the correct parameterizations of these
processes.