* 1538416
* Analytical Mode Decomposition of Dynamic Structural Response for The Detection of Damage
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Genda Chen, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 08/31/2019
* USD 269,252.00

Damage detection is the process of identifying the occurrence of changes to the
material and/or geometric properties of a structural system that adversely
affect performance. The goal is to transform subjective and inconsistent visual
inspections into objective and reliable condition screening of degrading
structures, in particular during extreme events such as earthquakes and blasts.
Most techniques currently available depend on the establishment of a structural
model with no damage progression over time, which is often unrealistic during
extreme events. This award supports fundamental research for the development of
a model-free and adaptive data analysis technique. The new technique will enable
an accurate and robust evaluation of time-dependent structural conditions, which
has been increasingly sought for applications in civil infrastructure
immediately after a disastrous event. Therefore, results from this study will
greatly benefit post-event response and recovery, leading to enhanced resiliency
and stable economy. The technique will be made available through a Wikipedia
page and may be applicable to multiple disciplines in science, engineering,
healthcare and finance industries. These multi-disciplinary applications will
help broaden the participation of underrepresented groups in research and
positively impact engineering education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Empirical mode
decomposition is a non-parametric and adaptive damage detection technique that
has since 1996 been demonstrated powerful to deal with nonstationary and
nonlinear dynamic responses. However, it has never been mathematically proven
for guaranteed success in various applications and thus faced challenges in
analyzing noisy data, weak intermittent fluctuations, closely-spaced modes of
vibration, and temporal changes in vibration mode. This research is to provide a
mathematical foundation to the decomposition of structural dynamic response and
explore analytical mode decomposition for damage detection of time-varying
structures. The research team will establish a sampling rate and finite data
length criterion that guarantees an accurate decomposition of a discrete time
sequence, develop a new adaptive wavelet transform for the optimal determination
of time-dependent bisecting frequencies, derive a computationally efficient
solution to a new system-response characteristics relationship recently
discovered for nonlinear structures, and experimentally validate the robustness,
accuracy, and efficiency of the analytical decomposition in system
identification and damage detection of complex structures with different
nonlinearities.