* 1538626
* RUI: Will climate change cause 'lazy larvae'? Effects of climate stressors on larval behavior and dispersal
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* M. Brady Olson, Western Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 08/31/2020
* USD 421,136.00

In the face of climate change, future distribution of animals will depend not
only on whether they adjust to new conditions in their current habitat, but also
on whether a species can spread to suitable locations in a changing habitat
landscape. In the ocean, where most species have tiny drifting larval stages,
dispersal between habitats is impacted by more than just ocean currents alone;
the swimming behavior of larvae, the flow environment the larvae encounter, and
the length of time the larvae spend in the water column all interact to impact
the distance and direction of larval dispersal. The effects of climate change,
especially ocean acidification, are already evident in shellfish species along
the Pacific coast, where hatchery managers have noticed shellfish cultures with
'lazy larvae syndrome.' Under conditions of increased acidification, these 'lazy
larvae' simply stop swimming; yet, larval swimming behavior is rarely
incorporated into studies of ocean acidification. Furthermore, how ocean warming
interacts with the effects of acidification on larvae and their swimming
behaviors remains unexplored; indeed, warming could reverse 'lazy larvae
syndrome.' This project uses a combination of manipulative laboratory
experiments, computer modeling, and a real case study to examine whether the
impacts of ocean warming and acidification on individual larvae may affect the
distribution and restoration of populations of native oysters in the Salish Sea.
The project will tightly couple research with undergraduate education at Western
Washington University, a primarily undergraduate university, by employing
student researchers, incorporating materials into undergraduate courses, and
pairing marine science student interns with art student interns to develop art
projects aimed at communicating the effects of climate change to public
audiences

As studies of the effects of climate stress in the marine environment progress,
impacts on individual-level performance must be placed in a larger ecological
context. While future climate-induced circulation changes certainly will affect
larval dispersal, the effects of climate-change stressors on individual larval
traits alone may have equally important impacts, significantly altering larval
transport and, ultimately, species distribution. This study will experimentally
examine the relationship between combined climate stressors (warming and
acidification) on planktonic larval duration, morphology, and swimming behavior;
create models to generate testable hypotheses about the effects of these factors
on larval dispersal that can be applied across systems; and, finally, use a bio-
physically coupled larval transport model to examine whether climate-impacted
larvae may affect the distribution and restoration of populations of native
oysters in the Salish Sea.