* 1538508
* Using Operational Performance Data to update Design Models for the Design of Failure-Resilient Engineered Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,12/31/2017
* Pingfeng Wang, Wichita State University
* Standard Grant
* Rich Malak
* 12/31/2017
* USD 320,000.00

As an engineered system ages, it becomes more prone to failure. Health
management of aging engineered systems is the science that seeks to proactively
prevent, mitigate and recover from potential system failures. It can potentially
make an aging engineered system failure-resilient, thus substantially reducing
its lifecycle costs. However, current approaches to engineering design have not
taken advantage of such health management data. This award supports fundamental
research to create the knowledge needed for health-management-informed design of
resilient engineered systems. Specifically, it will develop new methods and
tools for design that integrate health management into the design phase of an
engineered system. The new design methods and tools can be used by designers to
develop failure resilient engineered systems with reduced lifecycle costs. The
outcome of this research is likely to stimulate growth in several
technologically advanced industries, such as green energy or aviation, which
currently often suffer from catastrophic failures and high maintenance costs.
This research also offers unique research and educational experiences for
researchers across the fields of engineering design, prognostics, and health
management. Students will be trained in an interdisciplinary learning
environment. An engineering resilience database will be created and made widely
accessible to public.

This research pioneers a novel data-driven design model synchronization platform
for resilient engineered systems development by integrating health management
into systems design. Previously, quantitative analysis methods of health
management were only used at the operating stage of a system and were not
exploited for early-stage design. To enable health management being used for
early-stage design, this research encompasses three thrusts: 1) time-variant
design modeling, that models time-dependent system failures using novel modeling
methods and tools to be created; 2) data-driven design model synchronization,
which updates design models using sensory data acquired from actual aging
engineered systems; and 3) model-based prognostics of remaining useful life,
that enable updated design models being used for lifecycle health management. By
introducing time-variant design models, this research offers a unique solution
to consider system performance degradation in the design phase of engineered
systems. The outcome of this research will open the door towards utilizing
system design models to address post-design stage system failures, thereby
leading to resilient design of aging engineered systems.