* 1538381
* Fundamental Research on Hole Drilling and Surface Grinding of Carbon Fiber Reinforced Plastic Composites with Rotary Ultrasonic Machining
* ENG,CMMI
* 12/01/2015,11/30/2020
* Weilong Cong, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Wells
* 11/30/2020
* USD 316,691.00

Carbon fiber reinforced plastic composites have many applications, particularly
in the aerospace industry, due to their high strength and light weight. The use
of carbon fiber reinforced plastic composites in aircraft results in cost
reductions in manufacturing and maintenance, fuel savings, payload and range
increases, and aircraft life extensions. Carbon fiber reinforced plastic
composite parts can be fabricated to near-net-shape, however, additional
machining processes such as grinding and trimming are still needed to remove
excess material and holes must be drilled for assembly. Machining of composite
materials is difficult, due to their high abrasiveness and tendency to
delaminate at the interfaces between layers. Therefore, the commonly used
drilling and surface grinding methods result in high cost and low efficiency.
Rotary ultrasonic machining has been suggested for the machining of carbon fiber
reinforced composites, however, many scientific barriers are still not overcome.
Results obtained from this research will greatly benefit engineering education,
the U.S. economy, U.S. export, and society in general.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
objective of the research is to generate new understanding of hole drilling in
and surface grinding of carbon fiber reinforced plastic composites using rotary
ultrasonic machining. This work will contribute to the development of an
innovative, efficient, and cost-effective composite machining process for the
U.S. aerospace industry. The research will study the actual removal mechanisms
for homogeneous materials in rotary ultrasonic machining, determine the
dependence of horizontal ultrasonic vibration along the feed direction on the
cutting force in surface grinding, explore the relationship between cutting
force and delamination in ultrasonic hole making, generate understanding of
ultrasonic vibration's influence in rotary ultrasonic machining and ultrasonic
vibration assisted machining, and assess the effects of the tool-workpiece
contact mode and composite structural properties on machining performance. The
methodologies will include both experimental investigations (setting up
experiments and measurements to obtain process parameters) and theoretical
modeling (building finite element analysis models and mechanistic models to
explore the fundamental understanding of experimental phenomena). The project
will also provide foundational knowledge for the machining of composite/metal
stacks, benefit machining of other difficult-to-machine heterogeneous materials,
and explore and implement innovative concepts in research and education.