* 1538360
* Large Scale Nanomanufacturing of Novel Inhomogeneous Strained Two-Dimensional Materials with Tunable Electronic and Optical Properties
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,01/31/2019
* Gary Cheng, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 01/31/2019
* USD 300,000.00

The application of two-dimensional atomic layer crystals opens wide opportunity
to realize novel electronic, thermal and optical properties that may enable new
electronic and photonic devices and significantly improve the efficiency and
performance of current devices. However, these two-dimensional materials have
limited tunability and therefore provide insufficient benefits to their
potential applications. Bandgap opening and tuning is essential to fully exploit
the unprecedented electronics properties. This award supports fundamental
research to provide the needed knowledge for a scalable nanomanufacturing
technique, namely laser shock-based nano-straining engineering. Such a method
will generate tunable electrical and optical behavior in the two-dimensional
crystals by applying an inhomogeneous three-dimensional strain patterns. This
new technique will enable a novel large scale three-dimensional strain
engineering and parallel manufacturing process of the two-dimensional crystals
to achieve a wide range of tunable electronic and optical functionalities for a
variety of device applications. The results of the research will be used to
develop new coursework. The project will encourage students of various
backgrounds to participate in the research and demonstrations.

This project will build a solid science base for design and manufacturing of a
quasi-three dimensional, non-planar-strained nano-architecture out of the two-
dimensional atomic layer materials with tunable electrical and optical
properties. The award will specifically focus on graphene and transition metal
dichalcogenides such as MoS2. However, there are several scientific barriers to
overcome in order to realize the benefits of this novel quasi-three-dimensional
straining technique. The research team aims to fill the gaps by studying the
effects of processing conditions on nanoscale straining of the two-dimensional
crystals with molecular dynamics simulation and experiments, and determine the
relationship between the inhomogeneous strain-engineered two-dimensional
crystals and their electrical and optical properties. This research is the first
experimental attempt in nanoscale strain-engineering of two-dimensional
materials for tuning their functionalities.