* 1538125
* Topology Optimization for Wear of Composite Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Natasha Vermaak, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Jablokow
* 08/31/2019
* USD 530,672.00

Mechanical devices have numerous joints, bushings and bearings that must operate
reliably with low friction and wear to ensure acceptable device lifetime and
performance. The costs of friction and wear are estimated to be greater than
$500 billion per year in the United States alone. This financial impact is
compounded by the irreversible environmental factors of material and energy
waste. In this award a new design paradigm will be developed to optimize the
tribological, structural, and thermal performance and properties of composite
systems through the arrangement of materials. Topology optimization is a
powerful mathematical design tool that determines configurations of materials
optimized for performance. The performance metrics and properties of interest
include wear, surface topography, friction, density, cost, thermal conductivity
and electrical conductivity. This award will enhance the education, exposure and
interest in tribology and topology optimization at all levels of society through
hands-on, K-12 experiments and demonstrations, through the incorporation of
tribology and topology optimization in Lehigh University's engineering
curriculum, and by providing graduate and undergraduate student training.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This collaborative research project will result in a new
design optimization framework capable of designing composite materials for
applications involving sliding wear. Sliding interfaces in many engineered
systems must be multifunctional, prompting the need to optimize for a range of
thermomechanical and tribological processes and properties. Several strategies
will be explored to integrate fabrication information in the design optimization
process. Experiments establishing relationships and links between processing or
manufacturing parameters and wear characteristics are planned. The objective is
to produce experimentally validated wear models that include coupled multi-
physics formulations (relating contact pressures, temperatures, and wear
topography). These experimental investigations will feed into the development of
a holistic topology optimization framework for the wear of composites.