* 1538215
* Highly Conductive Reduced Graphene Oxide Films for High Performance Electronic Devices
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,02/28/2019
* Vladimir Tsukruk, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 02/28/2019
* USD 300,000.00

Graphene has proven to be a truly unique material and the record holder for a
number of physical parameters. It is expected that employment of graphene as a
highly conductive and transparent material would create a new class of
electronic devices characterized by excellent durability and flexural freedom.
However, despite recent significant progress in scaling up fabrication of large
area graphene sheets the fabrication methods still require significant effort
and sophisticated multistage handling of the material. To this end, this award
targets the manufacture of highly conductive graphene-based films from micron-
scale sheets of reduced-graphene oxide, which can be obtained from naturally
occurring graphite. The manufacturing method in this project is environmentally
friendly, does not involve toxic organic solvents, and utilizes conventional
industrial equipment. The approach has a significant potential to rapidly grow
to industrial scale and, therefore, increase the competitiveness of US based-
manufacturing and create employment opportunities. In course of the work
significant effort will be directed to increase the numbers of students,
especially underrepresented minorities and women, who wish to pursue advanced
degrees in science and engineering. Students will benefit greatly from this
project's interdisciplinary nature and hands-on approach.

The ultimate goal of this work is the design and understanding of a robust and
scalable nanomanufacturing method for the fabrication of highly conductive,
highly flexible, and transparent reduced graphene oxide (rGO) based nano-scale
layers or films via a facile dip-coating process assisted with polymer adsorbed
layers. The method is based on enveloping individual graphene oxide (GO) sheets
in few nm thick polymer layers allowing for near-perfect formation of the GO
monolayer by scalable conventional dip-coating. After the dip-coating a polymer
interlayer is deposited on the GO/ RMS (reactive macromolecular super-spreader)
monolayer by adsorption. The polymer interlayer is employed to promote formation
of the second GO monolayer (by dip-coating) and provide carbon atoms to connect
the bottom and upper rGO monolayers during the GO reduction. This work directly
addresses a number of the grand challenges for the large-scale nanomanufacturing
of rGO-based conductive transparent flexible films. Specifically, it is expected
that the research manufacturing method will allow the straightforward and
reproducible fabrication of tight GO monolayers on non-conductive substrates,
control of the thickness of the rGO layer with single layer precision, and
achieve high coherency and robustness of the fabricated layer. In terms of
properties, the project targets the manufacture of highly conductive (low sheet
resistance) and transparent (low absorbance in visible region) rGO-based
nanoscale films on non-conductive oxide surfaces.