* 1538102
* Collaborative Research: Perfect Simulation of Stochastic Networks
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Haipeng Xing, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 08/31/2018
* USD 83,999.00

Stochastic networks are a general class of time-varying probabilistic models
where there is competition for limited resources. They are used in a wide range
of engineering applications such as communication networks, call centers, and
manufacturing systems. Operators of these types of systems are often interested
in achieving a high level of performance over the long run, i.e., in steady
state. Thus, it is important to device efficient computational methods for
steady-state analysis of stochastic networks. Simulation is one of the most
commonly used methods for estimating steady-state performance but
straightforward application results in an initial-transient bias. This award
provides a comprehensive set of tools that will enable exact (i.e. with no
initial-transient bias) steady-state stochastic simulation of a wide range of
complex stochastic networks of interest. This characteristic (complete bias
deletion) is what defines a perfect simulation algorithm. This research will
therefore enable accurate steady-state analysis in a wide range of areas of
societal impact, thereby allowing operators to improve efficiency and
performance. Because steady-state analysis arises in a wide variety of areas,
including Bayesian Statistics, the award will also be impactful beyond the types
of applications mentioned earlier. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Steady-state
performance analysis of stochastic networks (including general queueing
networks) is of great importance in operations research. Stochastic simulation
has been a traditional tool used by modelers and researchers to perform steady-
state computations. The key challenge in steady-state simulation is the
quantification of the bias caused by the initial transient behavior associated
to any direct stochastic simulation procedure. This award's focus is on
algorithms that fully eliminate the initial transient bias in a non-asymptotic
sense; these are known as perfect simulation algorithms. This research will
produce the first class of perfect simulation algorithms for general stochastic
networks with features such as non-Markovian input, time-inhomogeneous
(periodic) characteristics, long-range dependence traffic (e.g. fractional
Brownian motion), and multidimensional networks with and without capacity
constraints (such as generalized Jackson networks). This research combines
techniques from areas such as rare-event simulation and steady-state simulation,
which have not been connected for the purpose of developing computational
methods. The project has important implications for other scientific areas of
great relevance, such as Bayesian Statistics, due to the connection between
steady-state simulation through Markov chain Monte Carlo method.