* 1538744
* Analytic Certification for Additively Manufacturing Parts and Processes under Uncertainty
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* David Rosen, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Steve Schmid
* 08/31/2018
* USD 100,000.00

Advances in additive manufacturing enable virtually unlimited design complexity
and thus require far more design decisions. Moreover, increased complexity and
flexibility in a system add significant amounts of uncertainty associated with
the larger number of design variables. This results in significant deviations
between an original design and the printed product due to current limitations in
the additive manufacturing process. Accordingly, there is an increasing pressure
to enable the certification of additively manufactured parts by analysis without
conducting customized testing for the printed parts. This award supports
scientific investigations on the behavior of additively manufactured parts at
different length scales under uncertainty. The knowledge generated from this
research will play a large role in the design and certification of additively
manufactured parts in the context of practical engineering systems. Ultimately,
the results from this research will facilitate the delivery of high-quality
additively manufactured parts with predictable performance, which is critical in
aerospace, medical device, and automotive industries, among
others.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research is to enable engineers to
certify additively manufactured parts according to desired properties across a
broad range of processes and materials. This goal will be accomplished by
enhancing our knowledge on the behavior of additively manufactured parts based
on advanced statistical analysis with physical experiments. Thus, the objective
of this research is to understand the relationship between mechanical behavior
of fabricated parts and their inherent uncertainties in geometrical deviations
(e.g., stacked position and length, and surface quality), and process parameters
(e.g., build orientation, layer thickness, raster angle, air gap, contour width,
etc.). Various sizes and types of cellular structures will be fabricated to
analyze the range of microstructures capable of being produced by fused
deposition modeling. The experimental results will be correlated to geometrical
deviations, process variables and their uncertainties as well as mechanical
properties. Appropriate representation schemes will also be identified for
uncertainty parameters of manufacturing processes and parts. These uncertainties
will be used to obtain mathematical formalisms by way of stochastic expansions,
which will be synthesized into a multi-level, multi-scale model that describes
the behavior of fabricated parts. The obtained model can be used to accurately
describe the behavior of fabricated parts at different length scales under
uncertainty. Ultimately, this additional effort will identify new knowledge
regarding key uncertainties in process parameters that affect the performance of
additively manufactured parts.