* 1538094
* Collaborative Research: Modeling-Based Design of Freeze-Cast Hybrid Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Jifeng Liu, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Alexis Lewis
* 08/31/2019
* USD 361,318.00

The freeze-casting process is one with which bulk materials and entire
components of several cubic centimeters in size can be manufactured with ease.
The process is based on the solidification of water-based solutions or slurries
(suspensions). To freeze-cast a scaffold, a solution or slurry is poured into a
mold and then directionally solidified. During freezing, the water solidifies in
the form of pure ice crystals, and the polymer that was dissolved and the
particles that were suspended in this liquid carrier are concentrated between
them. Once frozen, the sample is freeze-dried to sublime the ice-phase and
reveal the material scaffold; its architecture is the negative of the ice
crystals which templated it. The cell wall material structure is the result of a
self-assembly process. Freeze casting or "ice templating" is a relatively
inexpensive procedure and provides a means to mimic complex, efficient natural
materials with hierarchical designs over several length-scales. This award
supports research to build models, basic design principles and tools that will
enable a systematic approach for the design and manufacture of freeze-cast
hybrid materials with enhanced performance. These new materials will be of
benefit to both individuals and the general public at large through applications
that range from energy generation and storage to tissue repair and regeneration.

This research program focuses on the fundamental science and modeling-driven
design of freeze-cast hybrid materials. An interdisciplinary team with expertise
in modeling, experiment and characterization will address current knowledge gaps
and analyze the formation and evolution of the ice phase and ice-templated
material architectures generated by the freeze casting process in an attempt to
uncover basic physicochemical principles and determine fundamental processing-
structure-property correlations. The three research goals are to (1) determine
the underlying fundamental materials science and establish a realistic model for
ice-crystal nucleation and growth on a well-defined substrate (graphene) during
freeze casting; (2) uncover processing-structure-property correlations by
combining multiscale computational modeling with experimental approaches; and
(3) develop predictive models to identify the most promising processing-additive
combinations in order to custom-design and optimize structure formation and
performance in the model material system.