* 1538108
* Directed Assembly of Colloids for Nanomanufacturing of Hierarchically Ordered Electronic Films
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Bridgette Budhlall, University of Massachusetts Lowell
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 08/31/2019
* USD 299,999.00

The promise of polymer-based electronics is that energy harvesting, lighting and
sensing applications can be achieved with cheap, flexible, lightweight and
abundant plastics using faster, more efficient solution-based manufacturing.
Current state-of-the-art processing for organic electronics employs toxic
chlorinated organic solvents and relies on the uncontrolled self-assembly of the
polymer as it solidifies from solution. Additional barriers to widespread
adoption include reproducibility and lifetime issues associated with the scale-
up of device manufacturing. This award aims to address these challenges through
study of a novel nanomanufacturing paradigm. Water-based colloidal suspensions
of electronic polymers will be assembled into hierarchical structures using
external electric fields. This research will lead to cheaper, more reliable and
sustainable solution-based processing of polymers for the manufacture of
flexible electronics, photovoltaics and sensors. Integration of research into
education will be an enduring impact of this project. Students will be involved
at all levels, including undergraduates. Plans are to engage K-12 students,
including minority and first-generation-to-college students, in the City of
Lowell Public Schools by introducing the basics of nanotechnology and organic
electronics with hands-on demonstrations and student
mentoring.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of this research project are to
investigate a novel dielectrophoresis (DEP) technique to manufacture
hierarchically ordered conjugated polymer films from colloidal suspensions and
to create a new processing paradigm for organic electronics applications. This
research will provide a new nanomanufacturing method for directed assembly of
multicomponent nanoparticles into well-defined structured thin films over a
range of length scales. Specifically, the tasks are (i) investigate of a novel
DEP technique for hierarchical patterned deposition of colloidal nanoparticles
of semiconducting polymers, (ii) elucidate the role of polymer nanoparticle
preparation variables on particle size, colloidal stability and internal polymer
chain structures, and (iii) characterize the relationship between this new
manufacturing paradigm and polymer film morphology and electronic properties. By
controlling the morphology of conjugated polymer thin films, the award will
study the hypothesis that films from aqueous colloidal nanoparticle assembles
are more suitable for devices with improved electronic properties compared to
films prepared using conventional film-casting from organic solvents. The
principles learned from this fundamental research will establish design rules
for conjugated polymer nanoparticle assembly and enable creation of a "colloidal
process engineering tool-kit". This will serve as the underpinning of continuous
nanoparticle assembly and deposition to control thin-film morphologies that can
be translated into innovative and versatile manufacturing processes for
electronic devices.