* 1538569
* Collaborative Research: Improving Spatial Observability of Dynamic Traffic Systems through Active Mobile Sensor Networks and Crowdsourced Data
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/15/2015,05/31/2018
* Xuesong Zhou, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Chen
* 05/31/2018
* USD 200,000.00

To provide effective traffic congestion mitigation strategies, transportation
agencies need to effectively design sensor networks to reliably estimate and
predict traffic conditions across large transportation networks. The next
generation traffic sensor network will offer large, diverse data streams not
only from fixed traffic detectors, but also from many emerging active mobile
traffic sensors such as Unmanned Aerial Vehicles, self-driving cars, and
crowdsourced data sources from social sensors and transportation network
companies. This new generation of agile sensors can provide a much richer but
also increasingly complex traffic data environment. Moreover, crowdsourced data
is generally uncontrolled, inaccurate and unreliable. This research focuses on
new sensor design/control applications to transform the interconnection between
travelers, sensors, data and transportation management systems. Methodologies
developed in this research will help transportation agencies to efficiently
deploy and integrate sensors with limited budgets and resources, identify
links/nodes/areas in transportation networks with the weakest sensor coverage,
and generate mitigation strategies based on observability measures. Field tests
using active mobile sensors will demonstrate the feasibility of the system.
Research outcomes will be integrated into teaching through various channels
including curriculum development and teaching-oriented software tools that can
contribute to the training of future transportation engineers. The collaboration
with a Historically Black College and University will help broaden participation
of underrepresented student groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
objective of this research is to develop rigorous mathematical foundations and
innovative algorithms to accurately quantify spatial observability of dynamic
traffic states, optimize active mobile sensor locations, and mine information
from crowdsourced data sources. The research team will first characterize
analytical space-time distributions of different traffic states at both
macroscopic and microscopic scales, and further develop time-geography-oriented
optimization for quantifying spatial observability for dynamic networks. A new
class of ubiquitous sensor network design problems is studied for the traffic
state estimation stage, and the integration of the well-fused crowdsourced data
with optimized fixed and active mobile sensor data is investigated under
different levels of activity/penetration rates. Utilizing the structure of
underlying dynamic transportation networks, this research aims to develop
computationally efficient optimization algorithms to create a distributed and
scalable computing framework, which can solve joint scheduling and routing
problems of active mobile sensors to increase coverage and accuracy. The
research team will develop generic measures of spatial network observability
that can provide additional theoretical findings for general civil engineering
systems such as earthquake impact detection, ground water pollution source
identification, and critical infrastructure monitoring.