* 1538550
* Developing New Methods for Obtaining Energy-based Acoustic Quantities
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Kent Gee, Brigham Young University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Landers
* 08/31/2019
* USD 395,995.00

Although a microphone measures only pressure changes, multiple microphones can
be used to extract significant information about acoustic energy flow, leading
to more effective source and sound field characterization. This award will allow
in-depth study of new methods for obtaining energy-based quantities from multi-
microphone measurements, improving on traditional techniques that often require
measurements be repeated with different microphone spacings. Initial development
has already enhanced vector intensity measurements of rocket and military jet
noise fields, but theoretical and experimental investigations will extend this
work to other quantities in both enclosed and radiating sound fields as well as
impactful applications. The effort will not only lead to improved and more
efficient characterizations of sound sources and fields, but will be used to
promote and further develop targeted activities to prepare a diverse, globally
competitive workforce, support science education on all levels, and increase
public awareness and appreciation of science through a broad outreach
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To improve frequency bandwidth of energy-based
acoustical measurements made with multi-microphone probes, new calculation
methods based on taking gradients of the amplitude and phase variation across
the microphones will be developed. Signal processing procedures for different
acoustic quantities will be obtained from analytical investigations and
laboratory experiments will be used to assess performance gains for different
acoustical environments, probe configurations, and processing methods. This work
has diverse practical applications in engineering acoustics, noise control,
architectural acoustics, and source localization and tracking, a few of which
will be investigated as a result of this award. Improved sound power measurement
procedures will impact source noise assessment across a broad range of
industries. New acoustical holography methodologies will result in more
efficient three-dimensional sound source and field characterizations.
Additionally, plane-wave tube measurement methods used to characterize
absorption and sound transmission properties of different materials may benefit
from the work. These new methods for obtaining energy-based acoustical
quantities from multi-microphone measurements will guide development of probe
microphone configurations optimized for the calculation procedures and prompt
reviews of current national and international measurement standards.