* 1538596
* Material with Tunable Constitution for Elastodynamic Deformation
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2019
* Kurt Maute, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 07/31/2019
* USD 364,927.00

Structural composites are materials consisting of two or more constituent
materials with different properties, that when combined, exhibit unique
mechanical properties. The individual constituents can be chosen and arranged to
achieve desirable properties, such as high stiffness and low density. In a
conventional composite, however, these properties are constant and cannot be
changed without permanently changing the structure or composition of the
material. This award supports fundamental research to enable the analysis and
design of a new class of composite materials that are tunable on-demand and on-
the-fly. These tunable materials will feature internal networks of flow channels
that allow active tuning of the density, elastic constants, and damping
properties. The tunable composites enable fundamentally new strategies for the
control of vibration and acoustics across a wide range of applications. This
research combines several disciplines including elastodynamics, constitutive
modeling, dynamic homogenization, fluid-structure interaction, band structure
calculations, and design optimization. The multi-disciplinary nature of the
research will provide a stimulating setting for students who will participate in
this project and broaden participation of underrepresented groups in research.
Outreach activities will attract K-12 students to the design of engineered
materials with tunable properties and the underlying concepts pertaining to wave
motion and mechanics of materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific objectives
of this project are to establish a rigorous dynamic homogenization theory for
the tunable composites. The theory will account for the effects of dissipation
on the composite properties. This theory will be used towards the analysis and
design of fluidic metamaterials consisting of periodic arrays of resonators
intertwined with a built-in network of flow channels with varying fluid
composition and flow conditions. A topology optimization scheme will be
established to maximize the real-time performance of the emerging fluid-
structure material system. Building upon Bloch theory for harmonic wave
propagation, the research on dynamic homogenization will establish a methodology
for obtaining frequency-dependent effective properties for the density, damping,
and elasticity tensors. A computational framework based on a finite-element
time-domain scheme will be created for computing the band structure of the
coupled fluid-structure system. A gradient-driven topology optimization
methodology using level sets and the extended finite element method will be
explored to optimally arrange fluid and solid phases. The resulting tunable
metamaterial represents a major transformation to what constitutes a multi-
functional composite that is intrinsically dynamic, adaptive, and energy
absorbing, providing unprecedented new opportunities for sound and vibration
control.