* 1538374
* Stability Analysis of Large-Scale Nonlinear Systems using Parallel Computation
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Matthew Peet, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 08/31/2019
* USD 280,000.00

As engineered systems grow in complexity, the difficulty of safe and reliable
operation of these systems becomes more challenging. For example, consider the
$15 billion international nuclear fusion reactor being built in Cadarache,
France. Although the world has known for 60 years that it is possible to produce
energy from nuclear fusion by heating plasma in a magnetic field, physicists
have never been able to control the magnetic field accurately enough to produce
significant amounts of power. The reason is that even the simplest models of
magneto hydrodynamics involve more than 20 coupled nonlinear differential
equations. Although algorithms for control have made great strides in recent
years, control of systems of this complexity is still out of reach. This project
will design new algorithms for control which use supercomputers and massively
parallel computation in an attempt to enable the safe and reliable design of
controllers for large complex systems such as describe plasma in a
reactor.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At the heart of the project is a new way of using
convex optimization to parameterize Lyapunov functions (a measure of energy).
Specifically, while the well-known sum-of-squares parameterization of positive
polynomials is convex, reliable and accurate for small-scale systems, it cannot
be readily adapted to supercomputers and other forms of massively parallel
computation. The essence of this project, then is to look for alternative
mathematical parameterizations of Lyapunov functions which are convex and
furthermore are amenable to parallel computation. Such alternatives exist in
classical mathematical results by Handelman, Polya and Bernstein. The scope of
work is to use those results to create parallel codes, which can study multiple
coupled nonlinear equations and determine the best possible Lyapunov function
fit within the mathematical Language of polynomials. The project will test these
algorithms on cluster and parallel graphics processor computing machines and
will be able to study nonlinear differential equations with up to 20 states.
These algorithms will then be applied to discretized nonlinear partial
differential equation representations of the magneto-hydrodynamics of plasma in
a nuclear fusion reactor to obtain a function of energy which can then be used
to design and test magnetic and radio frequency controllers which will reduce or
eliminate magneto hydrodynamic instabilities. The algorithms developed can also
be applied to any large nonlinear system, implying they can be used to improve
understanding and control in applications such as chemical reactors, gene
regulatory networks and communication satellites.