* 1538946
* ERASynBIO:ECF Express - An Orthogonal, Organism-independent Expression Platform Based on Extractoplasmic Function (ECF) Sigma Factors
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2018
* Carol Gross, University of California-San Francisco
* Standard Grant
* Devaki Bhaya
* 06/30/2018
* USD 750,000.00

The defining characteristics of synthetic biology are both the application of
engineering principles to advance biological understanding and to develop new
functions for useful purposes. One of the major challenges of synthetic biology
is to modify or create new biological systems that are more efficient and
reliable than natural organisms. This research project addresses one such
challenge through the design and implementation of new regulatory modules that
will control and optimize gene expression without wasting cellular resources.
Significant broader impacts of this research are educating a next-generation
workforce to support a growing bioeconomy, providing a new fundamental
understanding of an important biological process, and generating new enabling
tools for the wider synthetic biology community.

This research takes advantage of a new process of using extracytoplasmic
function sigma factors for synthetic biology applications. These
extracytoplasmic function sigma factors (ECFs), when redesigned, can serve as
robust gene regulatory switches capable of controlling diverse transcriptional
activities. These factors have two conserved protein domains that recognize and
bind to specific promoter sequences. They then recruit RNA-polymerase to
initiate transcription from natural or synthetic promoter sites. The
compositional simplicity of these factors are used for creating a series of
synthetic sigma factor/promoter pairs tailored for specific regulatory needs. In
this project, the investigators will create chimeric ECFs from natural ECFs to
generate a large library of universal switches that are orthogonal in four model
bacteria (E. coli, S. meliloti, B. subtilis and S. venezuelae). This will be
accomplished by applying design strategies based on combinatorial synthesis,
structure-guided mutational approaches and in vivo and in silico testing in
complex genetic circuits. This results will provide new tools to enable
biological design via synthetic biology. This project is the US collaborative
component of a project funded through the ERASynBIO EU-US transnational funding
mechanism.