* 1538439
* A Multiphase Printing Process for Freeform Optics Manufacturing
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Lei Li, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 07/31/2019
* USD 299,009.00

Freeform optics can form high quality images with smaller aberrations by using
fewer optical components. At the present time, fabrication of a freeform optical
component is extremely time consuming. Drop-on-demand printing has been used to
fabricate spherical or aspherical microlenses with simple curvatures, but is not
able to produce more complicated designs due to the constraint of symmetric
surface tension forces. By applying external interfacial forces, this constraint
can be overcome and freeform shapes can be formed. This award supports
fundamental research of a novel multiphase printing process that integrates
direct printing and interfacial forces in order to fabricate high precision
freeform micro optics. This project will benefit the U.S optical industry by
providing a new high precision manufacturing process for low-cost and high
quality optical products. Research results can be readily applied to other
manufacturing areas that utilize tunable interface forces, for example, 3D
printing of smooth streamline surfaces in aerospace, automobile, and biomedical
industries.

The research objectives are to establish relationships (1) between lens surface
curvatures and the multiphase conditions (such as thickness and tilting of the
supporting liquid phase); (2) between freeform lens profiles and dynamic
deformation of droplets; and (3) between the freeform lens shapes and non-
uniform material properties (e.g. different surface tension and viscosity
coexisted on the droplet surface). Experiments will be conducted on a hybrid
multiphase printing platform. On this platform, ultraviolet curable monomer
droplets will be printed on a solid-liquid-air or liquid-air multiphase surface
under different multiphase conditions. A precision linear and tilting stage will
be used to control the thickness and tilting of the supporting liquid phase.
Lens surface curvatures will be measured by a white light interferometer and a
combined Twyman-Green and Mach-Zehnder interferometer. To achieve the first
objective, monomer droplets will be cured after the droplets reaching
equilibrium status on the multiphase surface. Finite element method will be used
to determine lens profile curvatures under different multiphase conditions. To
achieve the second objective, monomer droplets will be cured at transient state.
A high speed camera will be installed to identify the droplet transient shape.
Lens profiles obtained at different transient state will be analyzed and
correlated to high speed images. To achieve the third objective, maskless
lithography will be used to tune the local surface tension and viscosity of the
monomer droplet to achieve non-uniform properties, which will cause non-uniform
droplet deformation.