* 1538389
* Remote Infrastructure Monitoring Assessment via Multispectral Imaging of Surface Coatings
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Matthew McCarthy, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Irina Dolinskaya
* 08/31/2020
* USD 430,000.00

Our country's aging and deteriorating infrastructure creates the need for
transformative science and technology that can assist in novel management and
maintenance approaches. This award supports fundamental research on monitoring,
measurement, analysis and computations in support of system diagnostics,
applicable to a civil infrastructure. Examples include bridges, railroads,
masonry buildings, networks of pipelines, powerlines, dams and more. This award
investigates multispectral imaging through novel coatings that act as
selectively responsive sensing units when deposited on actual structural
components and monitored by appropriate imaging devices. The results of this
award could be used to implement unprecedented structural health monitoring
procedures which combined with the use of unmanned aerial systems developed to
perform such measurements in highly dynamic environments have the potential to
radically reduce downtime associated with lengthy and costly maintenance
operations. In addition, they may offer the capability of both earlier and more
quantitative identification of deterioration and damage. Therefore, results of
this research are expected to benefit the U.S economy and society as it targets
major improvements in manufacturing, monitoring and analysis methods with
applications in urban systems, sustainability and resiliency of infrastructure.
The broader impact of this research focuses in enhancing the efforts for cross-
cutting progress in restoration and improvement of urban infrastructure. In this
context of civic engagement, the research will leverage resources within the
PIs' institution co-operative educational program to transfer related knowledge
in educational curricula and train the next generation of engineers working in
the area of system diagnostics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Multimodal remote sensing
instrumentation platform coupled with scalable manufacturing and autonomous
aerial vehicles will create a framework to rapidly assess the condition of
infrastructure systems. Three research objectives in this project are targeted:
the use of novel manufacturing procedures in a context of a materials-by-design
and advances in metamaterials for the creation of unprecedented opportunities
for scalable, tunable, multimodal, multispectral and embedded coatings for
automated inspection and deformation quantification; the use of unmanned aerial
systems equipped with multi-spectral sensors capable to measure deformation
through interrogation of the coatings; the development of methodologies to
combine multispectral image point clouds, as well as other sources of
information with multiscale and multimodal modeling for state awareness and
remaining useful life predictions. Specifically, novel manufacturing procedures
will be adopted to design surface coatings and embed them in structural
components. The properties of the coatings will be tailored to guarantee their
rapid detection by multispectral sensing capturing ultraviolet and infrared
radiation as well as visible light. The relative position of the coating
elements will be tracked using dedicated algorithms based on computer vision and
photogrammetry used to quantify local and global position coordinates of the
monitored structures.