* 1538402
* Collaborative Research: Experimental and Computational Studies on CO2 Photoreduction to Fuels by Nanostructured Catalysts
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2014,04/30/2015
* Ying Li, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Gregory Rorrer
* 04/30/2015
* USD 40,144.00

Institution: University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee / Arizona State
University&lt;br/&gt;Title: Collaborative Research: Experimental and
Computational Studies on CO2 Photoreduction to Fuels by Nanostructured
Catalysts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Carbon
dioxide (CO2) from the atmosphere is a potentially sustainable source of carbon
for the production of renewable fuels. The photocatalytic conversion of CO2 and
water to hydrocarbons is a particularly attractive route, as it uses solar
energy as the source of reducing electrons to drive this conversion process.
However, the photocatalytic reduction of CO2 is an extremely challenging task
due to the stable thermodynamic properties of CO2. The low yield of CO2
conversion calls for more efficient photocatalysts, but the development of
efficient photocatalysts requires understanding of CO2?catalyst interactions and
electron transfer pathways deduced from computational studies at the molecular
level. The overall objective of the proposed research is to use solar radiation
to photocatalytically reduce CO2 to fuels (CO, methane, methanol, and other
hydrocarbons) at high conversion efficiency through manipulation of catalyst
composition and nanostructure. Toward this end, the proposed research has three
objectives. The first objective is to fabricate nanostructured photocatalysts,
specifically brookite-containing mixed-phase TiO2 nanoparticles with controlled
phase contents such as lattice-doped iodine and surface Cu clusters, to achieve
visible light responsiveness and facilitate charge separation. The second
objective is to develop a fundamental understanding of the catalyst properties
and charge separation mechanism at the mixed-phase (e.g., anatase-brookite)
nanocrystalline interfaces through closely coupled experiments and computational
chemistry (density functional theory) modeling. The third objective is to
optimize catalyst composition and nanostructure (e.g., TiO2 phase composition,
crystal size, surface structures, dopant concentration, etc.) to synergistically
improve CO2 photoreduction efficiency. In this regard, the proposed research
will integrate experimental and computational approaches to evaluate brookite-
based catalyst activity toward CO2 photoreduction, and will advance fundamental
understanding in the multidisciplinary areas of material science, surface
chemistry, photocatalysis, and nanotechnology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Processes for photoreduction of CO2 and water to
hydrocarbon fuels tackle the simultaneous challenges of greenhouse gas
management and renewable fuels production. The educational and outreach
activities will be in the context of the proposed research. Topics related to
CO2 reduction and solar fuels will be incorporated into solar engineering,
chemical reactor design, and air quality engineering courses at Arizona State
University (ASU) and the University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee (UWM). Outreach
activities at ASU sponsored though the Ira A. Fulton Schools of Engineering
(IAFSE) will provide hands-on experiences in solar fuels to students from
underrepresented groups as well as local teachers. An animated educational
module on CO2 conversion by sunlight will also be created to engage students and
the general public. This module will be posted on the websites of the principal
investigators as well as on the ASU IAFSE outreach website. Complimentary
outreach activities at UWM will be coordinated through the Urban Ecology Center
(UEC) in Milwaukee, Wisconsin, who has partnerships with forty-four inner-city
elementary and high schools and provides ?outdoor classrooms? in science
education for urban youth.