* 1538525
* How does intensity and frequency of environmental variability affect phytoplankton growth?
* GEO,OCE
* 12/01/2015,11/30/2020
* David Hutchins, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Michael Sieracki
* 11/30/2020
* USD 790,404.00

Microscopic plants called phytoplankton are key members of global oceanic
ecosystems, since their photosynthesis supports the majority of the marine food
chain and produces about as much oxygen as land plants. Because of this,
oceanographers have often carried out experiments examining how factors such as
temperature and carbon dioxide levels may affect phytoplankton growth. Most
previous experiments have used constant levels of temperature and carbon
dioxide, but it is clear from looking at measurements from real ocean ecosystems
that these two factors often vary greatly over timescales of days to weeks.
Using field and laboratory experiments along with computer modeling, this
project will test how the growth of several major groups of phytoplankton
differs under constant conditions of temperature and carbon dioxide, compared to
conditions in which these factors fluctuate in intensity and frequency. This
research will give marine scientists a better picture of how phytoplankton may
respond to a varying natural environment today and in the future, and therefore
help us to understand how ocean food webs function to support critical living
resources such as fisheries. The project will train graduate and undergraduate
students and a postdoctoral researcher, and the lead scientists will be involved
in an ocean science education program for largely minority high school students
from a downtown Los Angeles school district.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of
this project is to use laboratory culture and natural community experiments to
understand how realistically fluctuating temperature and pCO2 conditions may
affect globally important phytoplankton groups in ways that differ from the
artificial constant exposures used in previous work. Culture experiments will
test how the intensity and frequency of short-term thermal and carbonate
fluctuations affects the growth responses of diazotrophic and picoplanktonic
cyanobacteria, coccolithophores, and diatoms under both current and projected
future environmental conditions. These lab results will be supported and
extended by parallel experiments using mixed natural assemblages from the
California upwelling regime, allowing us to test these same questions using
phytoplankton communities that experience large seasonal shifts between highly
dynamic thermal and carbonate system conditions during the spring upwelling
season, and relatively much more static conditions during fall stratification
events. These results will be synthesized using a new generation of numerical
models that employ novel approaches to incorporating realistic environmental
variations to allow more accurate predictions of phytoplankton responses to a
dynamic environment in today's marine ecosystems, and in the future changing
ocean.