* 1538003
* Manipulation of Elastic Deformation in Bio-inspired Wet Adhesion
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Joelle Frechette, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 08/31/2019
* USD 338,000.00

The choice of materials to control adhesion depends on the desired application.
In robotics, for example, multiple adhesive cycles are necessary for locomotion,
gripping, and manipulation. Synthetic hierarchical structures based on the gecko
toe pads demonstrated these capabilities in air. Fulfilling these requirements
for reversible adhesion in fluid environments (for example underwater), however,
is more challenging. In fluids, dynamic effects such as drag and swelling can
deform surface structures prior to contact and prevent adhesion. The objective
of the work is to develop the fundamental understanding in mechanics necessary
for the creation of structured surfaces that can act as reversible adhesives in
liquids. The strategy to be followed is the fabrication of porous soft material
films with a surface topography inspired by the frog toe pads. These films will
be employed to investigate the role played by porosity and deformation on
adhesion. The development of coatings for reversible underwater adhesion will
advance the manufacturing of robotic components, bandages and wound sealants,
and could help understand the mechanisms of biofouling. Beyond underwater
adhesion for robotic and larger scale applications, a better understanding of
poroelasticity in compliant materials could lead to better performing materials
to replace joint cartilage. Outreach efforts include participation of high
school and undergraduate students in the laboratory. Students participating in
the project will be encouraged to present at conferences and be involved with
additional outreach efforts at local elementary
schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The dynamics of friction, adhesion, and fracture
of porous compliant materials involve poorly understood phenomena because
transport, deformation, and adhesion are highly coupled. To address this issue,
new instrumentation will be developed to study the mechanical performance of
soft and porous coatings to measure simultaneously dissipative forces and
spatiotemporal deformation. The performance (e.g. adhesion and poroelastic
relaxation) of polymer coatings fabricated with three different type of
anisotropic pillars will be investigated and results will be compared with
uniform coatings of the same material. In particular, dissipative force
measurements in fluids will be performed to determine the role played by out-of-
contact deformation alter the magnitude and directionality of adhesion.
Throughout the project, experiments will be compared to existing theories and
continuum numerical finite element models for elastohydrodynamics and
poroelasticity that are based on lubrication, elasticity, and transport in
porous media. The contributions of multi-scale porosity (e.g. mesh scale, pillar
spacing, and surface roughness), modulus, and directional anisotropy in surface
topography will be characterized in terms of their ability to be engineered
toward applications in reversible adhesion in wet environments.