* 1538127
* Hexagonal Boron Nitride Crystal Growth from Solution: A Study of Fundamentals
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* James Edgar, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 08/31/2018
* USD 308,701.00

Solid state electronic devices such as diodes and transistors used in cell
phones, computers, and light emitting diodes (LEDs) require materials of the
highest perfection. They must be close to flawless and have low impurity
concentrations in order for the device to function properly. Under this award, a
method of producing single crystals of a new electronic material, hexagonal
boron nitride, with high perfection will be developed. Currently, this material
is only available as a powder, but much larger crystals are necessary for many
applications. In this research program, hexagonal boron nitride crystals will be
produced from a molten metal solution as it is cooled from a high temperature.
The effect of parameters such as the solution's maximum temperature and cooling
rate on the size and perfection of the crystals will be determined. High quality
hexagonal boron nitride single crystals are expected to enable new types of
electronic devices, such as ultraviolet light emitting diodes for water
purification and sterilizing medical equipment, flexible electronics, and
radiation sensors for interdicting materials to make nuclear
weapons.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The processing parameters that affect the size and
quality of hexagonal boron nitride single crystals precipitated from a molten
nickel-chromium solvent will be examined by the statistical response surface
methodology. Solution growth was selected due to its relatively low temperature
(&lt;1600 C) and pressure (&lt; 1 atmosphere) requirements. The boron and
nitrogen concentrations, the maximum temperature of the solution, and the
solution cooling rate are expected to be important parameters. The
concentrations and distributions of boron and nitrogen (as pairs or isolated
elements) in the solution will be measured as a function of temperature. The
impact of temperature and supersaturation on the crystal's growth rate, area,
thickness, habit, surface morphology, and dislocation types and densities will
be determined by a combination of optical and electron microscopy, x-ray
diffraction, and compositional analysis. The influence of impurities
(specifically oxygen and carbon) on the growth rate anisotropy and crystal habit
will also be examined. This investigation will establish the fundamental
thermodynamic and kinetic parameters that are most important for controlling the
size and quality of hexagonal boron nitride single crystals so the process can
be optimized. It will support the education of a PhD student and will provide
high quality materials to other researchers to investigate hexagonal boron
nitride's optical, electrical, and mechanical properties and applications.