* 1538161
* Understanding the Relationship Between Cell Mechanical Variability and Gene Expression Through Single Cell Experiments and Modeling
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Alexander Alexeev, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Laurel Kuxhaus
* 08/31/2019
* USD 395,881.00

This award is to study the variation in biomechanical properties of individual
healthy and cancerous cells and to relate these properties to the underlying
gene expression of important structural, regulatory, and invasive features of
the cell. The project will use a new cell sorting device to divide healthy and
cancerous cells into softer and stiffer groups. Important biological properties
of the cells that predict how they could spread in the body and make new tumors
will be measured and compared between the softer and stiffer cell groups.
Finally the project will develop a computer model of the cell to explain how
differences in which genes are active cause them to be stiff or soft. Knowledge
of the biomechanical variation of cancer cells may improve the understanding of
cancer metastasis and create a new predictor of a cancer?s spread. This project
will provide training opportunities to graduate and undergraduate students on
cell mechanics, microfabrication, and cancer biology. The research activities
will also promote the recruitment and mentoring of students in cutting-edge
scientific techniques through outreach in the Atlanta public high schools.

The mechanical integrity of cells is regulated by a dynamic network of
structural, cross-linking, and signaling molecules. Therefore, alterations of
the mechanical properties of individual cells can reveal important insights into
changes in these molecular networks. For example, invasive tumor cells typically
soften mechanically, which thereby enhance their capacity to escape from a
primary tumor. However, the mechanical variation within a given cell type can be
substantial, which not only limits the specificity of cell mechanical
measurements, but also poses an intriguing and unanswered question: why do cell
mechanical properties vary between similar cells? The objective of this research
is to understand how variations in gene expression can lead to variations of
cellular mechanics between populations of cells as well as within populations of
cells. This study will examine the correlation between cellular mechanical
properties (modulus, viscous relaxation, and size) and gene expression, on a
cell by cell basis. Two unique experimental measurements will be conducted.
First, individual cells will be measured biomechanically with atomic force
microscopy and subsequently analyzed for gene expression of mechanically
relevant genes previously identified to be differentially expressed from
population studies of ovarian healthy and cancer cells. Second, a biophysical
cell sorting device will be used to obtain cells of stiffer and softer
phenotypes. Each sorted group of cells will be examined for functional and gene
expression differences. Finally, the experimental results will be used to inform
a multiscale computational model of the cell to explain how biological variation
(e.g. crosslinking density) can lead to biophysical variation. The study will
delineate the fundamental aspects of the mechanical properties of living cells,
particularly cytoskeleton crosslinking, nuclear membrane, and micromechanical
changes due to dynamical processes on short time scales (e.g. cell cycle) and
longer time scales (e.g. epithelial to mesenchymal transition). This project
will answer questions such as whether softer subtypes of noninvasive cells can
nonetheless show metastatic-like migration. Knowledge of the biophysics of
metastasis of ovarian cancer cells may lead to new diagnostic and treatment
approaches based upon detecting and inhibiting specific cell biophysical
phenotypes. The project will continue the educational and outreach efforts to
increase the number of students pursuing science and engineering. The project
will train graduate and undergraduate students in solving interdisciplinary
problems by using state-of-the-art experimental and computational methods.