* 1538784
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Mechanisms For Long Term Maintenance Of Social Stability
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2015,04/30/2021
* Wendy Cegielski, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 04/30/2021
* USD 25,143.00

This project will examine mechanisms of social stability and the reasons why
some social systems resist change. Social stability, or the persistence of
social systems, is a fundamental feature without which human society is not
possible. Understanding contexts and processes that resist change and that
maintain social stability is crucial to predicting and managing the effects of
the intensity and pace of change of the modern world. Previous scholarship has
shown that social stability is not an inherent property of a social system and
cannot be defined simply as the absence of change but must be explained. Social
stability is embedded over time through the cumulative social dependencies
created between individuals who choose to form a relationship. The peculiar
formations of these dependencies result in different levels of social cohesion,
akin to "social glue", that act to promote or thwart social stability. Since the
embedding of social stability is a cumulative process that plays out through
time, archaeology is uniquely positioned with an established corpus of tools and
the long-term perspective necessary to problematize social stability, to
establish contexts in which societies resist change, good or bad, and ultimately
to understand how, why, and when social transformation does or does not take
place.&lt;br/&gt;The research will be conducted by Wendy Cegielski, under the
direction of Dr. C. Michael Barton, as part of her doctoral dissertation
research It will examine change or lack thereof in social complexity by
combining quantitative modeling and the comparative archaeological record where
the social system is represented by networks of relations between settlements.
From prior sociological research, it has been demonstrated that multiple paths
to social cohesion exist and the particular evolution of these paths may be
responsible for a society's long-term resistance to change. Subsequently,
recognizing the mechanisms governing these paths is important to understanding
the evolution of social complexity. In order to accomplish this goal, this
project uses formal, abstract modeling techniques called Exponential Random
Graph Models from Network Science, the study of relational data. These methods
move beyond static snapshots of data toward the investigation of the role of
cumulative, bottom-up drivers of stability and change, and their relation to
empirical record. The research will be conducted in eastern Spain along the
Mediterranean and on the material culture of the Valencian Bronze Age, where
prior research appears to indicate little, regional social change for 700 years.
Previous scholarship has demonstrated the robusticity across complex social
systems of the network theory used in this research; thus the methods proposed
can be applied cross-culturally and across disciplines. This research also will
increase collaboration between US and international institutions and provide new
opportunities for technical training in these innovative techniques.