* 1538090
* Inkjet-Electrospray Hybrid Printing: Understanding the Processing-Structure Relationship
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Xin Yong, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Wells
* 08/31/2019
* USD 399,970.00

The ability to create thin films of functional materials addresses vital
technological needs for many applications, including: flexible electronics, bio-
sensing, optical coatings, energy conversion/harvesting, and data storage. As
one of the dominant thin film manufacturing techniques, printing of materials
underpins multi-billion dollar industries. However, the current printing methods
have reached a fundamental limit that has inhibited innovation in thin film
processing. The overarching goal of this research is to provide the much-needed
knowledge for creating a high-resolution, scalable technique that can achieve
mass production of printed patterns using a variety of functional inks. The new
technique will provide manufacturers with a unique tool to print novel materials
for industrial applications and consumer products. The success of this research
will lay the groundwork for changing the paradigm of thin film processing and
will have an impact on accelerating manufacturing innovation in the United
States. In addition, the integration of undergraduate and graduate students into
this research will provide industry with the highly qualified and experienced
personnel they need to expand the commercial use of thin film additive
manufacturing.

This project aims to combine inkjet technology and electrospray printing to
create a hybrid printing technique that provides the advantages of
photolithography and traditional printing, namely, high feature resolution,
material versatility, material conservation, and control over microstructure.
Using electrospray, dry colloidal material is delivered to the surface of
inkjet-printed sacrificial rivulets to form colloidal monolayers. The monolayers
are subsequently transferred to the substrate upon complete evaporation of the
rivulets to create self-assembled, close-packed nanoparticle monolayers. Unique
mechanical, electrical, and optical properties can emerge in the monolayers by
controlling the deposit structure on the length scale of an individual particle.
This research will integrate computational modeling and experimental approaches
to discover the fundamental relationships among the process parameters, printing
dynamics, and final deposit structure. Advanced imaging techniques will be used
to characterize the time evolution of this complex system and the final
deposits. A novel two-way coupled Lagrangian particle tracking-lattice Boltzmann
model will be developed to provide fundamental insight into the electrospray of
nanoparticles, the physico-chemical hydrodynamics of the evaporating rivulet,
and the self-organization of particles at the interface and subsequent
deposition. With a greater understanding of this hybrid printing process, the
research team will design and build an integrated hybrid printhead that
encompass an inkjet nozzle and electrospray emitter for scalable processing.