* 1538505
* A Three-dimensional Model of Spinal Cord Growth and Repair in a Regeneration-competent Organism
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Rifat Sipahi, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Irina Dolinskaya
* 08/31/2020
* USD 415,043.00

Spinal cord injury represents an incurable condition, usually leading to severe
life-long disability in humans. Numerous therapeutic strategies developed thus
far to improve structural regeneration have resulted in only modest
improvements. An alternative strategy is provided by the study of organisms that
can spontaneously regenerate central nervous tissue after injury, such as fish
and salamanders. Understanding the biological mechanisms underlying spinal cord
healing in such species provides novel translational opportunities for the
identification of therapeutic targets to treat spinal cord injuries in humans.
This project focuses on the theoretical study of one exemplary organism, the
brown ghost knifefish Apteronotus leptorhynchus. The goal is to integrate the
wealth of existing experimental data into a systems-level theoretical framework
through mathematical and computational modeling. The resulting model will be
used to uncover some of the rules governing normal spinal cord growth, as well
as to determine the optimal conditions for structural and functional spinal cord
regeneration. Moreover, this project will demonstrate the power of
interdisciplinary approaches, in particular the use of tools developed by
engineers and mathematicians for solving biological problems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The cellular and molecular processes underlying the growth
of spinal cord tissue and its regeneration after injury have been studied
extensively from a biological perspective. However, few attempts have been made
to integrate the resulting empirical data into a comprehensive theoretical
framework through computational and/or mathematical modeling. As part of this
project, such a model will be developed by using the knifefish Apteronotus
leptorhynchus as one of the best-examined organisms capable of spontaneous
regeneration after spinal cord injury. A hybrid, discrete-continuous approach
will be employed, combining an agent-based framework at the cellular level with
a dynamical systems framework at the molecular level. This study will lead to
the development of what is likely to be the first computational model of the
cellular and molecular phenomena underlying growth and repair in a regeneration-
competent organism. It will lead to a comprehensive understanding of healing
dynamics within the central nervous system, making it possible to define the
conditions for optimal regeneration. The computational framework established as
part of the project will provide extended opportunities for other researchers
working on growth and regeneration mechanisms, including the development of
therapeutic strategies for the treatment of spinal cord injuries.