* 1538162
* Collaborative Research: Experimental and Computational Nanomechanics of the Load Transfer Mechanisms at the Graphene Polymer Interface
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Huck Beng Chew, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 08/31/2019
* USD 202,956.00

Polymer nanocomposites show substantial property enhancements at much lower
filler component weight as compared to conventional polymer composites. Graphene
has been considered an ideal candidate for reinforcing additives in polymers due
to its high stiffness and strength. However, there is a lack of fundamental
understanding of strength properties of graphene-polymer interfaces. This
collaborative research award supports fundamental research to provide
mechanistic understanding of the stress-transfer processes across interfaces
between selected polymers and graphene. These processes ultimately control the
stiffness, strength, and toughness of graphene polymer nanocomposite. This
research will contribute towards achieving light, strong, and tough polymer
nanocomposite materials. Such advanced materials would impact the aerospace and
automotive industries. The research crosses the disciplines of manufacturing,
mechanics, materials science, and nanotechnology. Results from this multi-
disciplinary research will be incorporated into existing undergraduate courses
at both universities. The research results will also form the basis of a new
lecture series for K-12 summer camp students introducing these poetntail future
engineers to the topic of polymer nanocomposites as next generation aerospace
materials.

The strength characteristics of graphene-polymer interfaces play critical roles
in the bulk mechanical response of graphene-based nanocomposites. Yet, the
complex nanoscale phenomena occurring during shear deformation associated with
the pull-out of graphene from the polymer matrix are not well understood. This
collaborative research award supports investigations of deformation, load
transfer and failure of graphene-polymer interfaces at the nanoscale. A
combination of complementary experimental and computational methods is employed.
The research team will perform pull-out tests on individual graphene sheets
embedded within polymer matrixes using an unique in-situ nanomechanical
characterization technique. The nanomechanical pull-out experiments will provide
direct and quantitative measurements of the interfacial strength properties.
These experiments represent a significant advancement over prior macroscopic
measurements of the bulk composite properties where the graphene-polymer
interfacial properties can only be inferred indirectly and qualitatively. In
parallel, molecular dynamics simulations of the pull-out tests will be conducted
at size-scales relevant to the experiments. This complementary approach
facilitates comparison between the results of experiments and simulations. The
simulations will provide insights into the fine graphene-polymer interfacial
details not accessible by experiments, and will guide further experiments. This
complementary experimental and computational effort will provide mechanistic
understanding of the nanoscale interfacial strengthening processes, and decipher
the roles of the size and morphology of the embedded graphene on the mechanical
strength of graphene-polymer interfaces.