* 1538658
* Nonlinear Fracture Mechanics of Hydrogel-Like Soft Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2015,01/31/2020
* Chad Landis, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 01/31/2020
* USD 442,000.00

Hydrogel-like soft materials are abundant in nature including soft tissues such
as cartilage, tendons and ligaments. With similar mechanical properties and
biocompatibility, synthetic polymer-based hydrogels have been used extensively
for a wide range of biomedical applications such as artificial tissues and drug
delivery. More recently, hydrogel-like materials have been explored as a class
of soft active materials in the development of soft machines and soft robotics.
For many of these applications, mechanical properties of the hydrogel-like soft
materials are important, governing how they deform and fail under various
conditions. In particular, fracture of hydrogel-like soft materials has not been
well understood, and it remains a challenge to predict if and when such
materials would fracture. This project aims to establish a knowledge base
necessary for failure analysis and prediction of hydrogel-like soft materials.
The results will enable engineering of such materials with reliable fracture
properties for a range of applications including tissue engineering and soft
robotics. The three PIs, jointly with expertise in fracture mechanics/dynamics,
soft materials, experiments, modeling and simulations, will collaborate to bring
different perspectives onto this project. Education and outreach activities will
be integrated within the project to enhance its broader societal impacts, which
include research experience for undergraduates, engaging minorities and
underrepresented groups, and outreach to high school students and general
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The fracture processes of hydrogel-like soft
materials are highly nonlinear in general, coupling large deformation with
particular kinetic processes due to solvent diffusion and polymer
viscoelasticity. This project is to establish a nonlinear, transient theoretical
framework that defines the fracture driving force and a fracture criterion for
crack growth in hydrogel-like soft materials, with explicit recognition of the
associated kinetic processes. The theoretical framework will enable
implementation of numerical simulations that would predict particular fracture
behaviors relevant to hydrogel-like materials such as delayed fracture and rate
dependence. The results will be compared to experimental measurements for
validation. The developed methodology with modeling and experiments will then be
used for measuring fracture properties of hydrogel-like soft materials. The
distinct effects of solvent diffusion and viscoelasticity on fracture will be
elucidated through numerical simulations and a set of experiments from
quasistatic to dynamic regimes.