* 1538332
* A Stochastic and Computational Approach for Fracture Modeling of Quasi-Brittle Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Reza Abedi, University of Tennessee Space Institute
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 08/31/2019
* USD 322,131.00

There is an increasing need to predict materials response and failure behavior
at macroscopic scale from its microstructural composition. In brittle and quasi-
brittle materials, such as glass, concrete, rocks, and ceramics, failure is
particularly sensitive to the microstructure leading to a large scatter in
failure loads. Most existing fracture models fail to reliably predict this
scatter. This award supports fundamental research in developing theoretical and
computational tools for fracture of brittle and quasi-brittle materials that
directly link their microstructure to failure loads and the scatter observed.
Brittle and quasi-brittle fracture mechanics finds applications in a variety of
material and structural designs and plays a central role in many other fields.
For example, ceramics are used with metals to develop high-strength and light-
weight materials for armor designs and aerospace industry. Rock fracture,
whether occurring naturally as in earthquake or manmade for enhanced oil
recovery and CO2 sequestration is another example. Finally, obtaining more
accurate probabilities of fracture reduces uncertainties in current design
practices and can aid in the assessment of the structural integrity of existing
infrastructure systems. Educational goals focus on development of short course
toolkits on random models and computational tools to attract high school
students to STEM fields, and software modules that will be shared with
scientific community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The field of stochastic partial
differential equations provides systematic approaches for the propagation of
randomness in an analysis in general. However, there is currently no means to
relate material microstructures to initial random field description needed for
these stochastic models. This research fills the knowledge gap by deriving
continuum models that directly translate microstructure distribution to the
initial material field description. Unlike common homogenization schemes,
stochastic representative volume elements still preserve the spatial variability
and randomness of material. This enables realistic modeling of brittle and
quasi-brittle fracture. To ensure accurate rendering of this theoretical model
an advanced finite element model is formulated that can efficiently capture
complicated fracture patterns by incorporating both bulk and interfacial failure
mechanisms. Moreover, a novel adaptive computational scheme eliminates the
sensitivity of the failure load on initial mesh discretization and guarantees
the estimation of probability of failure within the user-specified error bounds.
The microstructure-based probabilistic fracture model approach aims to explain a
variety of phenomena that are not well captured with commonly used deterministic
models. Some examples are size effect in brittle and quasi-brittle materials,
scatter in failure load, and formation of complex fracture patterns even under
uniform loads.