* 1538749
* Forecasting the Return Home of Non-US Citizens with US Ph.D.'s: Trends over time and why Non-US Citizens with US earned doctorates choose to return home
* SBE,NCSE
* 09/15/2015,12/31/2016
* Stuart Bretschneider, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Mark Fiegener
* 12/31/2016
* USD 102,988.00

The number of U.S. doctoral students with temporary visas has steadily increased
over the last two decades; approximately half of these individuals stay in the
U.S. after receipt of their doctorate. However, the roles of economic,
nationalistic or scientific influences on the decision to stay or to leave are
not widely understood. The objectives of this project are to 1) generate a
baseline forecast of temporary U.S. visa holders with U.S. doctoral degrees who
return home, 2) build an explanatory model for the decision to return home by
these individuals, and 3) use the results of the model to enhance our ability to
predict future trends about temporary visa holders intention to either stay in
the U.S. or return home. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A major focus of this work is to
provide policy relevant information and tools on how the changing status of
economic and political activity abroad influences individual decisions to leave
the U.S. Further the work will contribute to our understanding of how early
scientific training and the quality of training also influence the decision to
return home. Data from the Survey of Earned Doctorates (SED) and the Survey of
Doctorate Recipients (SDR) will be used for the study. The development of a
forecast from this data will provide evidence as to whether or not the return
phenomena is stable, growing or in decline over time. The explanatory model will
provide a mechanism for linking policy relevant variables (e.g. nature, amount
and conditions of financial support for doctoral education, quality of training,
role of foreign governments) to individual likelihoods of return after receiving
a U.S. degree. Finally, the results can help enhance data quality for regularly
collected information from the SED by quantification of bias. It is also useful
to note that this project will support one full time doctoral student who will
become proficient using SED and SDR data.