* 1538204
* Reducing Latency by Replicating Jobs
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Mor Harchol-Balter, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 08/31/2018
* USD 299,711.00

A new notion of redundancy in computer systems design is the act of purposely
replicating a job, dispatching each replica to a different queue, and only
waiting for the first completion (all remaining replicas are discarded). While
still nascent, recent studies at Google, Microsoft, and U.C. Berkeley have shown
that redundancy can reduce mean latency in data centers and cloud services by up
to 50 percent. Unfortunately, there are almost no analytical studies of
redundancy. The research team will provide the first exact analysis of
redundancy, understanding both the pros and cons of redundancy. The results of
this research will impact several diverse research communities including:
operations research, queueing theory, coding theory, cloud computing, data
center optimization, and healthcare, and will also increase K-12 STEM
opportunities for students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Redundancy requires a new
queueing paradigm: there is no longer a single copy of each job, and redundant
copies disappear as soon as one copy completes. Different classes of jobs may
have different levels of redundancy, necessitating a complex state space where
the exact ordering of all copies of all jobs in all queues must be tracked.
Systems with redundancy bear some resemblance to other classically hard
operations research systems, like fork-join systems, coupled-processor systems,
and flexible server systems. The research team aims to explicitly characterize
the latency benefit to jobs that are replicated as well as the pain inflicted
(increase in latency) on those jobs that cannot be replicated. The research will
also investigate how the benefit of redundancy is affected by real-world
externalities, like cancellation cost, reneging of users, and variability of
service times. Redundancy will also be compared with other dispatching policies
both via analysis and experimentation in cloud systems.