* 1538309
* Cross-laminated Timber Panels from Low-value Northeastern Woods
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Peggi Clouston, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Caglar Oskay
* 08/31/2019
* USD 390,925.00

Cross laminated timber is a processed building material that is opening up new
opportunities for wood in the construction industry. Made from lumber glued
together in crosswise layers, the material is used in floor, roof, and wall
assemblies in building construction. The product is an environmentally friendly
alternative to steel and concrete. Its composite nature is forgiving of defects
to an extent, making it a promising construction material of varied quality,
small-diameter, and environmentally threatened wood species in Northeastern
forests of the United States. This project pursues research that will develop
basic understanding of the processing and properties of cross laminated timber
panels made from low-value wood. Use of wood from forest provides significant
environmental benefits because wood sequesters carbon, and creates less air and
water pollution in production when compared to other building materials, in
addition to being renewable and sustainable.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of
this research is to develop timber panels with natural defects and delineate its
properties on a scientific basis. The project will pursue the following: 1)
Develop probabilistic models for mechanical properties of cross laminated timber
that has defects of knot, shake, and slope of grain; 2) Develop stochastic
finite element model for the mechanical response of cross laminated timber
panels; and 3) full-scale laboratory panel testing to validate finite element
model. The project outreach will be pursued by inclusion of stakeholders of
foresters, architects, and engineers in pursuing experimental tests. The
students working on this research project will gain valuable experience in
numerical and experimental methods.