* 1538495
* Cellular physiological mechanisms for coral calcification and photosynthesis: extending lab-based models to the field
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Martin Tresguerres, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 07/31/2019
* USD 491,257.00

Coral reefs are amongst the most biodiverse and productive ecosystems in the
world, providing millions of dollars of ecosystem services to coastal
communities. There is growing concern about the future of coral reefs and the
impact of anthropogenic stressors including eutrophication, ocean acidification,
warming and sea level rise. However, the lack of knowledge of fundamental coral
cellular mechanisms limits our ability to understand and predict responses and
to implement appropriate management decisions. This proposal will use a
combination of field and laboratory experiments to use immunological techniques
to study coral cellular responses to environmental conditions. This project will
focus on processes related to calcification, photosynthesis and nutrient uptake
and test in nature the relevance of mechanistic models obtained from laboratory
experiments. Results from this study could help generate biomarkers for future
physiological, ecological and interdisciplinary studies. To maximize the
scientific, societal and educational impacts of this research, a coordinated set
of activities will include: (1) Training of one graduate student in molecular,
cellular, and ecological research. (2) Dissemination of results through
journals, conferences and undergraduate and graduate physiology courses. (3)
Partnering with the Birch Aquarium at Scripps to build awareness of coral reef
biology, ecology and conservation issues and disseminate the findings of this
study to the general public. These activities will reach hundreds of thousands
of children and adults that attend Birch annually, and millions of viewers
through online resources. (4) Engage and train undergraduate students from
underrepresented minorities through the Scripps Undergraduate Research
Fellowship summer program.

This research will use recently developed immunological techniques to localize
and quantity proteins in specific coral cell types and determine coral responses
to environmental conditions at the cellular level. One enzyme of interest is the
vacuolar proton ATPase (VHA), which was recently found in the symbiosome
membrane of gastrodermal cells and identified as essential for the coral's
symbiotic algae to concentrate CO2 for photosynthesis. Another enzyme, the
sodium/potassium ATPase (NKA), was immunolocalized to calicoblastic cells
suggesting a role in calcification. Additionally, NKA was found in cells in
corals from the Complex but not the Robust clades, suggesting a role in nutrient
uptake only in the former. In the project a series of field and manipulative
aquarium studies will be used to determine the physiological roles of VHA and
NKA in two coral species, one from each clade. Specifically, this research will:
(1) Localize and quantify VHA and NKA in specific tissue layers of Acropora
cervicornis and Orbicella annularis from 1 and 5m depth at a lagoonal and an
open ocean exposed reef in Bocas del Toro, Panama. (2) Correlate potential
differences in VHA and NKA to light, pH, and nutrient levels at the different
field sites and depths, to study evolutionary adaptation to environmental
conditions. (3) Perform one-year reciprocal transplantations to examine chronic
acclimatization. (4) Perform one-month reciprocal transplantations to examine
acute acclimatization. (5) In a flowing seawater system expose corals to a range
of environmentally relevant nutrient, light and pH levels to determine if any of
the single factors are causing changes in the cellular responses. In addition to
characterizing responses to environmental conditions on a broad temporal scale
from evolutionary, chronic, to acute exposure, this research will examine
potential cellular mechanistic differences between Robust and Complex corals.
The long-term goal is to generate biomarkers based on specific cellular
physiology processes to explain and predict effects of environmental stress
(e.g. eutrophication, ocean acidification, and sea level rise) on coral
homeostatic responses.