* 1538877
* Compute-Aware Control Systems: Coordinated Control of Physical Systems and Computer Processes
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2019
* Aldo Ferri, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Robert Landers
* 08/31/2019
* USD 369,906.00

Increasingly, the heart of modern products includes embedded processors that
control physical systems such as lights, motorized mechanisms, and
communications. These developments are enabled by the increasing sophistication
of embedded processor technology that can reconfigure the computing system while
it is running in order to improve performance or power usage. However, current
practice is to design the controller of the processor separately from the
physical system controller, overlooking the opportunity for synergy. The focus
of this research is to develop methods to coordinate the design of the processor
and physical-system controllers in order to give more design flexibility.
Specifically, this coordination will make the physical system control algorithms
compute-aware, that is, adaptive to the fluctuating demands and limitations of
the computing systems. Similarly, a computer process controller will be designed
that dynamically manages the power and performance of the computing processes in
response to the changing demands of the physical system controller. The impact
of this work is that embedded processors used for controls applications can be
downsized, made lighter in weight and lower power, while still maintaining
stability and good performance. The applications that are expected to have the
most benefit are self-powered systems such as mobile robots and aerial robots,
especially ones where size and weight are important.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
objective of this research is to develop coordinated control methods for the
physical system controller and the computing system controller. The research
will combine a theoretical framework with a software architecture in order to
design and analyze the stochastic hybrid system that arises from integrating the
physical system controller and the computing system controllers. The researchers
will develop stability analysis methods and new design methods that will expand
the applicability of anytime algorithms to larger classes of control laws and
larger classes of physical systems. The predictive control methods to be
developed for computing systems will make the system highly responsive to the
fluctuating demands on the computer processor. The computer science approaches
to be used include the concepts of soft-real-time computing, reusable software
frameworks, and software verification and validation methods. The architecture
to be developed has three basic components: Compute-Aware Physical System
Controllers: standard controllers reformulated into Anytime Algorithms, which
can be stopped or reconfigured anytime due to sudden limitations in the computer
resources; Computer Power and Performance Controller: a controller for computer
processes that adapts to changing requirements of the physical system
controller; and a High-Level Coordination Controller: algorithms that manage the
trade-off between the power and performance requirements of the computer system
and of the physical system controller. All of the developed methods will be
validated through Monte Carlo simulations and experiments.