* 1538165
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: IMEE: Disaster Recovery, Social Capital, and the Sri Lankan Context: A Comparative Study of Two Communities in Batticaloa
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2016
* Kathleen Tierney, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* David Mendonca
* 08/31/2016
* USD 9,568.00

This research project will analyze recovery processes and outcomes in two
communities in Batticaloa, Sri Lanka: one predominantly Tamil/Hindu community
and one Muslim community. This area suffered the impact of the 2004 Indian Ocean
Tsunami and the civil war in Sri Lanka, and provides an opportunity to
understand the interaction between complex humanitarian emergencies and natural
disasters. Within a context of insurgencies and "small wars" around the world,
increasing disaster losses, and global environmental change, both nations and
the international communities are faced with the challenge of providing disaster
assistance in the context of ongoing humanitarian crises. This research will
result in practical lessons regarding disaster recovery in areas affected by
armed conflict. It will also contribute fundamental knowledge to the efforts to
build a theory of community recovery from disasters which should increase
community resilience around the world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research focuses
on three community-level recovery outcomes: social recovery; infrastructure and
built-environment recovery; and the extent to which risk reduction measures have
been incorporated into the recovery process. The study will investigate the
impacts on recovery of three broad sets of factors: pre-existing conditions;
disaster impacts; and post-disaster conditions and recovery-related
interventions. Using the knowledge gained through earlier NSF-sponsored
fieldwork, the co-PI will conduct exploratory and open-ended interviews with
district and local leaders, live in each of the two study communities and
participate in everyday community activities, and explore local recovery
dynamics, with a specific emphasis on the ways in which recovery challenges were
influenced by experiences in the civil war. In addition to community members,
the co-PI will interview local, district, and national government officials and
individuals involved with relevant relief and recovery projects, such as
representatives of non-governmental organizations. The findings from this
project will be integrated into University of Colorado undergraduate curricula.