* 1538055
* Collaborative Research: A Framework for Evaluation, Approximation, and Optimization of Time-Dependent Stochastic Service System Models having Deterministic/Scheduled Interventions
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2015,03/31/2019
* Michael Taaffe, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 03/31/2019
* USD 270,000.00

This award supports establishing a mathematical framework for modeling,
evaluating, approximating, and optimizing the performance of service systems
featuring time-varying random as well as deterministic/scheduled input
processes. Two important example problem classes are (1) optimizing efficiency
and utilization while improving patient satisfaction in healthcare facilities
that treat both time-varying randomly-arriving patients (e.g., emergent or walk-
in) as well as patients having scheduled appointments (e.g., primary-care-
physician referrals, school-required physical exams, or scheduled vaccinations),
and (2) optimizing efficiency and utilization while improving flexibility and
responsiveness to global competition in manufacturing facilities that operate in
both a time-varying stochastic (e.g., production) environment as well as a
deterministic/scheduled (e.g., job-release schedule) environment. The solution
to a unified abstraction of both problem classes requires modeling and analysis
methods that allow rich variations in model-input processes, and model logic,
while adequately capturing the time-dependent evolution of the resulting
probabilistic network. Traditional (exact) time-dependent differential-
difference equation modeling of such networks is infeasible since the number of
differential-difference equations describing even modest-sized networks can be
of the order of hundreds of thousands (or more). Monte Carlo (MC) computer
simulation, the natural alternative choice, is convenient but burdened with slow
convergence rates and additional mathematically technical inefficiencies.
Methods investigated by the research team will assist healthcare (and other)
service and manufacturing sector industries to increase their economic
competitiveness and patient/customer,
satisfaction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will result in
closure-equipped partial moment differential equations (PMDEs) for numerically
approximating the time-dependent evolution of general stochastic networks having
scheduled interventions. By exploiting the structure of PMDEs, and then
strategically using closure approximations, the research team will be able to
efficiently describe the time-dependent evolution of very general networks.
Preliminary evidence indicates that the time-dependent evolution of modest
stochastic networks can be approximated to machine accuracy within a few seconds
on a typical laptop computer. Moreover, higher order derivatives, which often
require significant effort in the Monte Carlo context, can be obtained with
little to no extra effort by exploiting the rich structure inherent in the
approximations.