* 1538707
* Conformational Switch, Activation and Clustering in Cell Focal Adhesions
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,09/30/2021
* Mohammad Mofrad, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Laurel Kuxhaus
* 09/30/2021
* USD 446,858.00

Cells attach to a solid surface or to the tissue they are part of by connections
called "focal adhesions". The cells interact mechanically and biochemically with
their environment through the adhesions. This creates a mechanochemical coupling
between the cells and their tissue. The coupling controls many biological
functions of the cell, such as survival, change of the cell into another type
and also whether it can move from one part of the body to another. The focal
adhesions are part of the membrane that surrounds the cells of mammals, birds
and reptiles. Since so many different species (including humans) have focal
adhesions, understanding how they transmit mechanochemical signals will have
broad applicability to understanding important biology. The research will create
computer models of how the focal adhesion forms from the many molecules that are
part of it and how the molecules interact to transmit signals. The computer
models will be tested against real data collected as part of the research to
ensure that they are correct. Understanding the formation and function of focal
adhesions will ultimately inspire new types of cell-based medicine. This project
requires several different fields of science including biology, chemistry,
mechanics, and bioengineering. The principal investigator also will reach out to
undergraduate students in these broadly spread disciplines by creating an annual
workshop that includes underrepresented community college students to help
broaden participation in engineering research.

Understanding the detailed pathways for integrin activation, clustering, and
recruitment and maturation of focal adhesions will provide insight on the
regulatory mechanisms of cell-matrix signaling. While it is widely established
that integrin signaling is dependent upon allosteric conformational changes that
initiate at certain points in the molecule and propagate over the entire
structure, the sequence of events leading to its activation and extensive
conformational changes remains elusive in many aspects. The dynamic nature of
the focal adhesion machinery and integrin conformational switch has so far
hindered a full appreciation of the key events involved in the cell-matrix
adhesion. With the advent of computational resources and advanced techniques,
computational modeling can now be employed effectively to reconcile apparently
contradictory experimental observations. This research is aimed at filling the
knowledge gap on the mechanisms of focal adhesion formation. The research team
will develop coarse-grained and molecular dynamics models to understand the
mechanism of integrin activation, conformational switch and signal transduction.
Using computational models and in vitro experiments, the competitive and
cooperative roles of different focal adhesion proteins will be investigated.