* 1538814
* Collaborative Research: A Dynamical Systems Approach to Shepherding and Sorting Microparticles in Fluids
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2021
* Stuart Smith, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Harry Dankowicz
* 08/31/2021
* USD 250,000.00

Engineering problems requiring the controlled transport and positioning of solid
particles suspended in fluids on a microscopic scale arise in contexts ranging
from biomedical research to precision manufacturing. Technology enabling
particle manipulation without direct mechanical contact between particles and
manipulators is required in situations when the particles are fragile (like
biological cells) or when high throughput is critical. This award supports
fundamental research advancing a strategy whereby slender vibrating probes are
used to excite patterns of flow in particle-laden fluids that in turn advect
particles in desired ways. Preliminary results indicate that this approach can
be used not only to achieve particle transport and positioning but also to
separate particles according to physical attributes like size and geometry. The
project requires coordinated activity by members of the research team in
mathematical, computational, and experimental domains. Outcomes from this
activity will include both scientific results with diverse practical
implications and novel mechanisms for training undergraduate and graduate
students across traditional disciplinary lines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
issues to be addressed include the development of mathematical models with
varying degrees of detail representing fluid flows near systems of vibrating
probes, the development of approximate analytical models for the time-averaged
dynamics of inertial particles advected by such flows, and the development of
top-level control strategies for archetypical problems in particle transport and
sorting. All of these will build upon successful preliminary studies by the
project team and will be validated with numerical simulations exploiting high-
fidelity computational models and with physical experiments exploiting a unique
laboratory platform under development.