* 1538100
* Acoustics-based Structural Health Monitoring of Closed-Cavities and Its Application to Wind Turbine Blades
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2021
* Christopher Niezrecki, University of Massachusetts Lowell
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 08/31/2021
* USD 366,000.00

Wind turbines operate under extreme loads and suffer from reliability issues
attributed to manufacturing defects, fatigue, or extreme weather conditions.
Blades are one of the most critical and vulnerable parts of modern wind turbines
and are subject to blade edge splits, holes, or cracks that can lead to failures
that can be catastrophic. In order to help identify damage in wind turbine
blades, several approaches have been used in the wind industry, most of which
require transducers to be mounted on the turbine blades, have not been
effective, or require visual inspection. This award supports the fundamental
research needed to understand the influence of damage on the acoustic radiation
from and through the turbine blades to enable an efficient health monitoring
framework. A significant outcome of this research is to improve the reliability
of wind energy harvesting turbines thereby lowering energy costs, making their
use more globally widespread, resulting in a reduction of greenhouse gases that
will help to retard climate change. As part of this project, the UML team will
collaborate with the KidWind Project to impact K-12 students who constitute the
next generation of scientists and engineers. These outreach efforts will be
delivered in collaboration with a team of middle and high school teachers
motivating women, and underrepresented minority groups to become interested in
science and engineering, while at the same time educating the general public.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will generate scientific knowledge advancing
acoustic interrogation techniques, allowing them to be implemented for
operational damage detection and identification. The research will achieve a
fundamental understanding of the influence of damage severity and location on
acoustic radiation from cavity structures. The causal relationship of both
controlled deterministic and naturally excited aerodynamic sources of sound on
acoustic cavity radiation and response will be investigated. The sensitivity of
several detection and identification techniques for different damage types,
geometries, locations, frequency ranges, and severity levels will be assessed
and quantified. A variety of empirical and computational investigations will be
made to investigate the influence of damage on source-path-receiver dynamics of
cavity structures. An understanding of the influence of acoustic source and
sensor placement within a cavity will help to minimize the instrumentation
required while achieving maximum damage detection capability.