* 1538149
* Large-Scale Fork-Join Networks with Synchronization Constraints
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2018
* Guodong Pang, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 07/31/2018
* USD 250,000.00

Fork-join networks with synchronization constraints can be widely used to model
patient flows in hospitals (e.g., emergency department treatment and patient
discharge process) and data centers (e.g., parallelized Web search), among many
other applications. In such networks, jobs are forked into parallel tasks to be
served at service stations with parallel servers, and tasks are then joined for
job completion or further processing provided that certain synchronization
constraints are satisfied, for example, only completed tasks from the same job
can be joined (non-exchangeable). However, very little is known about the
performance, reliability and control of these networks, and existing methods in
stochastic networks cannot be applied to study them. This award supports
development of new methodology to better understand important performance
measures (e.g., congestions and response times) of fork-join networks with non-
exchangeable synchronization constraints, to design reliable fork-join networks
with synchronization constraints operating in dynamic random environments, and
to manage them in a cost-effective way. The research findings will have a broad
impact on the society by improving the efficiency and quality of services in
healthcare and data centers. The research will result in young STEM-trained
graduates and underrepresented groups with new mathematical tools that help
understand and improve the delivered services. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main
mathematical challenge to study fork-join networks of multi-server service
stations with non-exchangeable synchronization lies in the resequencing of
arrival orders after service completion at each station due to randomness of
service times. Unlike classical queueing networks, delay for synchronization is
a key performance measure affecting system congestion, while resequencing is its
determining factor. No analytical methods and results are known for such
networks. This research will develop a new framework to solve the resequencing
problem in fork-join networks, and thus, result in effective approximations for
the synchronization dynamics as well as the service dynamics. The approach will
use multi-parameter stochastic processes to study the service, queueing and
synchronization dynamics, including sequential empirical processes driven by
random vectors and their limits, and two-parameter processes tracking elapsed
and residual service and wait times. Coordination and information sharing among
parallel tasks of each job during their services will be exploited to develop
optimal control policies for fork-join networks with synchronization constraints
in order to minimize delay for synchronization as well as delay for service.
Preventive strategies will be provided on the design and management of reliable
fork-join networks with synchronization constraints operating in dynamic random
environments.