* 1538650
* GOALI: Nanoscale Printing and Machining using Electron Beams in Liquids
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Jeffrey Hastings, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 08/31/2019
* USD 316,000.00

Nearly all high-throughput nanomanufacturing processes require the replication
of master templates. As a result, three barriers to manufacturability demand new
solutions: (1) rapid prototyping before committing to a production template, (2)
repair of template errors and defects both before and during production, and (3)
product debugging before committing to revised templates. Locally adding
("printing") and subtracting ("machining") materials using a focused electron-
beam could meet these needs if the available materials, purity, and throughput
were not limited by the associated gas-phase reactants. This Grant Opportunity
for Academic Liaison with Industry (GOALI) award investigates a change from gas
to liquid reactants in order to expand the range of processes and materials
available and dramatically improve purity and throughput. These advances would
enhance efficiency at multiple points in the product cycle for nanomanufactured
systems, and thus benefit U.S. industry and society. The award involves an
industry partner to accelerate the transition from laboratory research to
industrial implementation. The multidisciplinary nature (electrical, chemical,
and materials science and engineering) of the work provides a remarkable
training opportunity for undergraduate and graduate participants, while
educational and outreach efforts involving K-12 students further broaden its
impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award advances knowledge in the primary field
of electron-beam induced processing by elucidating the physical and chemical
mechanisms involved in liquid-based processes and deepening understanding of the
factors controlling resolution, material purity, and throughput. The effort will
advance understanding of radiation- and electro-chemistry in nanoscale volumes
near liquid-solid interfaces and fluid dynamics in reduced pressure
environments. This knowledge is relevant to fields as diverse as in-situ
electron microscopy, electron-beam lithography, and radiation induced chemical
and biochemical processes. The technical objectives are to (1) relate process
parameters to figures of merit by comparing deposition and etching experiments
to Monte Carlo and finite element simulations; (2) understand how to control
thin liquid films in partial vacuums using in-situ liquid injection,
microfluidic structures, and surfactant additives; and (3) evaluate processes
for two immediate nanomanufacturing applications: nanoelectronic circuit edit
and plasmonic device prototyping.