* 1538002
* GOALI/Collaborative Research: Designing Structures to Enhance Friction of Rubbery Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Anand Jagota, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Wells
* 08/31/2020
* USD 273,749.00

Friction of rubbery materials against a stiff surface is of great practical
importance in many applications. For example, it determines the performance and
efficiency of tires, windshield wipers, and seals. Much of the previous work on
control of their friction mechanisms has either varied surface chemistry or
altered properties of the rubber itself. Recent research on biological
attachment devices has shown how adhesion of rubbers can also be strongly
enhanced by design of their near-surface architecture, but usually their sliding
friction is reduced rather than increased. The principal goals of this Grant
Opportunity for Academic Liaison with Industry (GOALI)project are to investigate
surface architectures for enhancement of sliding and static friction against
rough and smooth surfaces. The target application is improving friction of
tires, and the planned research requires work on design & theory, fabrication,
and testing under realistic constraints and conditions. For this reason, the
project is a collaboration between two university labs (at Cornell and Lehigh)
and an industrial researcher at Michelin North America. The Lehigh group is
responsible for fabrication and experiments, the Cornell group for theory and
modeling, and Michelin for testing under realistic conditions and constraints.
The project will train graduate students in use-inspired and industry-relevant
collaborative research and will provide research opportunities for undergraduate
students. The results of this research will be incorporated in an ongoing
collaboration with the Da Vinci Science Center in Allentown, PA, for informal
science education. A new exhibit will be designed for the general public on bio-
inspired design of surfaces to bring out the immediacy and impact of national
investments in research and education. Preliminary work has shown that certain
surface architectures, for an appropriately designed set of materials and
geometrical parameters, exhibit significant enhancement of sliding friction and
maintain static friction enhancement against rough surfaces. For example, a
film-terminated ridge-valley design (an anisotropic structure with direction-
dependent frictional properties) can strongly enhance sliding friction in a
direction orthogonal to the ridges by complex internal deformation mechanisms
that dissipate energy. For certain combinations of parameters, sliding friction
along the ridges can also be enhanced. Such film-terminated fibrillar structures
also results in strong enhancement of static friction that is substantially
retained even against rough surfaces. These bio-inspired surface architectures
have the potential to be transformative by providing dissipation mechanisms at
the micron scale that can be optimized by quantitative design of the
architecture.