* 1538665
* Collaborative Research: Multi-Hazard Response Mitigation Systems Using High Strength and Damping Capacity Shape Memory Alloys
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2018
* Haluk Karaca, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 09/30/2018
* USD 151,998.00

Designing structures to withstand dynamic natural hazards such as earthquakes,
strong winds, and hurricanes is of primary concern for civil engineers. Recent
advances in architectural forms, structural systems, and high performance
materials have enabled the design of very slender and lightweight structures.
These flexible structures are susceptible to high levels of vibrations under
strong winds and earthquakes, which may lead to structural damage and potential
failure. This research project will explore the design and characterization of
high performance smart alloys in multi-hazard response mitigation systems. The
use of smart alloys in a novel passive control device will provide enhanced
dynamic performance of buildings under various hazards of varying magnitudes.
This will lead to reductions in disaster losses and in social and economic
disruptions associated with future natural hazard events. With its
interdisciplinary nature, this research will be closely integrated with
educational plans to foster a natural process of learning and discovery. The
research objective of this project is to design, fabricate and characterize
superelastic shape memory alloys with high strength and damping capacity to
mitigate damage and enhance post-event functionality of mid-rise to tall steel
buildings subjected to multiple hazards by implementing a novel passive
structural control device. Using the Nickel-Titanium-Hafnium-Palladium
(NiTiHfPd) alloys that have very high strength, high dissipation/damping
capacity, good cyclic stability, and a wide operating temperature range, a shape
memory alloy-based re-centering damper (SMARD) will be investigated to provide
damping and re-centering capabilities to buildings subjected to wind and
earthquake excitations. The advantageous characteristics of the SMARD device
include large and scalable force capacity, excellent re-centering ability, high
damping capacity, passive nature, ability to withstand multiple levels of
hazards, and need for no special maintenance or replacement through the life-
cycle. The research activities include the following: (1) characterize the shape
memory behavior of heat treated NiTiHfPd alloys to establish the microstructure-
property relationship, (2) tailor the microstructure to obtain high strength
(greater than 1.5 gigapascal) and damping capacity (greater than 30 Joules per
cubic centimeter) NiTiHfPd alloys that can operate between minus 20 degrees
Celsius to plus 50 degrees Celsius with stable cyclic behavior, (3) examine
cyclic response of selected alloys, (4) design and fabricate a prototype of a
SMARD with a force capacity of 500 kilonewtons and stroke of 300 millimeters,
and (5) characterize and model the dynamic behavior of the device.