* 1538951
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Gender Differences in Experiencing Unemployment
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2016
* Annette Lareau, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 06/30/2016
* USD 12,000.00

This dissertation investigates how unemployment shapes gendered inequalities in
the family and the labor-force. Qualitative studies of unemployment have focused
almost exclusively on men. Even when women have been included in the sample,
studies have not analyzed how unemployment likely has different meanings and
consequences for the families of men and women because of the different gender
roles men and women occupy at home. By conceptualizing unemployment as an event
that impacts both men and women in qualitatively different ways, this
dissertation seeks to fill this gap. First, how do men and women imbue meaning
to their unemployment? Second, if unemployment holds different meanings for men
and women, how do they contend with emotional and gendered divisions of labor in
the home during unemployment? Third, what are the long-term implications of
unemployment for men and women's orientations to the labor force, and does
unemployment shape women's decisions to drop out of the labor force?
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These questions will be answered with data from in-depth
interviews with 50 unemployed college-educated, married, heterosexual
individuals (25 men and 25 women) who are part of dual-earner couples with
children, and family observations with a subset of spouses and children of
unemployed respondents. Respondents are recruited from job fairs, professional
networking events and churches in the Greater Philadelphia Area. Insights from
this study will help organizations and policy makers soften the blow of periods
of unemployment and find ways to make transitions back to employment easier.