* 1538893
* RII Track-2 FEC: Low-Cost, Efficient Next-Generation Solar Cells for the Coming Clean Energy Revolution
* O/D,OIA
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2020
* Jinsong Huang, Brown University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Chinonye Nnakwe
* 07/31/2020
* USD 4,000,000.00

Non-technical description&lt;br/&gt;This Research Infrastructure Improvement
Track-2 Focused EPSCoR* Collaboration (RII Track-2 FEC) award to Brown
University is for a collaboration with the University of Nebraska-Lincoln and
Rhode Island College. The project focuses on the development of solar cells
using compounds called perovskites (the name perovskite derives from their
crystal structure). The project includes materials research to understand
structural, electrical, and optical properties of perovskites, development of
non-toxic perovskite materials for use in solar cells, experimentation to
enhance power conversion efficiency, and exploration of scale-up processes for
low-cost, high efficiency perovskite solar cells. The collaboration provides
mentoring for junior faculty and the critical mass effort is expected to enhance
research capacity, infrastructure, and train skilled workforce in both Rhode
Island and Nebraska. The educational training for graduate student includes
courses on entrepreneurship; undergraduates from 4-year colleges (including
Tougaloo College in Mississippi) and high school teachers are engaged in summer
research/camps. SciToons for YouTube will be developed in partnership with Rhode
Island School of Design to increase the scientific awareness of solar cell
research for clean energy production.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
description&lt;br/&gt;The project addresses scientific and technological
challenges in the development of hybrid perovskite solar cells (PSCs) including:
(1) Understanding of solution-deposition mechanisms and effects on nano-/micro-
structure of hybrid perovskites; (2) development of solution-processing methods
and scale-up of processes for high throughput fabrication and potential
commercialization of solar cells; (3) experimentation of electrode materials and
solar cell efficiency enhancement through plasmonic concentrators and tandem
devices; and (4) exploration of lead-free materials for use in low-cost, high-
efficiency PSCs through computational and experimental validation. The work
involves synthesis of hybrid perovskite materials in the form of thin films,
bulk polycrystals, and single crystals; characterization using a variety of
spectroscopic, microscopic and crystallographic methods; and studies of optical
and transport properties and the interplay between ferroelectricity and
photovoltaic response with an aim to improve the stability of PSCs. The project
team will explore technologies such as roll-to-roll printing and doctor-blade
coating for scalable manufacturing as well as carbon-based electrodes, plasmonic
concentrators, and tandem devices to improve the power conversion efficiency of
PSCs. The team will also pursue the discovery and studies of lead-free
perovskite systems (methylammonium tin iodide, metal halide, potassium platinum
chloride, and bismuth-based perovskites) to develop environmentally-safe
materials for use in PSCs. The project involves ten faculty members, 16 graduate
students, 17 undergraduate students and one high school teacher in research, as
well as 12 teachers in summer camps on solar energy. The K-12, public outreach
activities leverage ongoing programs and are focused on renewable/solar
energy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;*Experimental Program to Stimulate Competitive
Research