* 1538851
* GOALI: Additive Manufacturing of Wear Resistant Metal-Composites for Biomedical Devices
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2015,12/31/2019
* Amit Bandyopadhyay, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 12/31/2019
* USD 341,967.00

Metallic biomaterials are typically the choice for wear resistant parts in most
biomedical devices towards load-bearing implants. However, concerns are growing
related to metal ions in the body that can cause metallosis, and severe tissue
and bone damage in some patients. Metallic devices offer greater motion, higher
stability and higher than 99 percent reduction in wear debris compared to
polymer components; however, use of these metallic implants dropped
significantly in recent years primarily due to metal ion release concerns. This
Grant Opportunity for Academic Liaison with Industry (GOALI) award supports
fundamental research to gain understanding on metal-ceramic composites that can
reduce the release of metal ions in human bodies due to in situ formation of
self-lubricating films at the contact surface. Results from this research can
offer future direction to solve long-standing metal ion release problems in
load-bearing implants such as total hip arthroplasty and total knee
arthroplasty, which can increase life of implants' for patients of all ages.

In load-bearing implants, when two metal surfaces come in contact, there is wear
induced damage that releases metal ions inside human bodies. The goal of this
project is to minimize release of metal ions from metallic implants inside human
bodies using self-lubricating ceramic based tribofilms. These films are formed
in situ at the contact surfaces of metal-ceramic composites, and are similar to
cartilage between the two hard articulating surfaces in load-bearing implants.
The project will generate fundamental knowledge related to processing of metal-
ceramic composites capable of forming self-lubricating films during articulation
via laser based additive manufacturing. The research objective is to understand
the influence of different amounts of calcium phosphates addition to titanium on
mechanical and biological properties of titanium-calcium phosphate composites.
To achieve this objective, first, titanium-calcium phosphate metal-ceramic
composites will be processed using laser engineered net shaping with varying
amounts of calcium phosphates, from 1 to 10 weight percent of titanium. Second,
mechanical properties (such as tensile and compression strengths, and elastic
moduli) of titanium-calcium phosphate composites will be measured under uniaxial
loading using servo-hydraulic testing set-up. Third, wear resistance of these
composites will be evaluated using flat-on-flat fully automated wear testing
set-up. Finally, in vitro biological properties of these composites will be
evaluated using human osteoblast cells at day 3, day 7 and day 11 in culture
media.