* 1538748
* Collaborative Research: Diversifying the STEM Labor Force: Are Women and the Foreign-Born Complementary or Additive?
* SBE,NCSE
* 09/01/2015,12/31/2019
* Sharon Sassler, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Mark Fiegener
* 12/31/2019
* USD 199,673.00

The need for STEM workers is expected to grow at or above the national growth
rate over the next decade (U.S. Department of Commerce, 2012). In recent decades
the U.S. government has focused a good deal of attention on increasing the
presence of women and underrepresented minorities in STEM fields. The science
and technology labor force has already diversified in important ways over the
past few decades. Women's representation in science and technology education and
employment has increased significantly, though their representation remains
considerably smaller in fields such as engineering and computer science. This
research explores whether the particular components of the STEM labor force -
such as the representation of women in particular fields, or the share of
coworkers of a particularly nativity or race - are associated with retention in
the STEM work force or the gender wage gap. In fields where women account for a
larger representation of STEM workers, for example, is the gender wage gap
narrower? How is that relationship influenced by the group size of foreign-born
workers, and does it matter whether these workers received their education and
training in the United States or abroad?

There are several social scientific views that can be evoked in seeking to
account for the dynamics involved in occupational sex composition and
occupational wage rates. These perspectives are not necessarily mutually
exclusive, but each focuses on distinct ways in which employers may exhibit
preferences by gender or ethnicity. Our project will utilize Queuing theory and
Devaluation theory to explore how the changing composition of the STEM labor
force promotes (or retards) the retention and earnings of women in STEM. Such an
approach will enable us to move beyond a simple gender dichotomy (men/women) to
assess variation within gender (native-born/foreign-born). Data come from
pooling six waves of the National Science Foundation's (NSF) Scientists and
Engineers Statistical Data System (SESTAT), covering years from 1995 through
2008. SESTAT is comprised of three ongoing surveys designed to create a
nationally representative sample of science and engineering college degree
holders (Kannankutty & Wilkinson, 1999). The restricted SESTAT data include
detailed information regarding labor force participation, occupation categories,
educational attainment, and demographic characteristics. The proposed project
will include three sets of analyses, including descriptive analyses establishing
trends in STEM employment by gender and nativity, as well a time since degree;
multivariate logistic regression models incorporating predictors of employment
in a STEM profession, by sex, and how group representation of the foreign-born
moderates these associations; and OLS regression of women's and men's logged
wages on observable characteristics.