* 1538139
* Study of Driving Volatility in Connected and Cooperative Vehicle Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Asad Khattak, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Chen
* 08/31/2018
* USD 399,793.00

Innovative connected vehicle solutions can address major societal problems of
safety, mobility, energy, and air quality. This research is to study the role of
wireless connectivity and how information from vehicle and transportation system
infrastructure based sensors can be integrated, processed, and disseminated. A
technical challenge is enabling drivers and/or autonomous vehicles to take
advantage of new and intelligent technologies, and estimate how they will
respond to new forms of information, and how feedback (early warnings and
control assistance) can help improve performance. Especially important in this
context is driving volatility, characterized by hard accelerations/braking,
jerky movements, sharp lane changes or turns, and abnormally high speeds. Can
these be mapped to a combination of local and global traffic states surrounding
the vehicles? Are they related to how surrounding vehicles behave and are they
related to socio-demographics of drivers? These questions will be answered by
leveraging connectivity and cooperation between vehicles and civil
infrastructure. The research will involve the development of analytic procedures
for understanding driving volatility, and the use of data for generating
information and driver feedback. The research will advance the multidisciplinary
field of driver behavior and cyber-physical systems, broaden participation of
underrepresented groups in research, and enhance engineering
education.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research is to model
computationally efficient algorithms for predicting driver actions and
volatility using information about their prior behaviors combined with positions
and motions obtained via wireless communications. A Markov Decision Process
framework will be used to develop models that anticipate instantaneous driver
maneuver decisions. Driver-specific estimates of rewards and penalties for
available maneuver choices in driving situations will be learned using Bayesian
Inverse Reinforcement Learning and gossip algorithms. The effect of social
persuasions from other drivers in a connected and cooperative vehicle system
environment will be quantified. Subsequently, systematic representation of
individual driver policies, along with emergent cyber-physical system
information will enable: 1) preemptive warnings and assists to drivers based on
anticipated maneuvers that are potentially unsafe, 2) expanded spatio-temporal
sphere of influence to slow down vehicles approaching an incident, reducing
chances of cascading incidents, and 3) maneuver suggestions to drivers that are
sequentially optimized for the entire group (or small clusters) of following
vehicles in the event of an incident. The potential widespread adoption of the
research findings will benefit society by advancing key methodologies at the
boundaries of connected vehicles systems.