* 1538228
* Non-Standard Plate and Shell Models in Solid Mechanics
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2018
* David Steigmann, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 07/31/2018
* USD 400,000.00

Plate and shell theories are fundamental to the field of structural mechanics.
They are essentially two dimensional representations of thin structures and
afford a convenient and effective means for engineers to analyze the strength
and safety of diverse types of components, ranging from the domes of buildings
to aircraft fuselages, ship hulls and automobile bodies. Thin shells also
constitute the basic components of an enormous range of biological structures,
including cells, bones and parts of the eye, to name just a few. Thin structures
are ubiquitous in nature and technology because they afford by far the most
efficient arrangements for sustaining loads while minimizing weight. Current
engineering theories for plate and shell structures are based on plausible
assumptions about how the material of the plate deforms in three dimensions, to
aid in the formulation of a tractable two-dimensional model. However, it is
known that these assumptions are sometimes not realized in practice. This award
supports fundamental advances in these theories that do not rely on such
assumptions, while taking into account the effects of plasticity and fiber
reinforcement in the constituent materials. Results from this research will
enable the analysis of more efficient aerospace, automotive and civil
structures, and will therefore benefit the U.S. economy and society in general.
The techniques established here will provide engineers with improved analysis
tools and will also benefit emerging fields such as biomechanics. These methods
and results will be disseminated in the form of a monograph currently in
progress, and through course lectures and specialized short courses.

Modern work on theories of plates and shells emphasizes rigorous dimension
reduction procedures such as asymptotic expansions or gamma convergence. These
are invariably based on the underlying assumption that the plate or shell
behaves elastically. In contrast, in the older literature one finds models that
account for more general material behavior, such as plasticity and the
anisotropy induced by fiber reinforcement, albeit based on ad hoc assumptions
about the underlying kinematics which may not be realized in general
applications. The present research is designed to fill the gap between existing
models that address such effects in ad-hoc approaches, and modern models that
are confined to purely elastic behavior but are overall more rigorous. The
research therefore has the potential to significantly expand the reach of
structural and solid mechanics. The research team will define new models for the
inelastic behavior in shells, based on dimension reduction approaches, to
include plasticity and diffusion of species within the shell material. The team
will also establish models that account for the effects of intrinsic flexural
and torsional stiffness of the fibers in fiber-reinforced plates and shells.
This is expected to yield a substantial improvement over existing theories that
account only for the anisotropy conferred by the fibers. These theoretical
advances will be supported by extensive numerical simulations.