* 1538582
* Kelp forest community resilience in action: adaptive responses of predators to a disease-driven food web perturbation
* GEO,OCE
* 08/15/2015,01/31/2021
* Mark Carr, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 01/31/2021
* USD 774,348.00

A key goal of ecology is to understand how species interactions -- competition,
predation, mutualism -- influence the structure (e.g., biodiversity) and
functions (e.g., productivity) of ecological communities and contribute to the
stability and resilience of ecosystems. Kelp forests along the West Coast of
North America have been a model ecosystem in which marine ecologists have
explored these questions. That work has provided evidence that predators,
including sea otters, sea stars, and fishes, can be important in controlling sea
urchins that otherwise overgraze forests and create alternative "barrens"
states, devoid of kelp. However, other examples suggest that disease and
disturbance, not predators, suppress urchin overgrazing. Here we employ
experiments and surveys to determine whether and how sea otters and sea stars
act separately and in combination to control the rapid growth of sea urchin
populations that is occurring in concert with a sea star "wasting" epidemic
along the West Coast of North America. The results of this work will (i) advance
our understanding of how multiple predators interact to influence community
structure, stability and resilience, and (ii) shed light on how species
interactions contribute to the stability of these forests that are the
foundation of productive commercial and recreational fisheries. The project will
involve citizen scientists contributing to surveys of sea otter abundance,
foraging behavior and diet, and underrepresented (largely Latino) undergraduates
and results will be disseminated in several public outreach facilities and K-12
educational programs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will advance our
understanding of the combined roles of species diversity and predators in
contributing to the stability and resilience of community structure. Though both
predators and diversity have been the focus of numerous studies, fewer have
explored how predator diversity does or does not enhance the resilience of
marine ecosystems. The investigators will determine the relative contributions
of southern sea otters (Enyhda lutris lutris) and two species of sea stars
(Pycnopodia helianthoides and Pisaster giganteus) in controlling the density and
size structure of two prey species, the purple sea urchin (Strongylocentrotus
purpuratus) and a snail (Promartynia pulligo), and the cascading effects on
survival and density of giant kelp (Macrocystis pyrifera). Orthogonal
manipulations of predator access in large field enclosures/exclosures will be
used to assess the relative roles of redundancy, complementarity and "sampling
effect" (i.e. particular importance of either species) among the two predators
on both direct mortality and indirect (trait-mediated) foraging behavior of
their prey. The PIs will evaluate whether results from the experiments "scale
up" to explain geographic variation in the relative densities of predators
(otters and stars), prey (urchins) and the major primary producer (giant kelp)
and the ability of sea otters to compensate for declines in sea stars to control
the rapid growth in purple sea urchin populations that can otherwise cause phase
shifts (forests to barrens) of these ecosystems.