* 1538861
* Collaborative Research:  Understanding the Effect of Powder Properties and Processing Conditions on the Performance of Pharmaceutical Tablets
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,06/30/2020
* Marcial Gonzalez, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 06/30/2020
* USD 200,000.00

Pharmaceutical tablets account for a large fraction of oral solid dosage forms
dispensed today. They are traditionally manufactured by directly compressing a
blend of the active pharmaceutical ingredient and excipient powders. In spite of
its long history, however, product quality control relies extensively on
empirical methods. Evaluating the impact of excipient variability on the
performance of pharmaceutical tablets, for example, still presents a great
challenge. To address these problems, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration has
released guidelines for the implementation of quality-by-design in the
manufacturing process and manufacturers are increasingly focusing on raw
materials and process controls. It is therefore of strategic importance to
understand the interrelationship between raw material properties and
manufacturing process parameters on product quality and performance. The
collaborative research effort by researchers at Purdue and Rutgers will combine
experiments, simulations and modeling to address this important issue in the
case of pharmaceutical tablets manufactured by direct compression of powders.
The broad nature of the collaboration also provides an excellent opportunity to
train graduate and undergraduate students in engineering and pharmaceutical
sciences in a wide range of experimental and computational techniques. The
investigators will also engage in outreach efforts coordinated at both
universities through different undergraduate research programs. In addition, the
numerical methods resulting from the project will be broadly available to the
pharmaceutical and process engineering communities and educators through NSF's
supported open-access HUBzero platforms, such as pharmaHUB.org.

The intellectual merit of the research work lies in developing a predictive
multi-scale model that is based on a mechanistic understanding at the level of
individual powder particles and captures the complex interrelationship between
powder properties (e.g., wetting) and processing parameters (e.g., compression
force) with critical quality attributes of dry tablets (e.g., hardness) and
tablet performance (e.g., disintegration behavior in contact with water). The
transformative nature of the research includes: (i) A novel mechanistic model of
compressed powders under large deformations and high confinement to predict
detailed structure and material strength, and a multi-scale approach to describe
solvent uptake combined with ad-hoc experiments that decouple the dominant
penetration mechanisms (capillary imbibition and case-II diffusion) and is able
to describe disintegration behavior; (ii) A broad set of ad-hoc experiments
(tablet hardness, free and constrained swelling, column imbibition with multiple
fluids) that will allow iterative experiment-model synergy for increasingly
complex systems. The model and the set of ad-hoc experiments will then be
utilized to reveal and understand the interrelationship between the properties
of the raw materials and manufacturing process parameters with the quality and
performance of pharmaceutical tablets.