* 1538275
* Ultrasonic Additive Manufacturing of Multi-Material Structures
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Marcelo Dapino, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Steve Schmid
* 08/31/2018
* USD 300,411.00

Ultrasonic additive manufacturing is a solid-state additive process for
fabrication of fully-dense metal structures from foil stock. When combined with
subtractive processes, it can be used to fabricate 3D structures that
incorporate dissimilar metals (e.g., aluminum, copper, and titanium), internal
conformal channels for cooling and other transport purposes, and temperature-
sensitive components such as sensors, reinforcement fibers, electronic circuits,
fiber optics, and smart materials. A lack of scientific understanding of the
process and how it affects build properties currently limits the quality and
size of builds and the range of dissimilar material combinations that can be
additively welded. This award supports fundamental research in order to
understand its complex process-property relationships and enable in-situ process
quality monitoring using hardware that already exists in commercial equipment.
Results from this research will lead to increased use of this US-based
manufacturing technology in the automotive, aerospace, biomedical, and
electronics industries. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research objective is to
correlate macroscopic energy transfer effects (i.e., electromechanical
transduction in the welder, vibrational energy imparted by sonotrode on foil,
and effects of mechanical compliance on the energy available to dynamically
recrystallize the microstructure) with details of the microstructure at the weld
interface and mechanical properties of ultrasonic additive manufacturing builds.
First-principles thermodynamic models will be formulated to describe the
complete flow of energy in the ultrasonic additive manufacturing process,
including system level electromechanical relationships in the welder (using
classical electroacoustics theory) and quantification of the energy available to
recrystallize the microstructure (from thermodynamic balances between input weld
energy, surface and bulk energies, and losses). In-situ experimental techniques
for measuring shear force at the sonotrode will be integrated with measurements
of weld vibration amplitude, voltage, and current to validate the energy models.
These validated models will be used to predict process-property relationships in
new material combinations (e.g., ultra high strength steels and titanium),
enable new 3D weld configurations, optimize process parameters without massive
experimental trials, and provide the basis for a new power-based process control
framework that overcomes current quality, size, and real-time process monitoring
limitations. A key aspect of intellectual merit is that this will be the first
comprehensive energy mapping of the ultrasonic additive manufacturing process
and also the first to be experimentally verified by both in-situ weld power
measurements and microstructural analyses.