* 1538432
* Fundamental Study on Sustainable Alternative Binders for Concrete: Reduction of Long-Term Time Dependent Deformation through Nanoengineering
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Paramita Mondal, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Gianluca Cusatis
* 08/31/2019
* USD 300,000.00

Concrete is second only to water as the most used material by humans. Its use
continues to grow to build new structures as well as to meet an increasing need
for repair of existing structures. The projected use of ordinary Portland
cement, the main component responsible for binding capacity of concrete, in 2020
is to be three times the level of 1990. As every ton of ordinary Portland cement
is known to produce 0.8 tons of carbon dioxide, reduction of cement consumption
by use of supplementary cementitious materials is extremely important to reduce
greenhouse gas emission associated with construction industry. However,
supplementary cementitious materials can be slow to react and greater use of
such materials in concrete requires external activation. External activation of
supplementary cementitious materials can produce binders with similar to
superior mechanical properties and have been used in actual construction.
However, there are still many factors, including their high early age
deformation due to moisture loss and limited understanding of long-term time
dependent deformation, that affect their wider use. This proposal, for the first
time, will study processing of such sustainable alternative binders and its
relationship with time-dependent deformation to ultimately control it. The
proposed work plan also aims to a) advance the integration of research and
education through training civil engineering graduate students in materials
science, b) encourage study of sustainable infrastructure materials among
undergraduates through middle school students and c) increase participation of
women and underrepresented students in research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research objective of this proposal is to provide fundamental understanding of
how the reaction mechanisms, and the molecular and nano structural arrangements
of the reaction products in alkali activated sustainable alternative binders
made from supplementary cementitious materials, are related to the time
dependent deformation of the binder. This proposal hypothesizes that the
abovementioned factors can be controlled through the addition of nanocrystalline
seeding agents. In this project, the effects of the addition of nanocrystalline
seeding agents on the reaction mechanism of alkali activated binders will be
studied through the use of high resolution electron microscopy and X-ray
scattering. Precise information on the growth mechanism will be transformative
as it will permit modification and possibly improvement of predicting capability
of existing models for reaction kinetics of such binders. Fundamental
understanding achieved through this proposal will be equally important for
improving resistance of alkali activated binders against leaching, efflorescence
and other chemical degradations as they also depend on the molecular and
nanostructure of the binder.