* 1538674
* Performance-Contract Engineering: Exploration of the Concurrent Design of Contract Terms and Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2018
* Peter Sandborn, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Rich Malak
* 07/31/2018
* USD 150,000.00

Complex mission, infrastructure and safety-critical systems are shifting away
from traditional contract mechanisms of fixed-price followed by the purchase of
support. Newer performance-based contracts are growing in popularity for
governmental and non-governmental acquisitions of critical systems, such as for
energy, defense, transportation and healthcare. These contracts allow the
customer to buy the system performance rather than to purchase the product
itself, or to buy availability rather than to pay for maintenance. Performance
contracts are not warranties, lease agreements, or maintenance contracts, which
are all break-fix guarantees; rather, these contracts are highly quantified
"satisfaction guaranteed" contracts where "satisfaction" is a combination of
outcomes received from the product, usually articulated as a time (e.g.,
operational availability), usage measure (e.g., miles), or energy-based
availability. Performance-based contracts (also called outcome-based contracts)
can take different forms where the particular performance that the contract
specifies distinguishes the contract mechanism, e.g., performance-based
logistics (PBL), public-private partnerships (PPPs), and power purchase
agreements (PPAs). Unfortunately, the contract design itself is almost always
performed separate from the engineering design process and provided as a
requirement to the engineering design process. This award supports fundamental
research towards the integration of the contract and system design for systems
that are subject to performance-based contracts. Such an integrated approach has
clear societal benefits since contract failure may mean hundreds of millions of
dollars spent by the public for either no outcome or inadequate outcome, or
result in the contractor being driven out of business, which can lead to
disaster for all parties involved including the public.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research approaches contract design as a system
design problem where the process of designing contractual terms that address
performance metrics, the payment model, and performance assessment, represents a
multidisciplinary design process that can be integrated into the broader
engineering design process. The development of a new methodology will be
explored that uses the customer and contractor goals as an input for determining
the contractual and engineering design terms using principal-agent and contract
theory to factor in incentives and information asymmetry. As a concrete case
study, the research team will study PPA contracts for wind farms with multiple
design parameters within a stochastic energy-price environment and uncertain
wind profile.