* 1538702
* Parametrizing ocean eddy transfer over continental slopes
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Andrew Stewart, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 08/31/2019
* USD 472,412.00

Continental slopes support some of the most influential currents in the world
ocean circulation, such as the strong poleward western boundary currents like
the Gulf Stream found in the subtropics. However, the circulation across
continental slopes is arguably of comparable importance, as they separate
shallow coastal waters from the water masses of the deep ocean. Water mass
exchanges across continental slopes facilitate upwelling of nutrients to support
coastal marine ecosystems, transport heat towards marine-terminating glaciers
around Greenland and Antarctica, and control the outflow of dense water masses
such as Mediterranean Water and Antarctic Bottom Water. Recent studies point to
the importance of mesoscale eddies in modulating both the structure and
transport of coastal currents and the cross-slope transfer of water masses and
properties. Predictive ocean and climate models are currently unable to resolve
these eddies, and are unlikely to routinely resolve the mesoscale globally for
at least a couple of decades. Yet despite major recent advances in
parametrization strategies for eddies over a flat ocean bed, there have been no
concerted attempts to develop analogous strategies for continental slopes. This
project aims to close the current gap in understanding mesoscale turbulence over
steep slopes, and thereby to develop a parametrization of eddy mixing and
transport over continental slopes. This project will provide a graduate student
researcher with three years of training in numerical and analytical modeling as
well as working knowledge of observational datasets. It also supports an early-
career faculty member. A key objective of this project is to produce a set of
recommendations for the treatment of mesoscale eddy transport over continental
slopes, which will be disseminated widely among the oceanographic and climate
communities. Adoption of these practices could substantially improve the
representation of shelf and slope processes in large-scale ocean and climate
models. The project's model output will be made available to the wider
oceanographic community for the purpose of testing and validation. The principal
investigator will also participate in outreach activities via existing
frameworks supported by his institution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A central goal of
this project is to explore the fundamental properties of equilibrated turbulence
over continental slopes across a range of forcing conditions, ocean
stratifications and slope geometries. The work will characterize the slope?s
impact on the eddy life cycle and generation mechanisms, cross- and along-slope
eddy transfer of mass and tracers, the routes to dissipation of surface-input
momentum and energy, sources and generation of eddy kinetic energy in slope
currents, and constraints on the inverse energy cascade and jet formation. In
strongly baroclinic coastal currents there is an abundance of potential energy
available for the generation of mesoscale eddies, but the availability of energy
may be offset by the steep topography, which tends to suppress energy conversion
to mesoscale eddy motions. The relative roles of these compensating effects in
setting rates of eddy transfer and mixing remains poorly understood. The
principal investigator and a graduate student researcher will develop an eddy-
resolving process model and create a suite of continental shelf and slope test
cases, the output of which will be made available to the wider oceanographic
community. This suite of simulations will be used to characterize key properties
of slope turbulence, such as the budgets of energy and momentum, and the eddy
life cycle. Guided by these findings, the research team will explore several
promising theoretical approaches toward the construction of a parametrization of
eddy transfer over steep topography. The parametrization will be tested and
validated against the suite of eddy-resolving simulations, and against existing
databases of satellite-derived sea-surface height data and coastal float release
data. The findings of this work will be used to create a set of recommendations
and best practices for parametrizing mesoscale eddies over continental slopes,
which will be disseminated widely to ocean and climate modelers.