* 1538447
* Mobile Gait Analysis via Low-power Piezoresponsive Wearable Sensors
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Anton Bowden, Brigham Young University
* Standard Grant
* Irina Dolinskaya
* 08/31/2018
* USD 386,053.00

The way that we move has long been recognized as a window into human health; our
gait is affected by numerous pathologies, including arthritis, diabetes, and
Parkinson's and Alzheimer's diseases. Having access to quantitative gait
analysis could be an important tool for pathology prevention, diagnosis, and
management. However to date, quantitative gait analysis has been largely
confined to the laboratory, due to the cumbersome and expensive nature of multi-
camera motion tracking lab equipment. This project uses novel sensors that
employ materials that emit a voltage when subjected to mechanical stress and has
the objective of bringing mobile gait analysis to the general public, in their
real-world environment. These wearable sensors are inexpensive, consume little
power, and can wirelessly communicate with a nearby smartphone. In addition, the
sensor technology itself promises to be transformational across a broad cross-
section of applications including clothing-integrated wearable sensors, self-
sensing furniture, smart mounts for vibrating equipment, advanced airbag
deployment systems, integrated helmet concussion sensors and self-sensing shoes.
Students from both mechanical engineering and exercise sciences are intimately
involved in all aspects of the research to provide a unique cross-disciplinary
educational environment. Furthermore, high school students can apply to receive
gait analysis systems to solve interesting science and technology
problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The piezoresponsive nano-composite sensors used
in this project are comprised of a dielectric polymer matrix impregnated with a
network of conductive nano-particles. The mechanical and electrical responses of
the sensors are independently tailored to provide an optimized system for
multifunctional implementation in numerous systems requiring large-deflection
sensing capabilities. When connected to a voltage-sensing device (for example, a
blue-tooth transmitting Arduino microcomputer) the sensors can track deformation
and impact energy and relay it to a nearby smartphone. In order to effectively
leverage these sensors for mobile gait analysis, several scientific barriers
need to be overcome. The piezoresponse of the sensors will be modeled using a
machine-learning algorithm to enable accurate, continuous self-calibration of
the sensors. An optimized mesh network of sensors will be designed to allow
mobile gait analysis and will be validated against traditional gait lab
instruments. Finally, the optimized sensors will be utilized to measure gait in
a cross-section of subjects to establish a public baseline database of gait
behavior in a variety of real-life environments (i.e., outside of the
laboratory).