* 1538950
* VEC: Small: Collaborative Research: Joint Compressive Spectral Imaging and 3D Ranging Sensing Using a Commodity Time-Of-Flight Range Sensor
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Gonzalo Arce, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* Jie Yang
* 08/31/2018
* USD 274,620.00

The commercial Kinect input device uses both a camera and a time-of-flight depth
sensor to capture 3d interactions ? initially for gaming, it has found novel
applications, including autism diagnosis and allowing surgeons to control
imaging in the operating room. This project aims to integrate the time-of-flight
(TOF) depth with Coded Aperture Snapshot Spectral Imaging (CASSI) in a single
sensor, giving 3d images not only of visible light, but extending into the
infrared. This will have advantages of improving the resolution of the depth
information, allowing the two sensors to work together to improve the quality of
both. The result will be the first generation of 3D-based ?spectrophotographic?
cameras for use on robotic platforms and as the heart of machine vision systems
used in manufacturing and metrology. With their higher spatial and spectral
resolution, these could open new and unexplored markets.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project develops a time-of-flight, spectral imaging
camera by addressing the problems of (a) novel coded aperture design and
optimization under light level constraints; (b) fast compressive inverse
reconstruction algorithms for real-time implementations; (c) characterization on
non-ideal optical elements and calibration mechanisms, and (d) super-resolution
enhancement schemes. The PIs will design and assemble a proof-of-concept
prototype camera that integrates a DMD array with a CMOS, TOF image sensor in a
package comparable to a pico-projector light engine. In order to mitigate the
computational complexity of CS inverse image reconstruction algorithms that
often preclude their use in real-time implementations, the PIs will build on
their history of developing coded aperture schemes that give rise to divide-and-
conquer image reconstruction algorithms that can be implemented on GPU and other
multi-core processors. This project also incorporates education activities
including: (1) the development of a compressive optical imaging course with an
emphasis on spectral and TOF modalities; (2) technical seminars at the annual
Society of Hispanic Professional Engineers (SHPE) Conference; (3) open-source
algorithms and measurement data for the scientific community.