* 1538797
* Collaborative Research: Understanding Gender Differences in STEM Academic Careers
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2021
* Donna Ginther, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 08/31/2021
* USD 249,996.00

This award funds research that uses data from the National Center for Science
and Engineering Statistics (NCSES) to consider women's academic career
progression in STEM disciplines. The team will use a new dataset, the Survey of
Doctorate Recipients Productivity Database (SDRPD), which includes publication
and patent data for PhD scientists who participate in the NCSES Survey of
Doctorate Recipients. The team will first produce a technical report that
details the characteristics of these data to aid a broad and interdisciplinary
community of scientists. They then plan to use the data to evaluate possible
causes for the already documented gender gaps in STEM publication and citation
by controlling for demographic, family, and employer characteristics. The
results of this project can be used by universities and funders who want to
develop policies designed to address barriers faced by women in academic STEM
disciplines.

Economic theory predicts that gender differences in productivity will lead to
gender differences in career outcomes. Without data that includes information
both on productivity and on individual demographic factors, we cannot tell, for
example, if women in STEM face a larger productivity gap if they have children,
or if women scientists find it more difficult to move for a new job. The project
will also evaluate the quality of SDRPD and will provide technical documentation
for the research community interested in using the data.