* 1538415
* GOALI: Battery Health Dynamics and Its Management
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,05/31/2021
* Robert Landers, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Harry Dankowicz
* 05/31/2021
* USD 428,559.00

Convenient, affordable, and safe electric vehicles have an important role in
moving the automotive sector beyond primary reliance on a single energy source.
However, the lithium-ion batteries that are the dominant energy storage
technology in modern electric vehicles suffer from long charging times, high
cost, and thermal stability concerns. This Grant Opportunity for Academic
Liaison with Industry (GOALI) project will model battery degradation mechanisms
and produce a mathematical framework suitable for analysis, design, and control
of battery management functions such as charging and cell balancing. The central
innovation that will enable new capabilities in this area is the integration of
micromechanical, electrochemical, and electrothermal behaviors across time and
length scales to provide accurate prediction of battery degradation. The result
can help achieve capacity, power, and lifetime improvements in energy storage
systems for transportation applications, thereby dramatically changing the
energy landscape of the United States. Beyond advancing the fundamental academic
understanding of battery physics and control, the education/research-integrated
activity will provide a broad range of opportunities for graduate,
undergraduate, and K-12 students to develop an interest in and learn about
cutting-edge scientific research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research plan
addresses unsolved questions essential to optimum battery management for
lithium-ion batteries; how mechanical failures in battery materials affect
chemical degradation, and eventually battery performance and capacity fade.
Integration of high fidelity degradation mechanisms into the electrolyte-
particle model will be used for the control of battery systems to maximize their
performance and lifetime. This research aims at: (1) gaining a fundamental
understanding of mechanical and chemical degradation mechanisms and
incorporating this knowledge into a complete battery electrochemical model, (2)
constructing a control-oriented model that quantitatively predicts capacity fade
due to mechanical and chemical degradation mechanisms, as well as their coupled
effects, and (3) leveraging this dynamic model to estimate battery state-of-
health during operation based on limited signals, and utilize these estimates to
optimize battery management system functions such as charging and cell
balancing. If successfully realized, the solution for the fundamental challenges
in energy storage systems, i.e., understanding the linkages between microscopic
and macroscopic material behavior, and between failure and its control, will be
realized. Further, the quantitative information regarding battery material
failure on the microscopic level will be of particular use to the computational
and modeling community.