* 1538354
* GOALI: Understanding Deformation Processing in Advanced Alloys
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2019
* Richard Gordon, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Alexis Lewis
* 07/31/2019
* USD 386,182.00

Shape memory alloys are multifunctional materials that undergo an reversible
phase transformation when exposed to heat or external load. These
transformations can led to useful properties, and their behavior can be
controlled if the relationships between the transformational and fine particles
dispersed throughout the material can be understood. A class of shape memory
alloys comprised of nickel, titanium and niobium (NiTiNb) exhibit structures
with unique constituent morphologies. This Grant Opportunity for Academic
Liaison with Industry (GOALI) award supports research seeking to couple thermal
and mechanical deformation processing and examine and understand the resulting
Nb particle interactions with the underlying phase transformation and
deformation mechanisms. The industrial partner specializes in fabrication of
NiTiNb materials and employs laser-based machining techniques for post-
processing without compromising the shape memory behavior. The approaches and
findings can extend to deformation processed shape memory alloys with insoluble
third elements in general. Fundamental interrelationships this research
establishes will unlock the full potential of manufacturing multifunctional
shape memory materials to tune performance for novel deployable structures. The
success of this research will advance processing multifunctional alloys to
commercialization as next-generation materials in broad ranging applications
from biomedical implants to unmanned vehicles that benefit the U.S. economy and
society. Furthermore, education and outreach programs will closely integrate the
technical research. Programs designed for high school, undergraduate, and
graduate levels will deepen the engagement of minorities and underrepresented
groups in academic disciplines of science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics.

This small business industry-university collaborative GOALI project will
investigate the underlying physical martensitic phase transformation (MT)
mechanism of a novel shape memory material response referred to as strain-
induced austenite (SIA) in a class of ternary NiTi-based shape memory alloys
(SMAs) with an insoluble third element Nb. A consequence of ternary alloying and
thermo-mechanical deformation processing is a micro-/nano-structured Nb particle
constituent morphology.The collaborative team will (1) systematically vary
thermo-mechanical processing and post-processing parameters of deployable
structures; (2) conduct x-ray, electron, and optical microscopy
characterizations of micro-/nano-constituent sizes, spacing, and coherency as
well as grain size and texture; (3) undertake multi-scale thermo-mechanical
experiments that determine multifunctional material properties and structural
response; (4) establish quantitative and qualitative relationships between
processing, microstructure and multifunctionality.