* 1538293
* GOALI: Diamond Wire Slicing of Crystalline Silicon Materials with Application to Manufacturing of High Quality Solar Cell Substrates
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2019
* Shreyes Melkote, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 06/30/2019
* USD 300,002.00

In fixed abrasive diamond wire slicing, very hard and brittle materials such as
crystalline silicon and sapphire are cut into thin wafers utilizing a moving
wire web consisting of thin steel wires coated with diamond abrasives. These
wafers are used as substrates for photovoltaic solar cells and energy efficient
lighting devices such as light emitting diodes. Although the fixed abrasive
diamond wire slicing process can potentially offer higher production rates than
existing semiconductor wafer slicing methods, scientific knowledge required for
its cost-effective application and optimization is lacking. This Grant
Opportunity for Academic Liaision with Industry (GOALI) award supports
fundamental research that will yield the scientific knowledge needed to produce
high quality photovoltaic solar silicon substrates with minimal mechanical
damage. Since higher quality wafers are less prone to breakage during solar cell
manufacture, the knowledge derived from this research will lead to lower solar
cell production costs, which in turn will lead to lower solar energy costs. This
will directly benefit the United States economy and the society at large.
Knowledge derived from this research will also benefit other industries such as
micro and optoelectronics where the diamond wire slicing process is used to cut
other semiconductor and optical materials. The research involves the disciplines
of advanced manufacturing, materials science, and mechanics. The project will
engage students from diverse backgrounds including underrepresented groups, and
will thereby contribute to educating the next generation of engineers in
advanced manufacturing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team will focus on
understanding and minimizing the surface and sub-surface damage generated in
diamond wire slicing of microstructurally-complex crystalline silicon materials
used as substrates in photovoltaic solar cells. The specific objectives of the
project are to understand and quantify the effects of diamond grit geometry,
crystal orientation and defects (such as grain/twin boundaries, dislocation
density variations), and diamond grit wear on the cutting mode (ductile vs.
brittle), surface morphology, and sub-surface damage produced in diamond wire
slicing of mono- and multi-crystalline solar silicon materials. Single grit
diamond scribing experiments using diamond indenters with idealized shapes,
crystal defect characterization as a function of crystal orientation, numerical
modeling using the extended finite element modeling method, and lab-scale
diamond wire slicing experiments will be used to investigate these effects. The
findings from these investigations can be used to synthesize diamond wires with
optimized grit shapes and wear behavior for use in the manufacture of high
quality thin semiconductor wafers.