* 1538121
* Temporal/spatial scales of mantle wedge composition and processes investigated with young boninites and basalts from the unusually active NE Lau Basin
* GEO,OCE
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2020
* Kenna Rubin, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Deborah K. Smith
* 07/31/2020
* USD 275,379.00

This project is a study of subduction zone volcanic rocks to understand how they
form. Subduction zones are places where materials from Earth's surface
(sediments, volcanic rocks, and other rocky materials) are returned to the
mantle. During this process fluids are drawn from the "slab" of subducting
material while it descends, causing the overlying mantle to melt, producing
magmas that drive a significant portion of Earth's volcanism. Despite 50 years
of research about how and where this magmatic activity occurs, the range of
volcanic styles and products, and their contributions to human society (hazards,
ore formation, landscape evolution, etc.), numerous questions remain about the
conditions and timescales of melting in the mantle, the different types of rocks
that might melt, and the sizes and shapes of these different subterranean rock
regions. In addition scientists still have a very incomplete picture of how all
of these things contribute to what type of magma is ultimately erupted and what
style the eruptions take (for example, how big, how frequent, how explosive).
This research project addresses these questions using recently erupted, rare,
volcanic rocks called boninites. These rocks form when H2O is added to the
shallow mantle under very high temperature conditions. The tools of
geochemistry, isotope geochemistry, and naturally-occurring radioactive element
distributions in these rocks will be used to analyze an already existing,
unique, set of samples. Project goals are to determine: (1) the variety and
spatial scale of mantle compositions beneath this subduction zone, (2) the
timescales over which they melt, (3) how magma forms and migrates to the
surface, and (4) how this contributes to volcanic activity. Answers to these
questions have broader impacts to society and the national interest because they
provide information on processes leading to magmatism and volcanism (and
associated hazards and benefits) at subduction zones, which occur both off the
western coast of the United States and along the coasts of many of our partner
nations in the Americas, Caribbean and Pacific Rim, like Japan, Taiwan and New
Zealand. In addition, the project will fund an institution in an EPSCoR state
(Hawaii), support an early career researcher, and carry out public outreach
through the NOAA outreach engine and U Hawaii websites.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will study interoceanic subduction zone
volcanism, using a unique set of young boninite and related mafic/ultramafic
samples from the nine Mata Volcanoes and neighboring rear arc and back arc
volcanoes (Northeast Lau and Fonualei Spreading Centers). U-series disequilibria
and analyses of Sr-Nd-Pb-Hf isotopes, and major/trace element abundances in
already-collected volcanic glasses, minerals and whole rocks will be used to
investigate high resolution (km-scale) mantle wedge heterogeneity at an active
inter-oceanic arc/backarc, sub-millennial variations in subduction fluid inputs,
and conditions of boninite and other magma petrogenesis. Hypotheses will be
tested to address how fluids from the subducting slab induce melting in the
overlying mantle, how different compositions of mantle melt, how different
magmas are delivered to the surface in a way that preserves large variations in
magma composition over small spatial scales, and the timescales of these various
processes, which prelimimary data indicates is likely to be much faster in some
cases than heretofore realized.