* 1538193
* Collaborative Research:  Nash Equilibrium Problems under Uncertainty
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2018
* Uday Shanbhag, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 07/31/2018
* USD 110,000.00

Nash Equilibrium (NE) models provide the mathematical basis to study the
interdependence between decision-makers in a competitive environment. These
models provide insights into the operations of many multi-agent socio-technical
systems, which include communications, electric power, and transportation
networks. These socio-technical systems must not only accommodate technical
constraints (e.g., physical laws of electrical power flow), but must also
acknowledge the goals of several decision-makers, all of whom make choices under
uncertainty and compete with their rivals. As a concrete example, consider the
modern electricity network: some generation is carried out by large units,
whereas distributed generation and storage may be operated by individuals, and
transmission and distribution assets are operated by system operators and
utilities. In addition, the growing penetration of renewable energy (highly
volatile), the uncertainty about fuel prices, new technology, and energy policy,
create a challenging setting in which the firms and/or individuals operate. This
project, which combines the need to incorporate system constraints, as well as
the effects of risk and uncertainty in the absence of cooperation across
decision-makers, will address some of the most challenging questions regarding
the structure, algorithms, scalability, and interpretations for NE models under
uncertainty. The broader impact of the project includes the study of markets in
power and communication networks, and the training and education of graduate
students.

Current theories and algorithmic schemes are relatively restrictive in their
ability to accommodate risk measures, hierarchical and recourse-based decision-
making, and coupled strategy sets. Motivated by these lacunae, this research
will utilize a broad framework that can accommodate both private and coupled
constraints, allows for linear, quadratic and convex models for taking recourse,
and captures risk-aversion through the incorporation of composite and deviation-
based risk measures. The goals of this research include the following: (i)
Analysis: Verifiable statements for the existence and uniqueness of the
resulting equilibria through the analysis of the resulting risk-based
variational and quasi-variational inequality problems; (ii) Algorithms: Design,
analysis (convergence, complexity) and statistical properties of estimators
derived on algorithms reliant on joint sampling and approximation schemes; and
(iii) Applications: Problems in electricity markets and other areas of planning
under competition and uncertainty will be considered in two-stage and
hierarchical settings.