* 1538813
* PFI:AIR-RA:  Commercializing  of a Molecular Analysis Platform for Plant Genomics in an Industry/University Ecosystem
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2019
* Abraham Lee, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 09/30/2019
* USD 804,790.00

This PFI: AIR Research Alliance project focuses on the translation and transfer
of an integrated microfluidic based screening and testing analysis platform that
has the potential to dramatically improve the efficiency and effectiveness of
breeding plants. In the current agriculture biotech industry, genetic analyses
of complex communities of plant cells are typically carried out in a
homogenized, whole community fashion where the output is global information on
the average state of the population of cells. This can mask the true extent of
cellular heterogeneity that is present by averaging properties and potentially
missing intriguing outliers. Molecular analysis at the single cell level would
lead to better capability to develop enhanced strains of plant cells that thrive
under various conditions. Thus there is a need for a tool that can provide
single cell-molecular analysis in large populations, capable of high throughput
while preserving heterogeneity information, and tailored to the agriculture
genetics industry. The goal of this project is to develop such a tool by
applying microfluidic lab-on-a-chip technologies for molecular and single cell
analyses derived from the NSF I/UCRC "Center for Advanced Design and
Manufacturing of Integrated Microfluidics" (CADMIM) where expertise and
discoveries in the design, microfabrication, and manufacturing of microfluidic
devices for cellular and molecular processing and detection are utilized. Not
only will the proposed technology enable the single cell analysis, it also has
the potential to lower the cost per molecular test by an order of magnitude over
current methodologies. Current technology used in the agriculture biotech
industry relies on discrete, bulky robotic systems that are time and labor
intensive and require larger amounts of power, sample, and reagents resulting in
much higher cost per test to analyze large numbers of
samples.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The innovation ecosystem that will be enhanced
includes CADMIM, UC Irvine, Johns Hopkins University, and DuPont Pioneer. The UC
Irvine site of CADMIM brings microfluidic cellular manipulation, lysing, and
micro-scale fluidic handling expertise. Johns Hopkins University brings
microfluidic molecular processing and detection expertise. DuPont Pioneer, a
leading developer and supplier of plant genetics to farmers worldwide, brings
the plant genomic expertise and agriculture biotech business knowledge. Students
and post-doctoral fellows from both universities will gain entrepreneurial and
technology translation experience through their frequent interactions with
DuPont Pioneer's technical team in understanding the current limitations in
plant genotyping biotechnology, how a multi-continent international company
works to solve large-scale problems, what is required for disruptive technology
to displace current working technology paradigms, and how interdisciplinary
teams communicate to develop cutting edge solutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project addresses several technology gaps as it translates from research
discovery toward commercial application. Plant cell genotype screening requires
millions of cell-level verification tests and subsequent further massive
molecular analyses of specific cell types. The current plant cell processing and
molecular analysis platforms consist of multiple cumbersome and expensive cell
processing machines that are time consuming and rely on skilled lab workers
operating them in sequence. This greatly limits the throughput of cells being
analyzed and makes it cost prohibitive for applications that require field-based
plant seed sampling and testing. With the integrated microfluidic technologies
developed in this project, the multiple steps will be integrated on a compact
and potentially portable platform, using smaller liquid volumes to obtain faster
results.