* 1538866
* Utilizing Remote Sensing to Assess the Implication of Tall Building Performance on the Resilience of Urban Centers
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2019
* John Wallace, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 09/30/2019
* USD 550,100.00

Tall buildings have become a staple of central business districts in the United
States and other parts of the world, reflecting the intersection of increased
urbanization with the constraints of limited land space. Recent advancements in
computer modeling and performance-based engineering are enabling improved
scientific assessment of the expected seismic performance of tall buildings in
terms of stakeholder-driven metrics, such as the cost to repair damage from
future earthquakes. However, these methodologies are based on the notion of the
building as "an island," where seismic impacts are constrained within its
footprint. However, recent earthquakes that have occurred around the world have
highlighted the critical role of building performance in minimizing the impact
on community functionality. This research aims to address this fundamental
limitation by investigating and applying new methods to assess the impact of
tall building performance on the resilience of dense urban centers, using
downtown Los Angeles as a test bed. Los Angeles is selected due to the density
of tall buildings, both old and new, existence of the only mandatory seismic
instrumentation program in a U.S. city, and recent focus on resiliency by city
government officials. An educational and outreach program will be established to
create new learning modules for undergraduate students, which provide an
appreciation of the critical relationship between the response of buildings to
extreme events and the functionality of the communities they serve. The research
program will include active participation from undergraduate and graduate
students, local building officials, and researchers and practitioners with
interests in performance assessment of tall buildings, application of sensor
networks for monitoring and decision making, and development of local, regional,
and national standards, guidelines, and codes. A primary research goal is to
provide a framework that can be used in other urban centers in the
U.S.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This research entails three main tasks: (1)
investigate how to model and assess the seismic performance of tall buildings by
using and enhancing the only mandatory seismic instrumentation program for
buildings that exists in the U.S. in the City of Los Angeles, (2) develop a
framework that enables the study of the impact of tall buildings on the
resilience of urban clusters by using Los Angeles as a test bed, and (3) create
tools that enhance data use and visualization, creating opportunities for
collaboration among scientists, engineers, social scientists, and policy makers.
The research program will improve Los Angeles' standing as a field laboratory,
which, after the occurrence of a large earthquake event, in addition to
facilitating a rapid assessment of damage, will generate valuable building
response data that cannot be obtained from reduced-scale experiments of
idealized structures. Alternative and novel sensors will be used to capture
important building responses to enable better performance assessment. Structural
models will also be developed with advanced characterization of nonlinear
behavior and earthquake ground motions. These models will be used to generate
engineering demand parameters for the resilience-based assessment, which
includes a probabilistic multi-limit state assessment of performance and
quantifying the temporal evolution of the building's functionality following an
earthquake. The research program tackles an important and challenging problem
that will advance the ability to model and design tall buildings, taking into
account the impact of their performance on urban resilience. Technology transfer
will include active participation of local building officials and interactions
with researchers and practicing engineers in the U.S. and abroad.