* 1538460
* Collaborative Research: Soil Improvement Through Bio-Cementation: Physical and Numerical Experiments
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2020
* T. Matthew Evans, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Giovanna Biscontin
* 06/30/2020
* USD 284,065.00

Dynamic loading associated with earthquake shaking can lead to the liquefaction
of loose, saturated sands, essentially transforming competent geological
material into quicksand. Any structures - natural or man-made - that exist on
these deposits will suffer catastrophic damage due to the loss of strength
associated with liquefaction. Cemented soils, however, are less prone to
liquefaction than loose granular materials. Cementation can occur naturally due
to the precipitation of certain minerals or may be induced via chemical
injections. More recently, novel biological techniques such as microbially
induced calcite precipitation (MICP) have been used in the laboratory to mimic
the natural cementation process. The biological cementation techniques have the
potential to be more sustainable than traditional chemical injection methods.
This work will explore the effects of bio-cementation using a tightly integrated
numerical-experimental program. The expected outcome of the work is a modeling
framework: if the level of cementation is known, then bio-cemented soil behavior
can be predicted. Thus, the models dveloped as part of this work will help
engineers use bio-cementation to prevent liquefaction during future earthquakes.
The work will be broadly disseminated through course development and a
collaboration with the Oregon Museum of Science and Industry.

Bio-cementation such as MICP has the potential to increase liquefaction
resistance by increasing the cyclic strength of sand, reducing the generated
excess pore pressures, and reducing settlements due to dynamic loading. The
behavior of cemented soil is extremely dependent on the mineralogy of the
cementing agent. Sands cemented artificially with chemical agents, such as lime,
ordinary Portland cement, and gypsum behave differently than naturally cemented
soils. Thus, existing models used to simulate the behavior of chemically-
cemented sand are not appropriate for bio-cemented sand. Before implementing
MICP for liquefaction mitigation, a better understanding of the underlying
physics governing the constitutive behavior of bio-cemented sands is necessary.
Measuring the underlying micromechanics (e.g., changes in particle roughness,
calcite fines generation during shearing) is difficult with traditional
experiments, so discrete element method simulations will be used to help study
bio-cemented sand at the microscale. Element- and particle scale behavior of
bio-cemented sands will be assessed through a combination of strength testing,
particle-scale measurements, and X-ray computed tomography. Results from these
experiments will be used to develop and calibrate numerical models to predict
the bulk response of bio-cemented sands subjected to static and dynamic loading.