* 1538830
* Geometric Mechanics of Cellular Origami Assemblages
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Glaucio Paulino, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Nakhiah Goulbourne
* 08/31/2019
* USD 465,385.00

Origami inspired structures can have applications ranging in scale from man-made
materials and micro-robotics to deployable solar arrays and building facades.
These systems can be created by creasing a thin sheet or connecting thin panels
with flexible hinges. Origami appeals for practical applications because it can
be stowed compactly and it can be deployed into a transformable moving
structure. Such deployable assemblages can drastically enhance the
characteristics and potential applications of the thin sheet system. Much
remains unknown about these configurations. The overarching goal of this
research is to create mathematical models and physical prototypes that capture
the behavior (both linear and nonlinear, including instability) of thin sheets,
and to use these to explore the mechanics of tubular and cellular origami
assemblages. This translational research will provide a new paradigm for using
thin sheet assemblages in engineering through the integration of active
materials, design theory, mathematics (geometric origami), and artistic
expression. These systems may provide solutions for space exploration (e.g.
deployable structures), robotics (e.g. robotic arms), medicine (e.g. stents),
and other fields of study. The interdisciplinary approach will help broaden
participation of underrepresented groups in research and positively impact
engineering education by using origami as a means to integrate knowledge in
different disciplines. The computer codes and geometric origami variations will
be distributed in open-source platforms, greatly extending the practical
applications of origami.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this
research lies in understanding origami assemblages for their geometric
variations and elastic properties, nonlinear mechanics, and instabilities
including bistable-multistable configurations. The research will explore
geometric variations of rigid foldable origami tubes and assemblages, create
analytical models to simulate nonlinearities in thin sheet origami systems, and
capture instability in transformable/reconfigurable origami structures. It will
study novel origami assemblages such as those with curved profiles, polygonal
cross-sections (N-gons), or multiple tubes coupled together. The research will
generalize the geometric definitions for different assemblages, and study the
kinematics, eigen-mode deformations, and material behavior of each system.
Because thin sheet assemblages are useful beyond the assumptions of small
displacements, the research will explore large displacements and the associated
nonlinear behavior of origami. New computer models will be established, which
can capture various nonlinearities associated with the thin sheet systems. A
unified iterative scheme will be used to study origami that demonstrates either
near-zero or negative stiffness. The energy states of these instabilities will
inform practical applications of the transformable origami. The mechanical
properties will be useful to scientist and engineers when using thin sheet
origami systems of varying scales.