* 1538671
* D/H isotope exchange between electrolyte-bearing C-O-H magmatic fluids: In-situ experiments involving vapors and brines
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2018
* Dionysios Foustoukos, Carnegie Institution of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Deborah K. Smith
* 09/30/2018
* USD 159,786.00

The properties of H2O at high temperatures and pressures are important to know
for both volcanic and magmatic processes, as well as for processes that impact
the geothermal energy, nuclear waste, and chemical engineering industries. This
research, using newly developed, novel laboratory techniques, such as
hydrothermal diamond anvil cells coupled with Raman/Fourier Transform Infrared
spectroscopy, will be used to make real time measurements of the solvation of
gases and metals in light and heavy H2O at supercritical conditions. This
project will bring new experimental techniques to bear to understand the
systematics of hydrogen gas and methane dissolved in electrolyte-rich
supercritical fluids by looking at the isotopes of hydrogen in the context of
the evolution of geothermal fluids in the subsurface and the degassing of magmas
in volcanoes. Data collected will be used to augment theoretical models of water
cycling in Earth's interior. The experiments and their interpretation will also
shed light on the mass and heat transfer associated with Earth's deep
hydrological cycle as well as the interaction of geothermal fluids with the
solid Earth, a process that contributes to the flux of carbon dioxide, methane,
and other gases to the atmosphere. Broader impacts of the work include providing
fundamental knowledge about H2O at high temperatures and pressures, which has
implications for a broad array of fields in science and engineering, such as
chemical engineering (e.g. toxic/radioactive waste remediation, nuclear power
reactors), physical chemistry, geophysics, geochemistry, and energy-related
research. In addition, a series of lectures and lab demonstrations will be
created and presented to undergraduate and graduate students at the George Mason
University in Virginia. Undergraduates will have an opportunity to be involved
in the project through a 10-week internship program at the Carnegie Institute of
Washington that will run during the summer both years that the award is active.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical aspects of the research involve study of the
exchange of deuterium and hydrogen isotopes between various hydrogen bearing
volatiles (H2, CH4, H2O). The work will examine these volatiles in the context
of understanding the thermal regime of volcanic settings and the source of
magmatic fluids. For example, deuterium-depleted brines derived from seawater
contribute to the hydrogen-isotope composition of Cl-rich melt inclusions in
mid-ocean ridge basalt glasses. However, the composition of these brines is
completely unconstrained, hindering efforts to trace the hydrogen-isotope
composition of the mantle source of seafloor basalts. Furthermore, at present,
there are no experimental data to describe the effect of degassing during magma
ascent on the D/H exchange between H2(aq), CH4(aq) and H2O dissolved in Cl-rich,
F-rich fluids, or aqueous fluids that contain common ions found in seawater
(i.e., Na/K/Mg/Ca/Cl/F). In the latter case, the concentration and electrostatic
properties of these ions on the structure of H2O and how they affect the
solvation mechanism and solubility of H-D isotopologues of H2 and CH4 in
supercritical H2O-D2O mixtures will be examined. Measurements will be made in-
situ and in real-time by employing hydrothermal diamond-anvil cells and
Raman/FTIR spectroscopy. Results will be complemented by the use of GC-TC/EA-
Isotope Mass Ratio Spectrometry to determine bulk D/H ratios and isotope
fractionations between species equilibrated at high-P/-T during experiments in
solid-media high-pressure apparatus. The proposed study will compliment and
support the new frontiers of H-D CH4 isotopologue geochemistry.