* 1538628
* Population genomics and ecotypic divergence in the most dominant lineage of marine bacteria
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2019
* Michael Rappe, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Michael Sieracki
* 09/30/2019
* USD 579,193.00

In the upper water column of Earth's coastal and open oceans, roughly one
million microscopic, single-celled bacteria inhabit each milliliter of seawater,
where they play important roles in driving nutrient cycles and other processes
that are vital to the habitability of these systems to other marine life. While
some marine bacteria are similar to plants in that they use energy from the sun
to transform the greenhouse gas carbon dioxide into living material and produce
oxygen as a byproduct, other marine bacteria known as chemoheterotrophs are
similar to humans and other animals in that they consume organic matter and
oxygen, producing carbon dioxide as a consequence of their growth. Although they
are limited in size and shape when observed under a microscope, genetic
techniques such as DNA sequencing have revealed tremendous functional (i.e. what
they are doing) and phylogenetic (i.e. how they are related) biodiversity in
natural communities of marine bacteria. Despite this high genetic diversity, a
single group of phylogenetically related chemoheterotrophic bacteria known as
SAR11 can sometimes make up over 50% of the microscopic cells inhabiting
seawater systems around the globe; it is considered one of the most abundant
organisms on Earth and thus an important aspect of ocean ecology. While it is
known that the SAR11 group consists of many distinct "types" that differ in
abundance with location, depth and time, we know little about what genetically
encoded features distinguish the different types, or how genetic characteristics
are gained and lost within the group. The goal of this study is to use a
genomics approach to understand the evolutionary processes that shape one of the
most abundant groups of organisms on our planet, and to improve our theoretical
understanding of the evolutionary processes that shape natural microbial
biodiversity in general. This project will provide advanced, cross-disciplinary
professional training for a postdoctoral scientist and a graduate student, and
will increase the participation of underrepresented groups in scientific
research by mentoring undergraduate students of native Hawaiian or Pacific
Island ancestry in hands-on research and training. Results will be incorporated
into a new university course offering on comparative genomics and microbial
evolution. A culture collection of marine microorganisms will also be expanded
and maintained, providing a valuable resource for other marine scientists.

This project will take advantage of recent advances in DNA sequencing technology
and a high throughput extinction culturing approach in order to investigate the
evolutionary characteristics of genomes from sympatric populations of the
globally important SAR11 marine bacterial lineage. The major objectives of this
project are to understand the forces that shape genomic diversity in large
bacterial populations such as SAR11, and to determine the nature by which this
diversity is reflected in functional differences between populations, as
inferred from genomics. SAR11 cells will be isolated from similar ecosystems in
the tropical North and South Pacific, as well as the coastal ocean of the
subpolar North Pacific, in order to investigate the effect of geographic
distance versus habitat similarity on the population genetics of free-living,
planktonic marine bacteria. By opening a unique genomic window that encompasses
SAR11 lineages of varying degrees of genetic divergence simultaneously, this
study will facilitate the investigation of evolutionary dynamics that spans a
continuum between macro- and microevolutionary processes. Quantitative
information regarding the mechanisms by which genetic diversity is generated,
propagated, and removed from native SAR11 populations will also help efforts to
model the fate of SAR11 and other large marine bacterioplankton populations in
the face of predicted climate-induced changes to the global ocean.