* 1538420
* Collaborative Research: Integrated Data-Driven Methodologies to Addressing the Driver Turnover and Shortage Problems in Truckload Transportation
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,05/31/2019
* Thomas Ferris, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 05/31/2019
* USD 186,879.00

In the Truckload transportation industry, high driver turnover is a chronic
problem, representing an annual cost of up to $2.8 billion. A primary reason is
extended on-road times for drivers, largely a consequence of the point-to-point
dispatching most often used in industry. Another related problem that is
becoming increasingly important is the driver shortage, estimated to reach 239K
in a decade, due to the retirement of the baby-boomer generation, an improving
economy, and newly implemented hours-of-service regulations. The research will
comprehensively investigate the driver turnover and shortage problems and
address them through a systems-oriented design focus that also includes new
proactive operational paradigms. In contrast to existing operational practices
to fire-fight individual issues as they arise, a systems approach framework will
take into account the perspectives of all stakeholders (drivers, companies, and
customers) and involve modeling and analysis of both current and new systems and
their operations via descriptive, predictive, and prescriptive analytics. The
outcome of this research is expected to make substantial impact in addressing
the turnover and shortage problems by providing a systems-oriented framework
that incorporates both operational and turnover related costs while improving
driver satisfaction with a data-driven collaborative dispatching tool. The
research has the potential to significantly reduce an unproductive cost on the
order of billions in the industry, and to benefit society by: 1) supporting the
driver workforce (and families) with improved health, prosperity, and welfare,
2) unlocking the potential for employment opportunities for new workforce, and
3) reducing costs with improved transportation
operations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The system design and operations can improve
driver satisfaction by better accommodating individual preferences for location,
schedule regularity, mileage, and other factors while also improving economic
measures important to all stakeholders. System development will proceed
following a systems-oriented approach that is structured around a framework of
three integrated analytical components. These components will be the product of
1) descriptive (designing and collecting field data from groups of drivers and
dispatchers to determine the factors affecting truckload operations and turnover
as well as their quantified contributions), 2) predictive (applying these data
to the design of a new data-driven turnover prediction model in the context of a
new collaborative dispatching paradigm), and 3) prescriptive (designing optimum
relay and point-to-point networks via an optimization-and-simulation framework
that incorporates collaborative dispatching/data-driven turnover prediction and
considers operational costs (e.g., empty repositioning) as well as turnover
costs obtained by the data-driven turnover prediction model) analytical methods.