* 1538868
* Mobile Mid-Air Interactive Systems and Design Workflows for Creative 3D Shape Modeling
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2017
* Karthik Ramani, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Rich Malak
* 08/31/2017
* USD 200,000.00

Currently 3D modeling tools for product design and manufacturing are the purview
of trained engineers and professional artists. Everyone has ideas but only a
select few can bring them to reality. Although touch enabled devices such as
tablets and smartphones are ubiquitous, the direct manipulation of content is
inherently two-dimensional, and the plethora of tools commonly used today grew
out of design metaphors based on windows, icons, menus, and pointers. They
require extensive training, and inhibit the user's ability to create,
manipulate, and modify virtual shapes in a straightforward manner. Research on
mid-air interactions has shown that our bodies and their perceptually guided
motions through the world do much of the work required to achieve our creative
goals. This perceptual process, if carefully integrated into 3D modeling, can be
instrumental in eliminating the barrier-to-entry for common users motivated to
externalize their creative ideas. This work aims at harnessing the potential of
mobile interactions in mid-air to cater to the creative processes involved in
design. In doing so, it takes an important step towards the computer-as-a-
partner paradigm that transfers our cognition to the virtual environment through
hand-held mobile devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The integration of a variety of
sensors into smartphones provides new affordances for designing interactive
processes towards creative on-the-fly shape modeling processes. However,
existing research on mobile interactions has focused on 3D object manipulation,
virtual scene navigation, and scientific visualization. The work will develop a
framework for direct 3D shape conceptualization using mobile interactions. To do
so, this work will leverage the unique advantage of using smartphones as an
extension to our mind and body, to spatially create 2D and 3D sketches, and
create, manipulate and modify virtual 3D objects. The ensuing simplicity of
spatial interactions for easy, direct shape-modeling operations will transform
our bodily motions and rotations of the phone and contextual sketches on the
devices to desired configurations and geometries. By combining multi-touch
interactions and device sensors, the work aims to leverage embodied cognition
towards spatial interaction and develop new metaphors for spatial control, and
develop processes for shape modeling to explore a new design space of intuitive
interactions. This will be achieved by developing process flows for constrained
and free-form 3D shapes, spatial configuration of 3D objects, and creative 3D
compositions with shapes. These development cycles will be driven by rigorous
user evaluations and iterations to derive the guidelines for design process flow
and user experiences.