* 1538506
* RUI: Effects of Pre-Excavation Activities on the Performance of Urban Cofferdams
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Lisa Star, California State University-Long Beach Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 07/31/2019
* USD 98,206.00

The recent tendency in urban excavations for high-rise buildings is the use of
cofferdams which at times are responsible for the majority of the resulting
ground movements. As a result of these projects, the allowable ground movements
imposed by underground regulatory agencies have been drastically reduced,
calling for improvements in the observational and analytical methods used in
movement control plans. This award supports fundamental research on the methods
of analysis and design of urban cofferdams and presents an opportunity for
advances in soil-structure interaction behavior of deep excavations. Design
recommendations considering the proposed effects in the performance of
cofferdams do not currently exist in the United States. Two urban cofferdams
serve as the test bed of this research: the first was built for a structure
projected to be the tallest building in the United States, and to have the
deepest basement ever built in the city where the structure was proposed; the
second was built for the One Museum Park West building in Chicago, Illinois. The
fundamental knowledge developed in this research will inspire new methods of
analysis and design of offshore structures, deep foundations, wharfs, and
retaining structures, and will advance the understanding of the soil-structure
interaction in other types of geotechnical projects.

Knowledge will be produced on the behavior of sheet pile interlocks in urban
cofferdams under compression loading, the concrete material time-dependent
effects on the behavior of cofferdams braced with reinforced concrete ring
beams, and slippage and rotation at sheet pile interlocks for urban cofferdams
braced with segmental steel ring beams. Three-dimensional fully-coupled flow-
deformation numerical analyses of urban cofferdams using advanced constitutive
soils models and incorporating the small strain behavior of soils will be used
in the analyses. New design methodologies oriented for practice will be
developed to incorporate the following factors into the design process: the
material time-dependency of reinforced concrete ring beams, the structural
compliance of steel ring beams and sheet piles, the slippage and rotation at
sheet pile interlocks, and the installation of deep foundations and other
structures inside of cofferdams. The ultimate goal of this research is to create
more sustainable and resilient urban environments by preserving and protecting
existing infrastructure, which is often compromised when excessive deformations
occur.