* 1538077
* RUI: Understanding How Engineers Draw from their Knowledge and Experience to Solve Design Problems Creatively
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Benjamin Caldwell, LeTourneau University
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Jablokow
* 08/31/2019
* USD 299,820.00

Engineers regularly face problems and must draw from past experiences to solve
them. The more experiences a person has, the more ideas they are able to
develop. Further, engineers with different experiences may develop different
types of ideas. This award will develop a way to measure the experiences of a
designer in order to predict his or her ability to generate creative solutions
to a problem. This new understanding of the creative process will enable
teachers to understand how engineers gain experience and use that experience to
generate high-quality ideas, improving the ability of educators in the United
States to teach creativity and innovation in the classroom. This award will also
provide a way for individuals to understand their own strengths in creative
thinking and ways in which they can become more innovative. Finally, this award
will enable project managers to strategically create diverse teams of problem-
solvers to maximize the types and quality of ideas developed in a team's
problem-solving process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will measure an
aspect of individual creativity, spontaneous flexibility, from a psychology
perspective and an engineering design perspective. The psychology perspective
focuses on an individual's experience and problem-finding ability, while the
engineering design perspective focuses on the individual's problem-solving
ability. Statistical correlations between these two perspectives will provide
insights into the value of an individual's problem-finding abilities when faced
with problem-solving tasks. It is hypothesized that when individuals perform
these problem-finding or problem-solving tasks, they draw from the same
cognitive network of relationships between artifact functions and forms. A
cognitive model will be developed to bridge the gap between psychologists' view
of spontaneous flexibility and applications in engineering design and to isolate
the role spontaneous flexibility serves to enhance problem-solving tasks often
encountered in engineering design. Spontaneous flexibility will be measured
multiple times from both the psychology and design perspectives, providing
repeated measures of the individual's spontaneous flexibility. This experiment
design and the rigorous data analysis techniques will enable a large portion of
the statistical variability to be accounted for, providing new insights and
applications of the role spontaneous flexibility serves in engineering design.
Statistical analyses of a longitudinal study of engineering students and
demographic information will provide an understanding of how students grow in
their creativity during their engineering degree and how students' background
and experiences are related to their spontaneous flexibility.