* 1538733
* PFI:AIR-RA:  Advanced Thin-Film Photovoltaics for Sustainable Energy
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2015,06/30/2019
* Kurt Barth, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 06/30/2019
* USD 868,203.00

This PFI: AIR Research Alliance project focuses on the translation and transfer
of higher efficiency Cadmium Telluride (CdTe) photovoltaic (PV) technologies
that are derived from the expertise and discoveries in advanced materials
processing and devices from the Next Generation Photovoltaics Center (NGPV), a
NSF funded Industry and University Co-Operative Research Center. CdTe PV is
currently competitive for generating electricity in many parts of the world
(e.g. 7-9 cents/kWhr from utility scale projects without subsidy) and the costs
are decreasing rapidly. However, the objective of this work is to advance the
CdTe technology to the point where solar is a competitive source of energy in
all regions for individual home owners and a variety of applications which are
now considered too expensive to be done electrically. To achieve this, the work
proposed under this award will enable a significant increase in device
efficiency while also addressing manufacturing methods to reduce costs. This
could have a direct impact on further developing the U.S. based CdTe industry
with the potential for significant economic growth and job creation. In
addition, results from this research will lead to cost-effective opportunities
to displace greenhouse-gas emitting technologies with PV technology and
corresponding benefits to the environment.

The innovation ecosystem that will be enhanced includes all the leading groups
in CdTe PV technology space. The proposed project will be led by Colorado State
University (CSU), which has a long history of successful CdTe PV research and is
a founding member of the NGPV. The primary research partner and third-party
investor will be First Solar, Inc., the largest U.S. manufacturer of solar
panels. CSU will also be joined by the Center for Renewable Energy Systems at
Loughborough university in UK (CREST), the U.S. National Renewable Energy
Laboratory (NREL), and material supplier 5N Plus. Students will gain
entrepreneurial and technology translation experience through working with
industry on their research projects and formal student training in innovation,
entrepreneurship, and technology transfer.

This project addresses the following technology gaps as it translates from
research discovery toward commercial application. The project will advance CSU's
state-of-the-art deposition systems and pursue two separate routes to higher-
efficiency manufacturing-friendly cells. The first route will be to advance the
research on unique device structures to move them to commercialization, and the
second will be to develop PV devices with a higher bandgap suitable for multi-
junction cells. In addition, detailed characterization of these advanced devices
will be performed. The proposed effort will have a clear line of sight to mass
production and has the potential to significantly increase the efficiency of
both single-junction and multi-junction CdTe-based solar cells.