* 1538754
* Multiscale Modeling of Left and Right Ventricular Function
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Kenneth Campbell, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Laurel Kuxhaus
* 08/31/2019
* USD 326,123.00

The mammalian heart has four chambers--two atriums and two ventricles. The
ventricles do much of the work of blood pumping, so understanding their
properties is important to understanding heart function. From the cell level to
the organ level, the ventricles of the heart are functionally and
compositionally different. The left ventricle is a high pressure chamber that
pumps oxygen-rich blood to the body and the right ventricle is a low pressure
chamber that pumps oxygen-poor blood to the lungs. While this basic function is
well understood, recent findings have shown that the ventricles respond to
disease and therapy in different ways. Very little is known about what causes
these differences. This research will further our understanding of the
fundamental differences between the left and right ventricle. Also, the
knowledge gained from this research may change some treatments of heart disease.
Since cardiovascular disease is the leading cause of death in the United States
the discoveries from this research could have a significant effect on society.
The research combines techniques and insights from several disciplines,
including engineering, mathematics, physiology, and biomedical imaging. The
project will include students at the university undergraduate level and also
will reach out to educate local middle school students about heart health and
research.

The goal of this research is to use novel multi-scale techniques to integrate
cellular and organ level experimental measurements into a geometrically accurate
bi-ventricular model of the heart. Ultimately, this work will create a more
versatile and robust computational tool, which includes functional mechanisms
that are not currently implemented in a simulation-based framework. The research
plan will be accomplished using a systematic approach. First, organ level data
will be collected in living animals using cardiac magnetic resonance imaging and
catheterization in order to measure geometry, wall deformation, and pressure in
each ventricle. Next, cellular level experiments will be conducted on cardiac
myocytes from both ventricles in order to measure differences in force, calcium
transients, and shortening velocity. Finally, computational algorithms will be
developed to create multi-scale simulation models which couple function at the
cell level to the organ level. The integration of this data will allow for a
more accurate and realistic representation of the heart. By using a combination
of both experimental and computational techniques, the differences in
ventricular function will be elucidated.