* 1538367
* Design of 3D Woven Lattices with Optimized Damping Properties
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Timothy Weihs, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 08/31/2019
* USD 650,000.00

This interdisciplinary project will create a topology optimization-driven
framework for the design and manufacture of 3D woven materials with tunable
vibration damping capabilities. 3D weaving is a highly efficient manufacturing
process where yarns or wires are arranged in a sequence of orthogonal patterns.
Topology optimization is a computational, systematic approach for designing the
micro-scale architecture of materials. This project will integrate these two
approaches to design, manufacture, and experimentally test 3D woven metallic
materials whose micro-architecture is optimized to achieve targeted damping
properties at elevated temperatures. Such materials would find a broad range of
applications in transportation, manufacturing, power generation and most
structural applications that are susceptible to fatigue and elevated temperature
exposure. It would also create a new avenue of applications for textile
manufacturers. In addition to the development of this new class of materials,
the project will develop Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (STEM)
related activities that will train and engage graduate, undergraduate and
elementary school students at a variety of levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will couple topology optimization with 3D weaving to design and
efficiently manufacture micro-architected lattice materials with optimized
damping properties. Although typical 3D woven fabrics serve as preforms that are
infiltrated with resin to create composite materials, this project will focus on
the 3D weaving of micro-scale metallic wires that are then bonded to create
porous, lightweight lattices. These wires will be 3D woven into patterns that
are dictated by the topology optimization design engine with the goal of
enhancing and controlling observed damping mechanisms, including inertial
damping and Coulomb damping. Design optimization algorithms will be developed
that integrate the manufacturing constraints of 3D weaving into the topology
optimization methodology. Material processing in the form of wire joining and
surface treatments will be developed to further exploit these damping
mechanisms. Optical characterization of material architecture, including
measurement of wire orientations and flaws, and experimental property
measurements at temperature will inform and validate the computational design
methodology and manufacturing processes, much in the theme of Integrated
Computational Materials Engineering (ICME).