* 1538706
* Rigorous Approximations of Stochastic Network Dynamics, with Applications to Real-World Networks
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Kavita Ramanan, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 08/31/2018
* USD 250,000.00

Stochastic networks are comprised of "jobs" in the form of packets or customers
that arrive to a network and wait in buffers at different nodes of the networks
until their processing requirements are fulfilled. Stochastic variability arises
from randomness in arrival and processing times, as well as from routing and
scheduling decisions. Such networks are ubiquitous and arise as models in
diverse fields ranging from telecommunications and service systems to biological
systems. A better understanding of these networks has the potential to lead to
new algorithms that dramatically improve performance and enable the support of
novel network applications. This award supports the development of a general
mathematical framework for the analysis of two broad classes of stochastic
networks: large-scale load-balancing networks that arise, for example, in web-
server farms, and queueing networks that use scheduling policies involving
prioritization, which are relevant for real-time scheduling in computer networks
and health care systems. The goal is to identify tractable approximations of
both transient dynamics and equilibrium behavior, rigorously establish their
accuracy for suitable values of network parameters, and to use them to gain
insight into network design. There will be mentorship of graduate students, a
multidisciplinary project for an undergraduate student and opportunity for
outreach. The project also involves interactions with industry, which increases
the potential of impacting the design of real
networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Stochastic networks are typically too complex to
admit an exact analysis. The goal then is to obtain tractable approximations,
whose accuracy can be rigorously justified in a suitable (asymptotic) regime of
network parameters via limit theorems for suitably scaled state processes. While
there is a well developed mathematical theory of "scaling limits" for certain
classes of networks, it does not cover the networks considered in this project,
which involve many servers at a single node, general service distributions and
non-head of the line scheduling policies. One of the challenges is that
Markovian scaling limits of these networks are typically not finite-dimensional.
The research will develop tractable infinite-dimensional Markovian
representations of these systems, involving interacting measure-valued processes
and infinite-dimensional Skorokhod maps, and rigorously establish scaling limit
theorems. The analysis will combine methods from different fields, including
probability, stochastic analysis, dynamical systems, partial differential
equations and optimization. The tools developed will potentially be applicable
more broadly for the study of analogous stochastic models arising in other
applications. Simulations will also be carried out to ascertain the validity of
these approximations for finite systems.