* 1538427
* Near-Surface Conversions of Semi-Diurnal Internal Tide Beam Energy
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2018
* Douglas Luther, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 07/31/2018
* USD 379,921.00

As the gravitationally-forced tides flow over topography they disturb the
ocean's internal stratification (e.g., layers of warm over cold water), creating
internal oscillations (internal tides) with relatively strong currents and short
spatial scales. The energy of the internal tides plays an important role in
mixing the deep ocean with subsequent impacts on temperature, salinity and
nutrient distributions that have far-reaching consequences for ocean dynamics
and biogeochemistry, including climate-time-scale variability. The distribution
of the energy in the internal tides is therefore a subject of considerable
consequence. This project is focused on elucidating how, and how much, internal
tide energy reaches the deep ocean. The investigators will undertake a set of
numerical investigations to characterize and quantify the processes occurring
when an upward-propagating, semi-diurnal, internal tide interacts with the
variable stratification near the surface of the ocean and reflects back
downward. The overarching question is "how much energy is 'lost' from the
internal tide during its transits and reflection?"&lt;br/&gt;Even though this
loss of internal tide energy in the upper ocean has received little attention,
it may result in a significant reduction in the amount of energy available to
ocean mixing, which is critical for maintaining the stratification at depth, as
well as the supply of nutrients for primary production near the surface. Proper
representation of such processes in oceanic and climate numerical models
continues to be a subject of intense research due to the sensitivity of these
models to mixing distributions. . A graduate student, Ms. Sherry Chou, who has
provided much material for the proposal resulting in this project, will continue
her training in internal wave science and numerical modeling techniques, and
will complete her dissertation. The numerical modeling results will also inform
how best to apply oceanographic instrumentation to study intricate internal wave
processes in the future. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project's principal
objectives are as follows: (1) To ascertain the range of the fluxes of energy
from the internal tide into other phenomena (e.g., solitary waves; sub-harmonic
waves; super-harmonic waves) as it interacts with the upper ocean stratification
and free surface under different environmental conditions (such as different
small-scale and large-scale stratification structures); and, (2) To explore from
the numerical investigations how best to try to discriminate and quantify the
different phenomena, which may all be present at once during the internal tide's
transit through the real ocean, given the spatial and temporal sampling
limitations of oceanographic instrumentation.