* 1538805
* The American Meteorological Society (AMS) Summer Policy Colloquium 2015-2017; Washington, DC
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2018
* William Hooke, American Meteorological Society
* Standard Grant
* Anjuli Bamzai
* 06/30/2018
* USD 367,200.00

The American Meteorological Society (AMS) conducts a Summer Policy Colloquium in
Washington DC to develop leadership skills of attendees by providing
introduction to methods for reconciling scientific opportunities with national
priorities. Annually, the Colloquium participants consist of 30 graduate
students, early career scientists, and faculty. National Science Foundation
Scholarships are provided for 10 students, early-career scientists, and faculty
from Minority Serving Institutions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Colloquium
participants are addressed by agency leaders, policy makers, journalists, and
government leaders in the legislative and executive branches. The unique set of
instructors in the Colloquium typically has interdisciplinary backgrounds in
science, policy, and law. The attendees are provided instruction to allow
development of skills and techniques for communicating science to policymakers
and the public in ways that encourage information sharing and collaboration.
Additionally, through instruction, examples, and exercises, attendees learn the
legislative process and the roles of science information in support of policy.
As a result, the national dialogue among scientists, policymakers, and the
public will become more efficient, clear, and solution-oriented. This benefits
support of national policy with respect to increased understanding and
management of natural resources critical to food, water, energy, resilience to
hazards, and environmental protection.