* 1538686
* Carbon Sedimentation In the Ocean Watercolumn (C-SNOW): Calibration
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2015,03/31/2018
* James Bishop, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 03/31/2018
* USD 778,687.00

Carbon sedimentation (10 Pg C/year) via the ocean biological carbon pump is
important to the regulation of atmospheric CO2, yet is poorly observed in space
and time due to limitations of current methodology (moorings/ships), and thus is
poorly understood and consequently is poorly represented in carbon cycle
simulations. Current estimates of the strength of the ocean biological carbon
pump are highly uncertain. The one year project will deploy and calibrate low-
cost robotic ocean-profiling current-following Carbon Flux Explorers (CFEs)
which is a necessary step paving the way high frequency broad scale monitoring
and prediction of carbon sedimentation in the ocean. Project scientists will
work with the San Francisco Exploratorium to enhance public knowledge of the
ocean carbon cycle, ocean robotics. UC Berkeley undergraduate students will be
exposed to this research activity in the class-room, as laboratory assistants,
and in hands-on experience at sea. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The CFEs represent the
integration of an ocean profiling float ? similar to those widely deployed in
the ocean as part of the ARGO program ? with the UC Berkeley / Lawrence Berkeley
National Laboratory - developed Optical Sedimentation Recorder (OSR). The CFEs
dive to depth and the OSR uses a camera and three modes of illumination to image
particles over time as they accumulate in a sediment trap. Periodically the
sample is removed and the imaging resumes. The use of transmitted, transmitted
cross-polarized transmitted, and side illumination permits three modes of
quantification sample loading as measured sample attenuance, sample cross-
polarized photon yield, and sample reflectance. The project specifically aims to
relate the three optical metrics of sample load to the amount of particulate
organic carbon, particulate inorganic carbon (also known as calcium carbonate),
and other biogenic particle phases. Thus, the development will demonstrate the
ability of the Carbon Flux Explorer to measure the strength of carbon
sedimentation in the ocean. In a one year project. Scientists at University of
California, Berkeley and engineers at Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory and
Scripps Institution of Oceanography will build/modify 2 Carbon Flux Explorers to
enable the collection of samples for their calibration. These and two other CFEs
and a surface tethered OSR will be co-deployed during an oceanographic
expedition in California coastal and offshore waters. Collected samples will be
analyzed and compared with the optical metrics of sample load, collected at the
same time. The project will thus meet its major goal of demonstrating that the
CFEs can measure the strength of ocean carbon sedimentation as a function of
depth, time, and ocean location, in a way here-to-fore impossible to achieve
from ships.