* 1538847
* EAGER: Development of a Nanoparticle NMR Toolbox for Evaluating Complex Environmental Mixtures
* MPS,CHE
* 11/01/2015,10/31/2018
* Sarah Larsen, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 10/31/2018
* USD 99,036.00

In this project, funded by the Environmental Chemical Sciences Program in the
Chemistry Division, Professor Sarah Larson of the University of Iowa develops a
Nuclear Magnetic Resonance spectroscopy (NMR) toolbox to investigate complex
environmental mixtures. Studies include prediction of the fate and transport of
very small particles (nanoparticles) in the environment and the preparation of
nanomaterials with specific characteristics to minimize negative environmental
and/or biological impacts. These results have broad implications for critical
areas such as carbon cycling, sustainability, and remediation of pollutants.
Undergraduate students, some of whom are underrepresented, are recruited and
mentored to participate in this project through programs such as the Sloan
Center for Exemplary Mentoring and the Research Experiences for Undergraduates
Program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The studies focus on validating nanoparticle
nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) methods as an important and valuable tool for
investigating complex mixtures of environmental relevance. The toolbox includes
NMR methods such as solid state NMR, high resolution magic angle spinning
(HRMAS), and pulse field gradient (PFG) NMR. The project demonstrates the
utility of the nanoparticle NMR toolbox for studying environmental interfaces of
engineered nanomaterials and natural colloids and establishes the use of
nanoparticle-enabled NMR spectroscopy to selectively detect species in complex
mixtures. The nanoparticle NMR toolbox is developed to elucidate molecular level
details and to improve selectivity for studies of the interactions of complex
mixtures, such as dissolved organic matter (DOM), with nanomaterials. The
information obtained from the NMR toolbox may be used to predict the fate and
transport of nanoparticles in natural systems and to engineer nanomaterials with
desired properties. Further impact of this work is in developing an exhibit on
environmental water research for the University of Iowa Mobile Museum and for
Science, Technology, Education and Mathematics (STEM) career outreach including
internships for high school students. Visitors will also be hosted at the
laboratory.