* 1538501
* Localized Finishing of Freeform Geometries using Dynamic Magnetic Field-Manipulated Magneto-Viscoelastic Fluids
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2018
* Steven Wright, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Steve Schmid
* 12/31/2018
* USD 120,000.00

Demand for biomedical prosthetic implants (e.g., total hip joints) is growing by
5 percent annually and this market is expected to exceed $35B by 2019. Local
finishing of targeted regions of the surfaces of various joints is essential for
their life assurance. The industry largely depends on laborious and expensive
manual or chemical etching methods for localized finishing. This award supports
fundamental research that can lead to new machine tools that use magnetic energy
and abrasive-mixed magnetic "blob" (semisolid globule in a nonmagnetic fluid)
for localized finishing of surfaces. These machine tools can be vital for
affordable manufacturing of custom, functional free-form parts (e.g., durable,
single piece prosthetic components).&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The focus of this
research is on the effects of the composition of the magnetic fluid as well as
the spatio-temporal variation of the external magnetic fields on the selectivity
and material removal rates over 1-10 sq. cm area on freeform parts made of
diamagnetic or weak paramagnetic materials. The first research objective is to
establish quantitative relationships connecting the rheological properties of
magnetic fluid blobs with their colloidal compositions and the spatio-temporal
variation of external magnetic fields: This knowledge is essential to select
magnetic field patterns that can create gradients conducive for optimal flow and
selectivity of magnetic fluids, and make a blob exert appropriate down
pressures. To achieve this objective, an experimental study will be conducted
employing a specialized rheometer instrumented with array of magnets, Gauss
meters, as well as force and vibration sensors. The rheometer provides a
controlled means to estimate both the magneto-viscoelastic properties of the
abrasive granular fluid (based on rubber elasticity theory) as well as the
material removal rates for different fluid compositions and workpiece surfaces,
and measure the induced magnetic field, forces, and the down pressure. The
second objective is to establish a relationship between the localized magnetic
field gradients induced over a magnetic blob and the applied spatio-temporal
magnetic field: The resulting knowledge will provide guidance to realize sharp
magnetic gradients at specified locations, and design magnetic enclosures
capable of creating these patterns. To achieve this objective, a novel implicit
viscoelastic modeling approach will be employed. This approach uses the property
relationships gathered from the first objective to provide a computationally
efficient means to capture the blob behaviors, including smooth transition from
a magneto-elastic solid like response to that of a magneto-viscoelastic fluid.