* 1538234
* Toward a Method for Achieving Synergy between Heuristic Rules of Thumb and Quantitative Methods in Engineering Design
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2018
* James Allison, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Rich Malak
* 07/31/2018
* USD 150,000.00

Engineering design experts' heuristic "rules of thumb" usually save time and
money when making design decisions. Through years of experience with product
design, materials, and manufacturing, experts can perform many design tasks
quickly, such as narrowing the set of possible design options to investigate
further. Sometimes, however, these shortcuts result in poor design decisions
that waste time and money. This happens especially when new materials,
manufacturing technologies, or types of products are being considered. The old
rules of thumb no longer apply, and even experts can be vulnerable to "cognitive
biases," or decision traps that we all sometimes fall into. Although
mathematical models and approaches can alleviate this problem, they often
require significant cost and effort to implement and therefore counteract the
desired benefit. This project will benefit society by combining the best of both
worlds, working toward a methodology for determining the best balance between
rapid heuristic strategies and more rigorous quantitative methods for making
design decisions. The intellectual significance of this project lies in building
a foundation for a new, formal design methodology that exploits the synergy
between heuristic and normative methods. This project will analyze a design
process for one advanced systems engineering problem, where the designer is
required to expand the frame of analysis to include issues never before
considered. Normative methods such as optimization and decision-based design
consider efficiency and tradeoffs under uncertainty with the same degree of
analytic rigor that was previously applied only to physical system modeling.
While this approach has been successful to some extent, there are times when the
cost of this approach (formulation, data gathering, solving) is simply not worth
the effort. Conversely, the heuristic "rules of thumb" employed by design
experts are faster, but can sometimes lead to suboptimal results because of
systematic cognitive biases that are inadvertently embedded in the heuristic and
lead the design choice away from the optimal solution. The problem addressed
here is that strictly heuristic design methods can lead to inferior solutions,
while strictly normative methods can be too time consuming and costly to
implement. Observed heuristics will be analyzed to determine their effect on
both the design process and the resulting product. Normative methods will be
analyzed in the same manner. Then, a method for defining the best combination of
the two approaches will be developed. This project will provide the foundation
for developing a full set of "rules for rational design analysis" for
determining the best combination of normative and heuristic approaches.