* 1538694
* Laser Additive Manufacturing of Metal Matrix Nanocomposites
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2018
* Xiaochun Li, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Steve Schmid
* 07/31/2018
* USD 301,895.00

Laser additive manufacturing, a layered deposition process in the family of 3D
Printing, is of significance to directly produce complex metallic parts.
Nanoparticle reinforced metallic materials (i.e. metal matrix nanocomposites)
have recently demonstrated great potentials to achieve significantly enhanced
mechanical properties. Laser additive manufacturing of metal matrix
nanocomposites will thus be promising for widespread applications. However,
there are some long-standing challenges limiting the mechanical performance and
shape accuracy in laser additive manufacturing of metal parts. This award
support fundamental research to provide knowledge needed to break the existing
barriers and extend the process capability and application space in aerospace,
defense, automotive, and biomedical industries, thus enhancing US competiveness
in global advanced manufacturing. Engineering education for both undergraduate
and graduate students will be enhanced through curriculum developments and
improvements. The project will also attract more historically underrepresented
students. K-12 students, teachers, and industries will be exposed to the new
technology.

The research objective of this project is to understand (1) the accumulative
effects of nanoparticles (of various types, loadings, sizes, and shapes) on
microstructure, material properties, surface finish/accuracy, and residual
stress; and (2) the effects of nanoparticles on laser absorption and
thermophysical properties of molten pool and deposited layers in laser additive
manufacturing of metal matrix nanocomposites. Single and multiple layers (3~5
layers) of metal matrix nanocomposites with nanoparticles (of various types,
loadings, sizes, and shapes) will be laser deposited. Optical and electron
microscopies, white light interferometer, X-ray diffraction, and micro/nano-
mechanical testing will be used to measure microstructure, surface
finish/accuracy, residue stress, and material properties, respectively. Laser
absorption during additive manufacturing will be measured by optical power
sensor; thermophysical properties of laser-induced molten pool and deposited
nanocomposites will be determined experimentally, including specific heat (by
differential scanning calorimetry), thermal conductivity (by laser flash
method), viscosity of molten pool (by high temperature viscometer), and surface
tension of molten pool (by sessile drop experiments).