* 1538151
* Epidemiology and spatial ecology of a tropical coralline fungal disease in the face of ocean warming and acidification
* GEO,OCE
* 12/01/2015,11/30/2018
* Nichole Price, Bigelow Laboratory for Ocean Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 11/30/2018
* USD 775,895.00

Coral reefs worldwide have suffered catastrophic losses of calcifying (reef-
building) organisms such as corals and crustose coralline algae (CCA). These
calcifiers construct and cement the reef together, providing a complex three-
dimensional structure for a diverse array of reef-associated species. On many
reefs, these calcifiers have been replaced by non-calcifying, "fleshy" species
such as seaweeds and other invertebrates. Such drastic shifts in ecosystem
structure and function, documented since the 1980s, are driven by complex
interactions between anthropogenically induced changes to the marine environment
(i.e., eutrophication, sedimentation, or over-fishing), climate-related change
(increase frequency and severity of storms, global warming, and ocean
acidification), outbreaks of predators, and the spread of disease.
Traditionally, investigations have largely focused on one stressor at a time,
and rarely explore the complexity introduced when combinations of stressors
impact a marine ecosystem, a reality most coral reefs face. This project
examines an important, yet difficult to study, interaction between climate
driven physical parameters (seawater temperature and pH) and the disease ecology
of a coralline fungal infection, recently identified by investigators on this
project, for an understudied but critical component of reef ecosystems. The
primary scientific and societal broader impacts of this project will be
advancing our ability to predict the future effects of climate change on disease
outbreaks that negatively affect carbonate accretion and primary production of
key taxa in coral reef ecosystems. This project supports the education and
training of undergraduate students and a postdoctoral scholar in an
international arena, engages the governor's Coral Reef Advisory Group in
American Samoa, and informs the general public through in-person discussions
online (Google Hangout) and at a Caf√© Scientifique.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many
tropical species of CCA are particularly sensitive to slight changes in
temperature and pH in an experimental setting and the central hypothesis is that
climate induced change will hasten the spread and severity of the coralline
fungal disease (CFD). The exact mechanisms of how and why a previously healthy
CCA host becomes infected by the endolithic fungi are unclear. Thus the two
major goals of the proposed research include: 1) a description of the CFD
dynamics (incidence, prevalence, and mechanism of transmission across, and
progression within, various coralline host species), and 2) an exploration of
how climate-driven global change (i.e., rising SST and seawater acidity) will
affect these dynamics using lab experiments and field observations. A
combination of high-resolution, large-scale benthic imagery and novel sensor
technology arrayed across reef habitats on Palmyra Atoll will be used to relate
the spatial distribution of infected or resistant host CCA species, fungal
colony-forming units, and environmental conditions over time in a natural
setting at a reef-scale. High frequency time series of seawater pH, pCO2,
salinity, and temperature data, calibrated and complemented by discrete sampling
for additional carbonate parameters (total alkalinity and dissolved inorganic
carbon), will be related with biological data (disease prevalence, incidence,
and host physiology). In addition, these field measurements will inform
laboratory experiments performed at an organismal scale and designed to test
alternative hypotheses about agents of disease progression within a calcareous
host.