* 1538211
* Centrifuge Modeling of Coastal Soil-Structure Instability
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Harry Yeh, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 08/31/2019
* USD 823,019.00

The 2011 Japan Earthquake and Tsunami caused unprecedented damage and loss of
lives in Japan. This large earthquake created long-duration ground shaking
followed by giant tsunami inundation. Post-event reconnaissance teams have
reported that damage to buildings and infrastructure was often exacerbated or
caused by soil instability. Understanding how combined earthquake and tsunami
events affect soil instability is crucial to prepare for similar impending
earthquake-tsunami events that have affected coastal areas of the United States
in the past. During an earthquake, soil instability is primarily caused by
liquefaction; that is, the soil acts like a liquid, and the potential for the
soil to support overlying buildings and infrastructure is severely reduced.
Liquefaction can also occur during the tsunami inundation in addition to
scouring at the surface caused by the water current. This research will advance
the understanding of soil instability caused by the combined effects of
earthquakes and tsunamis. Effective strategies for designing resilient critical
buildings and infrastructure will be developed. As part of this program, a
graduate student will be educated in the fundamentals of geo-and-fluid
mechanics, which will prepare her to become an interdisciplinary multi-natural
hazards researcher. A series of education videos will be created for the purpose
of encouraging college and high school students to pursue careers in science and
engineering.

With regards to the 2011 Event, it is suspected that soil instability was first
triggered by the earthquake, presumably via residual liquefaction and
fluidization, and then further promoted by the ensuing tsunami, presumably via
momentary liquefaction and scour. This hypothesis produces the questions: (1)
How does earthquake-induced soil instability interact with tsunami-induced soil
instability? (2) How does the elapsed time between the earthquake and tsunami
affect this interaction? (3) Is enhanced scour around coastal structures
worsened by the combined earthquake-tsunami multi-hazard? To answer these
questions, laboratory experiments will be performed using the UC Davis
Centrifuge Facility. The centrifuge is the only experimental apparatus capable
of imposing successive earthquake-tsunami loading on prototypical soil-fluid-
structure systems. The centrifuge experiments will aim to reveal fundamental
mechanisms of soil instability caused by successive earthquake-tsunami loads and
in turn, discover how this loading scenario affects soil-fluid-structure
systems. The high quality and unique data obtained from the precisely controlled
experiments will be invaluable for benchmarking and validating analytical and
numerical prediction models.