* 1538330
* Adaptive Building Skin to Enhance Interior of Buildings
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,02/29/2020
* Sigrid Adriaenssens, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Caglar Oskay
* 02/29/2020
* USD 299,979.00

Operating buildings, for either commercial or residential use, accounts for as
much as 41 percent of the energy consumption in the United States of America.
Adaptive building skins are active filters between the interior environment and
outside weather conditions. These skins are able to respond to changing outdoor
weather conditions and indoor operational needs, potentially reducing the energy
demand of a building by as much as 51 percent. However, current adaptive
building skins rely on mechanical hinges and actuation devices of high
construction complexity and life cycle cost. These attributes are obstacles to
their broader adoption. Therefore, this project pursues fundamental research
underlying the development of lighter, more durable, and, mechanically, less
complex adaptive skins. The research on building skins follows plant leaves that
change their shape based on weather conditions. Changing skins will produce more
energy efficient buildings. This will lead to decreased greenhouse gas
emissions, less US dependency on fossil fuels, and improved well-being of
individuals in society. For this project, a team spanning the disciplines of
civil and mechanical engineering, material science and botany is assembled. This
project will have a broad educational impact through the curating of an
exhibition at a national museum and providing research experiences at high
school, undergraduate and graduate levels and outreach to the K-12
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Plants utilize elastic properties of their
organs to move with minimal energy and maximum effect. The core idea for the
research is to interpret, upscale, modify, and tailor elastic deformation
mechanisms found in plants to mechanically less complex adaptive building skins.
The research hypothesis addresses how the elastic deformation response of these
bio-inspired skins can be refined and controlled in time and space through
optimized geometric design to follow a trajectory defined by environmental
performance criteria. The study will combine experimental and numerical methods.
The research tasks are (i) identifying, interpreting and up-scaling elastic
kinetics in plant movements for adaptive building skins, (ii) characterizing the
elastic deformation response to meet environmental performance requirements and
tailoring this response through shape optimization, and (iii) numerical and
physical evaluation by constructing and testing full-scale prototypes.