* 1538677
* Collaborative Research: Direct Oxidation of Organic Nitrogen by Marine Ammonia Oxidizing Organisms
* GEO,OCE
* 12/01/2015,11/30/2018
* James Hollibaugh, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 11/30/2018
* USD 480,835.00

Nitrogen is an essential nutrient for phytoplankton that often limits primary
production in the ocean, and its availability therefore plays a key role in
global ocean productivity. The amounts and form in which nitrogen exist are
controlled by microorganisms. One microorganism-mediated process is known as
nitrification, which oxidizes ammonia or ammonium to nitrite and nitrite to
nitrate, nitrate being the bioavailable form of nitrogen. While this is the
well-accepted process of nitrification, preliminary results strongly suggest
that a nitrogen-containing compound know as polyamine nitrogen may be directly
converted by some microorganisms to nitrate. However, the importance of this
process for global biogeochemical nitrogen cycling is unknown. The goal of this
study is to evaluate the biogeochemical significance of direct oxidation of
polyamine nitrogen, as a model organic nitrogen compound, to nitrification
compared to canonical nitrification of ammonia. The project will result in
training a postdoctoral researcher and provide opportunities for undergraduates
to gain hands-on experience with research on microbial geochemistry and coastal
ecosystem processes. Project personnel will also work with the Georgia Coastal
Ecosystems Long-Term Ecological Research program to engage a K-12 science
teacher in the project.

Ammonia oxidation is a key step in the process of converting fixed nitrogen to
dinitrogen gas and thus is central to the global nitrogen cycle and to removing
excess fixed nitrogen from coastal waters with high concentrations of nutrients.
Recent research has shown that Thaumarchaeota play a major role in ammonia
oxidation in the ocean. Experiments with enrichment cultures and coastal water
samples where ammonia oxidizing archaea are the dominant ammonia oxidizers, show
that some forms of organic nitrogen may be oxidized directly to nitrogen oxides
without first being regenerated as ammonium. Of the substrates tested, polyamine
and particularly putrescine nitrogen appear to be oxidized directly to nitrogen
oxides, while amino acid and urea nitrogen is first regenerated as ammonium and
then oxidized. The investigators will examine this process in detail over three
years using enrichment cultures and experiments conducted with coastal
bacterioplankton. Specifically, they will aim to better understand 1) the
consequences of this novel process to ocean geochemistry, 2) the fate of the
carbon present in polyamines, 3) what organisms are responsible for the direct
oxidation, and 4) the chemical characteristics of the organic nitrogen compounds
accessible to direct oxidation.