* 1538418
* EAGER: Collaborative: IC Supply Chain Security and Quality Control in Business and Social Context
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Wei-Ming Lin, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 08/31/2018
* USD 179,997.00

Trusted hardware is essential to achieving a secure and trustworthy cyberspace.
However, this security foundation is not free of threats. Specifically, an
adversary involved in Integrated Circuit (IC) development and supply may launch
a number of attacks such as intellectual property theft, design tamper,
counterfeiting and overproduction. The Comprehensive National Cyber Security
Initiative has identified this supply chain risk management problem as a top
national priority. Addressing this requires understanding the incentives and
capabilities, both business and technical, of parties in this chain. This
project combines expertise from computer security, business, and industrial
engineering to develop risk assessment techniques, management mechanisms, and IC
design techniques that are security and supply-chain aware. Findings from this
research will lead to improved trust and closer cooperation among various
parties in industry ecosystems.

This inter-disciplinary multi-university collaborative project develops new
methodologies for IC development and supply chain security risk mitigation and
quality control by leveraging the existing management science techniques in
product development, supply chain and project management. Specifically, the
investigators (1) assess potential hidden incentive and profitability structures
based on principal-agent models in game theory, (2) develop security risk-aware
IC design and management techniques, and (3) integrate economics and management
science techniques such as (i) revelation principle and other incentive
contracts, (ii) various effort, revenue and cost sharing mechanisms with new
security-enhancing IC design and manufacturing methodologies (iii) design data
access control, (iv) mutual verification and (v) digital forensics techniques.