* 1538746
* Combining Statistical Process Control and Optimization via Simulation for Robust Sensor Network Design in the Presence of Sensor Measurement Error
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Yao Xie, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 07/31/2019
* USD 342,922.00

For sensor network design, an optimization method is often used to determine how
many sensors to install and where to physically install them. One stream of
research is to assume a known functional relationship (usually a regression
line) among sensor measurements with normally distributed noise. This assumption
does not hold for systems with complex dynamics such as traffic transportation
or environmental monitoring. Even when a process simulation is used to capture
complex dynamics, it is often assumed that estimated performance measures from
stochastic simulation are accurate and there is no false alarm (i.e., no sensor
measurement error). A sensor network found under these assumptions may produce
unacceptably high false alarm rates, which eventually makes the decision maker
abandon the sensor network. This project develops statistical monitoring and
controlling methods for raising an alarm when a sensor network of a complicated
system detects abnormal behaviors such as a contaminant spill in a water quality
monitoring network. Then it develops efficient simulation-based optimization
algorithms to determine the number of sensors and their locations when
stochastic simulation is used to estimate multiple performance measures. Finally
this project combines the statistical methods and the simulation-based
optimization to design the optimal sensor network while controlling false alarm
rates. This research is interdisciplinary across manufacturing, quality control,
simulation and environmental engineering; and the composition of the research
team broadens the participation of underrepresented groups in research and
teaching. The results from this research are applicable to many application
areas and thus will benefit the U.S. economy and society.

The objective of this project is to develop methods that will be useful in
identifying an optimal sensor network quickly and accurately in the presence of
sensor measurement error for a complicated system whose in-control and out-of-
control observations are obtained through stochastic process simulation. This
project considers a potentially large-scale process with general marginal and
general correlation structure, which can broaden application fields of
statistical process control (SPC) methods; and develops SPC techniques whose
control limits neither require modeling of an underlying process nor trial-and-
error calibration. It also develops a combined framework of SPC and discrete
optimization via simulation when multiple performance measures exist. Finally it
facilitates knowledge transfer from IE/OR to non-traditional IE/OR fields by
applying the resulting combined algorithms to the water quality monitoring
problem.