* 1538342
* Anthropodynamics: Inferring the Control System Humans Use While Walking and Running
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Manoj Srinivasan, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 08/31/2019
* USD 177,226.00

Under normal circumstances, healthy adult humans can walk and run with a
vanishingly small likelihood of falling. This level of assurance far exceeds the
performance of state-of-the-art legged robots and robotic prosthetic devices.
The goal of this project is to reverse engineer the dynamics and control of
human locomotion using data from human subject experiments -- that is, to
understand the control laws underlying human locomotion through observation of
human subjects both walking naturally and responding to changes of terrain,
sudden shoves, and other disturbances -- and to apply this understanding to more
natural prosthetic devices and more capable legged robots. The results from the
project will also give insight into movement disorders and other balance
problems in the elderly and other at-risk populations, as well as allow design
of more effective balance-improving devices.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;In this
project, the physiological control laws governing human motion will be
estimated, based on experiments from both natural unperturbed walking and
running, and responses to carefully chosen external perturbations during
locomotion. The dynamics and the control laws near periodic motions such as
walking and running will be approximated using a factorized Poincare map -- a
simple generalization of the classical Poincare map. Factorized Poincare maps
are inferred from experimental data using statistical techniques such as maximum
likelihood estimation. The specific results this inference will allow the
prediction of how the human body will return to steady locomotion in the
presence of a external perturbation, in particular, it will allow the estimation
of how muscle forces and body movements are modulated to recover to steady state
cyclic gait. These inferred control laws will be validated using three-
dimensional mathematical biped models to demonstrate quantitative prediction of
movement variability and accurate estimation of the likelihood of falls.