* 1538638
* CAREER:  Dimensionality Reduction for Multi-Label Classification
* CSE,IIS
* 01/01/2015,06/30/2016
* Jieping Ye, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 06/30/2016
* USD 278,893.00

Recent advances in high-throughput technologies have unleashed a torrent of data
with a large number of dimensions. Examples include gene expression pattern
images, microarray gene expression data, protein/gene sequences, and
neuroimages. Dimensionality reduction, which extracts a small number of features
by removing the irrelevant, redundant, and noisy information, is crucial for the
analysis of these data. The goal of this project is to develop efficient and
effective dimensionality reduction algorithms for multi-label classification.
Multi-label dimensionality reduction poses a number of exciting research
questions that will be studied in this project: How to fully exploit the class
label correlation for effective dimensionality reduction? How to scale
dimensionality reduction algorithms to large-scale multi-label problems? How to
effectively combine dimensionality reduction with classification? How to derive
sparse dimensionality reduction algorithms to enhance model interpretability?
How to derive multi-label dimensionality reduction algorithms for multiple data
sources? The project is expected to largely improve the state-of-the-art in
dimensionality reduction for multi-label classification, and broaden this
research area by opening up and addressing many new research themes. The
algorithms and tools developed in this project will directly impact biological
research, as they will be used to annotate FlyExpress images; FlyExpress is the
only digital library of standardized fruit fly embryonic expression patterns.
The educational component of this project includes developing a new curriculum
that incorporates research into the classroom and provides students from under-
represented groups with opportunities to participate research. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;In order to achieve the project's goals, a hypergraph spectral
learning formulation will be developed for multi-label dimensionality reduction,
in which a hypergraph is used to capture the class label correlation. A joint
learning formulation will be developed, in which dimensionality reduction and
multi-label classification are performed simultaneously. In addition, a multi-
source dimensionality reduction framework is developed for learning from
multiple heterogeneous data sources. Project results, including open source
software and data sets will be disseminated via project Web site
(http://www.yelab.net/projects/career).