* 1538464
* GOALI: Additive Manufacturing of Glass Based Gradient Index Optics
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Robert Landers, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 07/31/2019
* USD 337,000.00

Optical lens systems are ubiquitous in industry, consumer products, and
scientific instruments. Conventional optical lenses control the path of light by
bending it at the interfaces. This limits the degree-of-freedom available for
designing a lens. The traditional solution of combining multiple lenses adds
expense, size, and weight to the system. Gradient index lenses use non-
homogenous materials to create a varying refractive index and continuously bend
the light throughout the lens. This Grant Opportunity for Academic Liaison with
Indusry (GOALI) award supports fundamental research to provide knowledge needed
to create a new additive manufacturing process for producing gradient index
lenses using optical-quality inorganic (glass-based) materials. The new additive
manufacturing process can fabricate gradient index lenses with performance that
could not previously be realized. Beyond gradient index lenses, the ability to
use additive manufacturing to deposit high quality glass will benefit integrated
photonics and electronics packaging. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The new additive
manufacturing process utilizes a novel filament-fed, laser-heated process to
deposit transparent glass. Multiple filaments, fed at different rates into the
molten region, will produce spatially varying properties by changing the
composition of the deposited glass. The first research objective is to test the
hypothesis that bubble generation in printed glass is a result of phase
separation during laser heating. Glass specimens, deposited under conditions to
preclude bubble entrapment, will be sectioned to determine the onset of bubble
nucleation and measure subsequent evolution. In-situ spectroscopy of the molten
region will identify chemical changes during processing. These results will be
compared to the temperature profile determined from modeling and pyrometery.
Bubble formation will then be corroborated with thermodynamic models for gas
saturation in glass. The second research objective is to test the hypothesis
that mechanical agitation of the molten region during deposition will enhance
mixing and lead to a smooth index profile. The feed-rate of colored filaments
will be dithered at different frequencies and amplitudes. The mixing will be
quantified by microscopic observation of the color distribution in printed
specimens. The third research objective is to determine the effects of the
thermal profile on the diffusion coefficient between layers. Prisms will be
printed using different layers of optical quality glass. The local index of the
printed prisms will be measured as a function of position before and after
prolonged annealing in a furnace and compared to the nominal profile.