* 1538344
* Enhancing Design of Water Balance Cover Systems Composed of Mixed Mine-Waste Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Paul Heyliger, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 07/31/2019
* USD 337,200.00

The objective of this project is to create an innovative design approach for
water balance cover systems composed of mixed mine waste materials (i.e., waste
rock and tailings). Water balance covers are designed to minimize the ingress of
precipitation and oxygen into underlying waste via moisture retention within
earthen materials used in the cover system. These earthen materials must also
provide the necessary resistance against slope failure and erosion. Challenges
to the design of water balance cover systems composed of mixed mine waste
include limited knowledge on (i) mine waste mixing methods, (ii) mine waste
characteristic effects on engineering properties, and (iii) techniques to scale-
up processes from the laboratory to the field. This project will enhance
assessment and design of using mixed mine waste materials in water balance
covers to expedite adoption in practice and promote sustainable mine closure.
Findings from the project will be relevant to mine owners and engineers
worldwide, and have the potential to enhance environmental sustainability and
land stewardship throughout our global society. The project will include an
academia-industry partnership between Colorado State University and the Tailings
and Mine Waste Conference Committee to create collaborations between
academicians, students, consultants, and industry personnel. These
collaborations will enhance research and education activities of the project.

The research objectives for this project include the following: (i) evaluate
mixing techniques to create homogenized materials from mine waste rock and
tailings; (ii) understand the effects of mixture ratio (i.e., mass of waste rock
to mass of tailings) and tailings composition on moisture retention and shear
strength of mixed mine waste; and (iii) establish proof-of-concept via up-
scaling technology from the laboratory to the field. An innovative discrete
element method and computational fluid dynamics model will be used to simulate
mixing behavior of mine waste in laboratory experiments and to design a mixture
process for field-scale implementation. Additional laboratory experiments will
focus on moisture retention and shear strength behavior of mixed mine waste. The
coupled experimental and numerical efforts will lead to an experimentally-
validated numerical model that integrates non-Newtonian flow mechanics and is
capable of predicting mixing behavior of dissimilar geomaterials. The shear
strength and moisture retention experiments will lead to empirical tools to
predict engineering properties of mixed mine waste as a function of mixture
ratio and mine waste composition. The field-scale experiment will close-the-loop
between laboratory research and field-scale feasibility and provide rationale
for evaluating the overarching hypothesis that water balance covers composed of
mixed mine waste can be designed via numerical simulations of the mixing process
and mechanistic understanding of the effects of mine waste properties and
mixture ratio on shear strength and moisture retention.