* 1538448
* Multiscale Modeling of Ultrastructural Origins of Bone Fragility
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2015,12/31/2019
* Xiaodu Wang, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Laurel Kuxhaus
* 12/31/2019
* USD 392,931.00

Abnormal deformation and failure of bone tissue at the smallest level directly
contributes to the incidence of bone fragility fractures in the elderly. These
fractures are a major concern for the health care of elderly and osteoporotic
patients because the fractures often cause death and are always painful.
Fragility fractures are mainly caused by negative changes in the shape of the
whole bone and also by negative changes in the bone tissue itself that are
caused by age, disease or as drug side-effects. There is no validated model for
how the bone ultrastructure creates the properties of the whole bone. As a
result, it isn't currently possible to understand which of the changes in the
tissue directly cause a weakening of the whole bone. This research will create
fundamental understanding of the ultrastructural origins of such bone fragility
fractures. The results will bridge the knowledge gap between the nano-structure
biology and whole bone biomechanics of bone, thus enabling future advances in
effective prediction and prevention of bone fragility fractures. The
multidisciplinary approach will help broaden participation of underrepresented
students in research and bring in positive impacts on engineering
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The unique multiscale modeling approach in this
study will, for the first time, allow for a systematic investigation on the
ultrastructural origins of bone fragility fractures. Briefly, bone will be
computer modeled as a composite of mineralized collagen fibrils embedded in an
extrafibrillar matrix based on the extensive experimental and analytical
observations provided in the literature and collected by the investigators in
previous research. A cohesive finite element approach will be used to capture
the ultrastructural behavior of bone tissue and its relationship with the bulk
properties of a whole bone. Based on simulations, the relationships between
ultrastructural features and the in situ and bulk mechanical behavior of bone
will be established. The efficacy of the multiscale model in prediction of bulk
bone behavior based on ultrastructural features will be tested for accuracy
using several in vitro and in vivo experiments.