* 1538697
* Development and deployment of distributed mini-observatory nodes to couple STEM training with coastal biogeochemistry
* GEO,OCE
* 08/15/2015,06/30/2018
* Brian Glazer, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 06/30/2018
* USD 296,983.00

The high cost of commercial solutions for environmental sensor observatories
that provide near-real-time streaming data limit the number of units that can be
deployed by researchers and is cost-prohibitive for scholastic K-12 programs or
interested 'citizen scientists'. The project will develop a robust, novel,
inexpensive, and open-source instrument sensor system and data workflow to
enable an understanding of the processes affecting water quality and
biogeochemistry in coastal environments. With recent increased availability of
low-cost, open-source, compact micro-controllers, new possibilities are emerging
for environmental sensing of aquatic environments at a fraction of the cost that
it once was to build up sensor data logger systems from scratch. Because of the
increased emphasis of the scientific community on interdisciplinary research,
more and more researchers want to deploy multi-parameter measurement sensor
nodes, and because more and more STEM students and citizens are becoming
interested in environmental monitoring and climate change, there is a growing
need for the development of an affordable coastal marine sensor data platform
for water quality and biogeochemistry studies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research will build upon a new but proven technology that uses open-source
hardware components and custom software scripts that can be assembled, tested,
deployed, and maintained by high school and undergraduate students,
environmental management organizations, or the technologically-savvy citizen
scientist, engaging their interest in STEM fields. The technological advances
specifically target multiparameter instrumentation to monitor, investigate, and
ultimately predict water quality parameters and episodic events associated with
water column and sediment-water interface biogeochemical fluxes. A commercially-
available thermistor chain will be deployed to measure water column and upper
sediment temperature with high enough precision to allow for calculation of
porewater transport rates. Transport rate calculations will be coupled to a
suite of environmental sensor measurements (e.g., dissolved oxygen, temperature,
conductivity, pH, redox potential, water depth, meterological data) to provide a
comprehensive understanding of chemical fluxes and the role of sediment
porewater exchange in the operation of the coastal ecosystem. Further, each
mini-node will be assembled using low-cost, open-source electronics hardware and
provide near-real-time data access through the internet.