* 1538730
* Collaborative Research: Unusual Temperature Dependent Behavior of Polymer Nanocomposites
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Pawel Keblinski, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 08/31/2018
* USD 235,049.00

Integration of nanoparticles into polymers leads to enhancement in thermal,
mechanical and shape changing properties of composite materials. Functionalizing
nanoparticle surfaces with polymers that are chemically identical to matrix
polymer are commonly employed in conventional polymer composites simply to
control particle dispersion. However, maintaining dispersion and mechanical
properties during high temperature processing and applications holds a critical
importance in manufacturing and performance of polymeric products. This grant
focuses on understanding the role of particle-polymer interactions on
dispersion, mechanical properties and processing. Towards this goal, the PIs
will focus on a material system design with on-demand control on reversible
mechanical response. Reversibly stiffening composites can be used in various
applications from soft robotics, flexible electronics to injectable implants
where mechanical integrity should be maintained when heated. This collaborative
work offers a fundamental research plan integrating the expertise of the PIs on
experimental and molecular dynamics simulations on polymer nanocomposites to
study the underlying mechanisms. In addition, the project offers to educate
graduate and undergraduate students on nanomaterials design and processing. To
broaden the knowledge of nanoscience and nanomaterials in high school education,
the PIs aim to organize a workshop for teachers in New Jersey and New York area.

The team aims to explore the phenomenon of reversible stiffening in polymer
nanocomposites. It is hypothesized that particles coated with a high glass
transition temperature (Tg) polymer and dispersed in a low-Tg polymer exhibit
liquid-to-solid transition upon heating. Experimental work is designed to show
the universality of this behavior in various miscible blends with different
glass-transition temperature differences. The phenomenon will be employed on
magnetic nanoparticles to demonstrate that the mechanical behavior can be
regulated with local heating of particles. Moreover, additional experiments to
relate the local viscosity and particle relaxations in asymmetric blends on
interphases are planned in order to capture the physics and mechanical response
in the experimental system design. Simulations will run in parallel and will be
used to guide the material design and more importantly will identify the
atomistic scale physics that leads to stiffening at high temperatures.
Processing studies will be conducted to understand the stability of interphase
layers, and composite structure (morphology) and properties after processing.
The processing results are very relevant for the material design such as for
biomedical implants where materials will experience frequent and controlled
dynamic loadings during their intended use for in vivo bone formation.