* 1538312
* Understanding Radiation and Temperature Effects in Cement-Based Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2018
* Rouzbeh Shahsavari, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Yick Hsuan
* 07/31/2018
* USD 359,998.00

This project uses the fundamentals of material science to tackle the pressing
needs for designing safe and failure-resistant concrete structures for extreme
thermal and radiological environments. This approach can have a significant
impact on discovering new cementitious materials with improved service life and
safety for use in key public infrastructures such as nuclear power plants and
oil and gas reservoirs, and will impact several other areas such as safe landing
areas for airplanes and tunnel liners exposed to fire. The education program
will develop new engineering modules and curricula that will be broadly
disseminated to catalyze the fusion of computational material science and
extreme conditions. Furthermore, underrepresented students and women will be
recruited and retained in STEM areas through the professional Engineering
Leadership Alliance at Rice University.

The overarching technical objective is to fundamentally understand the
physiochemical degradation processes of Calcium-Silicate-Hydrate (C-S-H), the
smallest building blocks of concrete, at elevated temperatures and radiations,
followed by utilization of this knowledge to design new intercalated hexagonal
Boron Nitride (hBN)/C-S-H composites. The underlying methodology lies in
developing atomistic simulations connected to advanced synthesis and
characterization techniques to understand and control the basic degradation
phenomena at the heart of conventional and hybrid cement-based materials. This
project will be innovative in its attempts to unravel the complex behavior of
C-S-H under irradiation using collision cascade simulations. Intercalation of
exfoliated hBN sheets with an optimum thickness into the sub-nanometer basal
spaces of C-S-H are novel elements in cementitious materials. The research will
link the complex ab-initio scale of chemistry, electron transfer, and radiation-
and temperature-induced deterioration processes with the scale of mechanics. As
such, this project will potentially lead to a new line of research in
cementitious and infrastructure materials.