* 1538898
* GOALI: Phase Transforming Cellular Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2019
* Pablo Zavattieri, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 07/31/2019
* USD 318,000.00

Rapid growth in our understanding of the mechanics of micro-architectured
materials complemented by a corresponding increase in the ability to manufacture
such materials over a range of length scales has led to a new generation of
materials with unique combinations of properties that are otherwise difficult to
obtain with traditional materials. This Grant Opportunity for Academic Liaison
with Industry (GOALI) research project will explore a new concept of phase
transformation in cellular materials that could impact key industries and
application areas ranging from structures with integrated energy absorption,
energy harvesting and wave beaming capabilities to adaptive catalyst substrates
and materials with switchable wettability and actuation properties. A close
collaboration with an automotive manufacturer at the fundamental materials
research stage ensures that the work remains relevant to industry needs.
Education and training for undergraduate and graduate students will be an
integral part of this project, and due to the interdisciplinary nature of the
project, students involved in it will be exposed to diverse aspects of the
analysis, synthesis and testing of these materials. Information learned from
this research program will be disseminated at international conferences, in
journal publications and brought directly into the classroom. Additionally, the
PI will work with the Minority Engineering Program (MEP) at Purdue University to
develop community outreach activities for local
museums.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research is to advance the
understanding of a novel set of phase transforming cellular materials (PXCMs)
whose building blocks can undergo large bi- or meta-stable conformational
changes when exposed to an appropriate stimulus that drives the phase
transformation. As a result of this phase transformation, the effective
properties of the cellular material are different between its stable phases.
Moreover, the phase transformation process itself results in significant
dissipation of energy without inducing permanent inelastic deformation in the
base material. Both of these aspects are reminiscent of first-order phase
transformations in thermodynamic systems. This research program will (a) study
the kinetics of the forward and reverse stress-induced phase transformations in
PXCMs under quasi-static loading, (b) and under dynamic loading, (c) study the
kinetics of the forward and reverse temperature-induced phase transformations in
PXCMs, (d) carry out a systematic exploration of the design space for PXCMs and
(e) study the changes in wave propagation properties accompanying phase
transformations using an approach that combines analytical and numerical
modeling with experiments at multiple length scales. Special emphasis will be
placed on the integration of reversible, solid-state energy dissipation
capability into structural members.