* 1538727
* GOALI: Tuning Degradation Properties of Metallic Implants through Polymeric Coatings and Surface Texture
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Ryan Toomey, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Wells
* 08/31/2020
* USD 425,851.00

There are approximately 1.5 million arthroscopic procedures (interference
screws, suture anchors) per year in the United States. However, the current
generation of biodegradable orthopedic implants have not fully met expectations.
Compared to commonly available metallic or polymeric implants, magnesium alloys
combine the advantages of both into one material. Magnesium screws, for
instance, can be made self-tapping and smaller in size than polymer screws,
minimizing injury to the surrounding bone upon implantation. Yet, they are also
degradable, opening up the possibility of fully bioresorbable metals. That said,
the major limitation of magnesium is that its rate of degradation is too rapid
for most clinical applications. This Grant Opportunity for Academic Liaison with
Industry (GOALI) research project will investigate how thin barrier coatings on
magnesium can be used to extend degradation time frames, which will usher in the
next generation of fully degradable implants with fixation properties similar to
currently available metals without the need for subsequent surgeries. As part of
the overall effort, a concurrent and integrated educational program also is
designed to train students and prepare them for the unique challenges presented
by implantable materials. A collaboration with ConMed Corporation will offer
tight integration between PhD scholarship and industrial skills in order to more
thoroughly prepare students for jobs after graduation. The research will be
broadly distributed into both classroom instruction and to middle and high
school students&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this research project, biodegradable
polymer coatings will be investigated to control the bioabsorption of magnesium
implants delineating the interrelationships between coating process variables,
coating composition, mechanical properties and life-cycle performance. Results
will be benchmarked against currently available bioresorbable materials. By
varying the composition and molecular weight of the polymer coating as well as
changing the crystallinity and the thickness of the coating through processing
conditions, it is hypothesized that water availability can be controlled in
order to customize bioabsorption profiles of the implant. Lines of research that
will be addressed include the following 1: How is water availability at the
magnesium surface controlled by a degradable polymer coating? 2: What are the
events of early pre-osteoblasts attachment followed by their subsequent
proliferation and maturation into bone forming cells on polymer-coated magnesium
model implants? 3; How does roughness of the magnesium surface affect the
biodegradation of magnesium/polymer materials? The answers to these questions
will enable predictions of degradation behavior over time to guide the design of
future devices.