* 1538935
* Postdoctoral Scholars Award: Remote Sensing, Open-source Analysis, and Citizen Nuclear Intelligence
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2018
* Christopher Lawrence, Lawrence                Christopher    C
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 08/31/2018
* USD 131,200.00

General Audience Summary

In this project, a postdoctoral research fellow will engage in a study of the
making of citizen nuclear intelligence and its role in framing public debates
about nuclear technology and weapons of mass destruction. The results of this
project will serve to enhance understanding of nuclear proliferation and weapons
of mass destruction by showing how distinctive knowledge communities frame
nuclear-proliferation risks in distinctive ways, and how those are changing in
the post-9/11 era. The results of this project will be communicated in academic
journal, and in arms-control periodicals. They will contribute to ongoing
discussions in STS and policy studies, and in nuclear security studies. They
will also provide a clearer understanding of how nuclear intelligence products
are made and used, which could thereby enable arms-control analysts to better
engage with policy makers and enable policy makers to better interpret and
deploy nuclear intelligence in national efforts to avoid costly foreign
confrontations and slow the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. In
addition, this work will help appraise the role that information technologies
can play in informing publics about complex technological and societal problems.

Technical Summary

This project centers around three sets of research question. The PI will
determine what are the tools, practices and themes present in open-source
nuclear intelligence analyses, and how these compare and interact with the
traditional analysis practices of intelligence and nuclear-safeguards
institutions. He will also address how the knowledge products of open-source
communities affect the framing of public debates within the US about nuclear
technologies and weapons of mass destruction, and the extent to which these
shape national procurements and foreign policy. Finally, he will explore how the
knowledge frameworks of open-source communities, and the national actions they
inspire, interact on a global stage with international institutions, coalitions,
and nuclear events. To engage with these questions, he will adopt a mixed
methods approach. In particular, he will us qualitative media analysis of
various documents including open-source intelligence products, news media
related to nuclear proliferation, and government documents that reveal how
decision makers are informed about nuclear activities. He will also conduct
formal interviews with open-source analysts, tasking committees of satellite-
imagery vendors, government decision makers, journalists, and nuclear-safeguards
experts in the Department of Energy and at the International Atomic Energy
Agency. In doing so, he will draw on current STS theories pioneered by his
mentor, and complement ongoing STS projects related to nuclear energy and risk.