* 1538799
* Open R&amp;D Consortia: Open Innovation Alliances in the Pharmaceutical Industry
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Joel West, Keck Graduate Institute
* Standard Grant
* Joshua Trapani
* 08/31/2020
* USD 349,280.00

The pharmaceutical industry provides a crucial role in improving human health.
Over the past 20 years established firms have faced declining efficiency and
effectiveness of their R&amp;D efforts. In response, dozens of industry-
supported R&amp;D consortia have been formed to create and share knowledge
between private and public participants, which include large and small firms,
universities and other research institutes. This project will study these
consortia and how firms reconcile the open nature of consortia with their
traditional IP-based business models. The project offers theoretical insights
for understanding consortia-style R&amp;D collaboration and also for assessing
new R&amp;D approaches in the pharmaceutical industry. The project will have
direct relevance for leaders of consortia and other public-private partnerships.
Finally, disseminating best practice for these consortia will help maximize the
benefits that biomedical firms gain from such collaborations, accelerating the
availability of improvements in human health. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will offer the first large-scale study of the open R&amp;D consortia as a new
form of cooperation in the pharmaceutical industry. The project will create a
public use database and typology of R&amp;D consortium based on archival data.
Interviews will be used to provide detailed case studies that will examine
intellectual property issues, knowledge appropriation and strategic alliances in
the implementation and operation of R&amp;D consortium. A deeper understanding
of how firms manage the flow of information in open innovation contexts has the
potential to make a significant contribution for managers and policy makers.
&lt;br/&gt;