* 1538300
* Collaborative Research: Self-Adjusting Periodic Optimal Control with Application to Energy-Harvesting Flight
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Hosam Fathy, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Irina Dolinskaya
* 08/31/2019
* USD 236,000.00

For many dynamic systems, optimal periodic operation provides superior
performance to the best possible constant input. For example, compared to
stationary flight, airborne wind energy systems can achieve higher apparent wind
speed -- and generate significantly more electricity -- by flying in circular or
figure-8 orbits. However these results may be sensitive to uncertainty. For
example, the performance of a periodic energy harvesting trajectory designed for
a particular flight condition may degrade rapidly when wind speed changes. Thus
the overarching goal of this project is to enable dynamic controllers that
rapidly adjust their periodic operation, in order to continue to provide near-
optimal performance despite changing conditions. The application to airborne
wind energy systems, which can access wind streams with reliably high speeds and
moderate air density, generate electricity more efficiently and more reliably
than stationary systems, thus benefiting society through lower power costs and
improved energy security. Moreover, the fundamental tools to be created in this
project will be applicable to many other important problems, including recurrent
drug-delivery scheduling for chronic disease treatment.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Existing results on periodic optimal control focus on
offline optimization. Very little is known about the following fundamental
challenges: (i) adaptation to unknown plant dynamics, (ii) achievement of
periodic optimality in a robust and stable manner, and (iii) simultaneous
optimization of both the time period and shape of the periodic trajectory. This
project addresses these challenges, thereby furnishing a novel framework for
robust online periodic control. Two distinct approaches will be pursued for
online optimization of periodic control trajectories in the presence of
parametric uncertainties, namely a novel implementation of extremum-seeking
methods, and an indirect adaptive control algorithm. The closed-loop system
stability will be analyzed using Floquet theory. Performance will be evaluated
in simulations of a benchmark drug delivery problem and an energy-harvesting
flight problem. Finally, effectiveness for control of energy harvesting flight
will be validated experimentally.