* 1538404
* CAREER: Integrated CO2 Capture and Catalytic Conversion to Solar Fuels Using Hybrid Multifunctional Materials
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2014,07/31/2019
* Ying Li, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Continuing Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 07/31/2019
* USD 344,565.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical/Scientific
Merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Photocatalytic reduction of carbon dioxide (CO2) with
water by sunlight is a highly desirable process to produce solar fuels such as
methane and methanol. This technology not only reduces greenhouse gases (e.g.,
CO2) but also provides pathways to sustainable energy. However, CO2 activation
and conversion is very challenging because of its stable thermodynamic
properties. Despite increasing efforts in this area in recent years, the
efficiency of photocatalytic CO2 reduction remains low. Some investigators
believe important problems have yet to receive adequate exploration, including
the nature of the photocatalyst surface active sites, its capacity for CO2
adsorption, the kinetics of reaction product desorption, and the long-term
stability of the catalyst. In this NSF Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER)
Program Award, Prof. Ying Li of the University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee will
address a number of these issues. Li will explore a new concept of integrated
CO2 capture and catalytic conversion (IC4) to produce solar fuels using novel
multifunctional materials, with the aim to achieve significantly improved,
stable CO2 conversion efficiency. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
multifunctional materials will exploit interacting adsorbent/catalyst components
in the form of mixed metal oxides, layered double hydroxides (LDHs), and their
hybrids, which are metal oxide nanoparticles embedded on reconstructed LDHs.
Different morphologies and nanostructures of the adsorbent/catalyst components
will be investigated to maximize the synergy between the two
components/functions. Another unique idea in the proposed research is to perform
the photocatalytic CO2 reaction at elevated temperatures in the range of 100 to
200 Â°C; whereas, conventional photocatalytic reactions are conducted at room or
near-room temperatures. At these higher temperatures, the desorption of reaction
intermediates and products from the catalyst surface will be enhanced, while the
adsorbent component of the hybrid material will function to ensure CO2
adsorption. This slightly elevated temperature can be achieved by utilizing
industrial waste heat or the infrared portion of sunlight in large-scale
applications, and thus a higher overall solar energy conversion efficiency is
expected. This CAREER project will also advance fundamental understanding of the
CO2 photoreduction mechanism. CO2 adsorption/desorption and the measured
photocatalytic conversion efficiency will be correlated with comprehensive
material characterization, through advanced spectroscopic methods including in
situ diffuse reflectance infrared Fourier transform spectroscopy (DRIFTS) and
x-ray absorption spectroscopy (XAS). These combined approaches will be powerful
tools to investigate changes in material properties during photoreaction,
interactions of adsorbates on the surface, fate of reaction intermediates,
charge transfer pathways, and factors that affect catalyst activity and
stability. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results
of this proposed research in converting greenhouse gases like CO2 to fuels will
have significant impact on the development of sustainable energy technology. The
current research on CO2 capture and CO2 conversion/utilization are separately
investigated in the scientific community. The proposed concept of integrated CO2
capture and catalytic conversion at slightly elevated temperatures using hybrid
adsorbent/catalyst materials offers a new route to solve this very challenging
problem in a more integrated, efficient way. The new material design and
fundamental understanding in catalyst stability in this research by Prof. Li
will also shed light on other photocatalytic systems such as solar hydrogen
production from water splitting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As expected for CAREER
projects, the proposed research will be integrated into teaching and curriculum
development. Graduate students will be trained in this interdisciplinary
research; undergraduate and high school students, particularly those in
underrepresented groups, will be recruited to participate in the research
project. Outreach programs are planned in collaboration with Milwaukee Public
Schools and non-profit education organizations in Milwaukee urban areas such as
the Urban Ecology Center, to assist teachers to build course materials related
to solar energy and nanotechnology, thereby increasing the students? awareness
in global climate change while promoting interests in the STEM fields.