* 1538190
* Collaborative Research : Nonlinear Long Wave Amplification in the Shadow Zone of Offshore Islands
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* James Kaihatu, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 07/31/2019
* USD 418,788.00

Field survey reports from recent tsunamis suggest that local residents in
mainland areas shadowed by nearby islands may be under the impression that these
islands protect them from tsunamis. Recent numerical results using the
mathematical procedure known as "active learning" have generated substantial
attention in world media (The Economist, Der Spiegel, Science, Korean Herald,
Kathimerini), because they suggest that, in most cases, islands amplify tsunamis
in the shadow zones behind them. In this application, the active learning
methodology requires about 100,000 times fewer computations than conventional
mathematical approaches, and it is unclear if the amplification effect is real.
Through comprehensive laboratory experiments, the physical manifestation of this
effect will be studied. If indeed the physical experiments confirm the numerical
idealizations, this research will help save lives by better targeting
educational campaigns to at risk populations. For example, it will be determined
if coastlines shadowed by offshore islands along the Pacific Coast of the US are
more vulnerable than earlier believed. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The early numerical
results from active learning are only applicable for non-breaking waves. While
many existing numerical codes attempt to model mild long-wave breaking, as they
sometimes do, it is unclear how well they perform when scattered long waves
break and interact. It is equally unclear if the isthmus between islands
scatters the wave energy or focuses further in the mainland behind them, or
under what geographical conditions either effect prevails. Through the
laboratory experiments, it will be determined if this vexing phenomenon persists
when waves break. The results will help validate active learning as a
mathematical procedure for uncertainty reduction which greatly reduces
computational costs. Also, a substantial laboratory data set will be developed
to help benchmark numerical computations for interacting breaking wave fronts,
under conditions as yet unstudied. An outreach campaign is planned to educate
populations at risk and improve the awareness of emergency managers on this
unusual amplification phenomenon.