* 1538059
* Biosensor Data Fusion for Real-Time Monitoring of Global Neurophysiological Function
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,03/31/2017
* Chun-An Chou, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 03/31/2017
* USD 222,970.00

Real-time detection of acute changes in neurophysiological state, such as
epileptic seizures, lapses in cognitive ability, acute stress, etc., can
ultimately serve to prevent accidents in high-risk occupations that require
unwavering focus. Such professions include hazardous cargo trucking, heavy
machinery operation, security and defense, air traffic control, etc. Indeed,
technology for acquiring rich biosensor data streams that capture brain
function, e.g., electroencephalography, are becoming increasingly portable and
noninvasive. These developments present an opportunity for implementing not only
real-time monitoring, but also providing pre-emptive alerts (e.g., smart phone
displays), which can be used to indicate degradation in physiological states.
This research has direct applications in biomedical settings - for instance,
epilepsy, is one of the most common neurological disorders afflicting over 50
million people worldwide, including 3 million people in the U.S. In about 25
percent of these patients, epileptic seizures are not controlled using available
medications. Being able to detect (or predict) the onset of epileptic seizures
would significantly enhance the patient's quality of life. In a proof-of-concept
study, the novel analytical approaches by the research team detected the onset
of epileptic seizures within 2.5 seconds. In contrast, existing approaches have
a detection delay exceeding 7 seconds. From a broader perspective, the findings
of this research can transform the status quo in real-time monitoring of
neurophysiological function. The multidisciplinary research team will strive to
provide state-of-the-art research and training opportunities for a diverse group
of students that bridges the gap from engineering to the life and brain
sciences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team will develop a sensor data
fusion approach based on graph theoretic topological mapping to combine data
acquired from multiple biosensors for neurophysiological change point detection.
Unlike existing approaches, which rely on complex signal pre-processing, the
graph theoretic approach eschews these computationally demanding steps and is
therefore more viable in a practical setting. The research team will exploit
this framework using a data library of high-resolution neurophysiological
recordings acquired from end users in realistic settings that induce shifts in
global functional states (e.g., acute stress, cognitive exhaustion, and fatigue
and so on). The research team will integrate automated decision-making
approaches in the overall schema to synthesize the information and provide
easily interpretable feedback to the end user (e.g., displays on a smart
device). Furthermore, the PIs will customize biosensors to accommodate the
patient's lifestyle.