* 1538593
* Computer Aided Design for 3D Fabrication Using Knitted Structures
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2018
* Cem Yuksel, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Rich Malak
* 07/31/2018
* USD 150,000.00

Knitted structures are widely used in textile production. The intricate
interlocking of yarn loops using numerous different types of stitching rules
allows knitted structures to naturally take 3D shapes that exhibit substantial
flexibility even if the underlying yarn material is barely stretchable. These
properties combined with new forms of yarn and modern automated knitting
machines open up new avenues for general purpose 3D fabrication well beyond
traditional, knitted garments. However, the existing computer aided design
methods and tools for knitted structures are suitable only for simple 2D
patterns. This award supports fundamental research to the needed knowledge for
the modeling of 3D knitted structures that will enable rapid design and
production of 3D surfaces with drastically different physical properties as
compared to other forms of customized fabrication, such as 3D printing. The
results from this research will benefit the U.S. economy and society with
potential applications in numerous fields including biomedical, healthcare,
furniture, automotive, and aerospace industries. The inherent multi-disciplinary
nature of this project will broaden the participation of underrepresented groups
in engineering research and positively impact education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
rich variety of knitting operations and stitch types allow for the production of
complex 3D surfaces. However, the methods and tools for determining a stitch
pattern for a 3D surface with desired geometry and properties are primitive.
Since the natural shape of a particular stitch depends of the stitches around
it, existing computer aided design methods for rigid materials are not
applicable. This research is to fill the knowledge gap in predicting the natural
3D shape of a knitted structure formed by different types of stitches with
different configurations. The research team will explore computer aided design
interfaces for specifying the knitting operations to produce a desired 3D
surface, conduct experiments with knitted structures to identify the natural 3D
deformations induced by different stitch patterns, establish rules for
predicting these deformations, and develop a physics-based simulation model for
computing the natural shape of knitted structures.