* 1538567
* Collaborative Research: Dissolved organic matter feedbacks in coral reef resilience: The genomic & geochemical basis for microbial modulation of algal phase shifts
* GEO,OCE
* 12/01/2015,11/30/2020
* Forest Rohwer, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 11/30/2020
* USD 449,923.00

Coral reef degradation, whether driven by overfishing, nutrient pollution,
declining water quality, or other anthropogenic factors, is associated with a
phase shift towards a reefs dominated by fleshy algae. In many cases managing
and ameliorating these stressors does not lead to a return to coral dominance,
and reefs languish in an algal-dominated state for years. Nearly a decade of
research has demonstrated that trajectories toward increasing algal dominance
are restructuring microbial community composition and metabolism; the
investigators hypothesize that microbial processes facilitate the maintenance of
algal dominance by metabolizing organic compounds released by algae thereby
stressing corals through hypoxia and disease. The resilience of reefs to these
phase shifts is a critical question in coral reef ecology, and managing reefs
undergoing these community shifts requires developing an understanding of the
role of microbial interactions in facilitating algal overgrowth and altering
reef ecosystem function. The research proposed here will investigate the
organics produced by algae, the microbes that metabolize the organics, and the
impacts of these processes on coral health and growth. This research has
implications for managing reef resilience to algal phase shifts by testing the
differential resistance of coral-associated microbial communities to algae and
defining thresholds of algal species cover which alter ecosystem
biogeochemistry. This project provides mentoring across multiple career levels,
linking underrepresented undergraduates, two graduate students, a postdoctoral
researcher, and a beginning and established investigators.

This project will integrate dissolved organic matter (DOM) geochemistry,
microbial genomics and ecosystem process measurements at ecologically-relevant
spatial and temporal scales to test hypothetical mechanisms by which
microbially-mediated feedbacks may facilitate the spread of fleshy algae on
Pacific reef ecosystems. A key product of this research will be understanding
how the composition of corals and algae on reefs interact synergistically with
complex microbial communities to influence reef ecosystem resilience to algal
phase shifts. Emerging molecular and biogeochemical methods will be use to
investigate mechanisms of microbial-DOM interactions at multiple spatial and
temporal scales. This project will leverage the background environmental data,
laboratory facilities and field logistical resources of the Mo'orea Coral Reef
Long Term Ecological Research Project in French Polynesia and contribute to the
mission of that program of investigating coral reef resilience in the face of
global change. The investigators will quantify bulk diel patterns of DOM
production and characterize the composition of chromophoric components and both
free and acid-hydrolyzable neutral monosaccharides and amino acids from varying
benthic algae sources. The team will also characterize planktonic and coral-
associated microbial community changes in taxonomic composition and gene
expression caused by algal DOM amendments in on-site controlled environmental
chambers using phylogenetics and metatranscriptomics, including tracking algal
exudate utilization by specific microbial lineages. Field-deployed 100 liter
tent mesocosms will be used to examine in situ diel patterns of coupled DOM
production and consumption, microbial community genomics and ecosystem
metabolism over representative benthic communities comprising combinations of
algal and coral species. Together these experimental results will guide
interpretation of field surveys of centimeter-scale spatial dynamics of
planktonic and coral-associated microbial genomics and metabolism at zones of
coral-algal interaction, including boundary layer dynamics of oxygen, bacteria
and DOM using planar optodes, high-throughput flow cytometry and fluorescence
spectroscopy.