* 1538318
* 4D Printing with Photoactive Shape-Changing Polymer
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Haifeng Ji, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 08/31/2019
* USD 299,983.00

4D printing is an emerging additive manufacturing technology that combines 3D
printing with smart materials. The 4D printed objects can change their shape
over time (the 4th dimension) when applying heat, pressure, magnetic field, or
moisture to the smart materials. Current 3D printing technology can print
objects with a multitude of materials; however, these objects are static,
geometrically permanent, and not suitable for multi-functional use. 4D printing
with a light responsive shape-changing material is beneficial because light is
wireless, easily controllable, and causes a rapid shape change of the smart
material. This award supports fundamental research to generate knowledge needed
for synthesis of a novel photoactive shape changing polymer (smart material) and
integrating this smart material into objects printed using a 3D printing process
(fused filament fabrication). 4D printed objects are programmable and can adapt
to their environment. Therefore, they can find wider applications, including
foldable unmanned aerial vehicles, artificial muscles, grippers, biomedical drug
delivery systems, stents, and minimally invasive surgeries.

The research objectives are: (1) to find the relationship between chemical
composition of azobenzene shape changing polymer pellets and their physical
characteristics (thermal, mechanical, and optical properties); (2) to understand
how polymer's composition and extrusion process parameters affect mechanical
properties of polymer filaments produced by the extrusion process; and (3) to
understand the shape change behavior of 4D printed objects using filaments
produced with different polymer composition and extrusion process parameters. To
accomplish the first objective, differential scanning calorimetry, UV-Vis
spectroscopy, and polarizing light microscopy will be used to measure thermal
and optical properties of the polymer pellets. Polymer pellets will also be
casted into standard testing bars to measure their mechanical properties through
stress-strain experiments, stress induced by UV light exposure, and hardness
measurements. To achieve the second objective, extrusion parameters
(temperature, material flow rate, and pressure) will be altered, and mechanical
properties of produced polymer filaments will be measured. To achieve the third
objective, objects will be printed using filaments produced with different
polymer composition and extrusion process parameters. Percentage volume
contraction, reversibility, bending speed, bending angle, and mechanical work
output (shape change during a period of time over which stress is applied) of
these printed objects will be measured with different levels of light input
(intensity). The knowledge gained from this research can be useful in developing
other 4D printing processes (such as stereolithography and selective-powder-
sintering) using photoactive smart materials.