* 1538051
* Collaborative Research: Characterizing sources of infragravity waves and the earth's hum using data from the Cascadia Amphibious Array
* GEO,OCE
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2018
* Thomas Herbers, NorthWest Research Associates, Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Candace Major
* 07/31/2018
* USD 99,420.00

Seismometers are sensitive to tiny ground motions generated by distant
earthquakes and other phenomena. As has long been known, in the absence of
earthquakes, these instruments also record a background 'hum', a low level
seismic signal originating in the earth that has energy cycling every 6-300
seconds. Broad waves called "infragravity waves" moving through the ocean are
the source of most of the 'hum', imparting cyclic pressure on the seafloor as
they travel through the seawater. This general relation between ocean 'forcing'
on the seafloor and Earth's seismic 'hum' is understood, but how much is
generated along the shallow margins of the ocean versus within the deep ocean
basins, and why? This project investigates the relationship between the source
region(s) of the 'hum' and the passage of major storms. It explores whether the
shape of the coastal slopes influences how much hum energy is produced. In order
to accomplish the work, seismometers both on the seafloor and on the continent
will be used to combine information from the signals detected across the array
of instruments, and point toward the location where the seafloor forcing
occurred.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through a collaboration between seismologists and
oceanographers, the spatial variability of infragravity wave (IG) energy levels,
the influence of ocean storms on that pattern, and the generation of microseisms
and Earth's long period "hum" will all be documented. Broadband seismic and
pressure spectra from the Cascadia amphibious array will be analyzed. Numerical
models will be employed to explore the range of possible wave behaviors across
the continental shelf. The coupling between wind-driven ocean waves, IG waves
and the seafloor will be studied in a near-coastal region of the Pacific
Northwest. The results of this study will contribute to the characterization of
IG noise levels on the ocean floor, link this variability to the near shore IG
wave climate, and provide guidance for future off-shore deployments of seismic
and pressure arrays. Improved understanding of the sources of Earth?s hum may
help design approaches to using long period seismic noise data for the study of
deep earth structure. The west coast of North America is uniquely suited for
this purpose as it is has been documented as a strong source region for the
"hum". A graduate student will play a significant role in this cross-
disciplinary research, obtaining experience in array processing techniques such
as stacking, beamforming, and back projection.