* 1538734
* Non Volatile Memory Workshop 2015 to be held on March 1-3,2015 at LaJolla, California
* ENG,ECCS
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2016
* Paul Siegel, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 03/31/2016
* USD 15,000.00

Advances in data storage technology have been crucial to the evolution of the
modern information age, enabling and accelerating the invention of new
information-related applications in consumer entertainment, personal and
business computing, enterprise data management, and scientific research. High-
capacity, non-volatile, solid-state drives (SSDs) are in the process of
revolutionizing this world of data storage. SSDs have a number of advantages
compared to conventional disk and tape drives, notably in shock resistance,
reduced power consumption, and faster data access. Although currently less
competitive in some storage applications with respect to cost per bit, write
latency, and product lifetime, continuing advances in SSDs based upon several
non-volatile memory (NVM) technologies are setting the stage for a revolution in
how computer systems and applications access and manipulate persistent data.
Improved flash memories - along with emerging technologies such as magnetic RAM
(MRAM), phase-change memories (PCM), spin-torque transfer memories (STTM),
resistive RAM (RRAM), and the memristor - are driving designers to rethink how
they integrate storage devices into computing systems, how operating systems
manage data, and how applications create and process information. Realizing the
full potential of NVM technologies is an exciting and important challenge with
enormous societal consequences. The proposed workshop is the sixth in the annual
series of Non-volatile Memories Workshops (NVMWs) that have been held on the
campus of the University of California, San Diego. The primary objective
continues to be the development of a "vertical" vision for research on the role
of NVM technologies in an ever-increasing number of application scenarios,
ranging from data-intensive computing systems to super high-resolution video
games. As the capabilities of NVM-based storage rapidly evolve, it is more
critical than ever that researchers at each level of the system "stack" be aware
of the needs, challenges, and opportunities associated with the other levels.
The workshop provides researchers and practitioners the opportunity to gain a
broader understanding of what is needed to accelerate the development and
adoption of NVM-based storage technologies, and to establish relationships that
will provide the basis for further advances. The workshop program includes a
half-day tutorial session, two keynote addresses, approximately 45 technical
presentations selected by an expert Program Committee, and a poster session.
Open registration for the entire workshop is intended to encourage broad
participation from academia, industry, and government. The technical program is
structured to provide a unique educational opportunity, particularly for
students and researchers who are new to the area. The exchange of knowledge and
the generation of novel ideas that result from the workshop will have
significant impact on the computing and data storage industries, both vitally
important to the national economy. The educational component of the workshop
will benefit students and postdoctoral researchers, as well as more senior
participants. An archival website will provide a lasting record of the workshop
proceedings and a resource for the scientific community and general
public&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This workshop will address fundamental problems in
the science, engineering, and application of high-performance data storage
systems based upon non-volatile memories. This includes the study of nanoscale
physical phenomena that permit storage of information; the development of coding
algorithms for reliable, persistent, and secure data storage; the analysis of
system architectures for data-intensive computing; and the conception of new
paradigms for non-volatile storage of data in a variety of applications. The
program will reflect the latest advances in device technology, data encoding,
system architecture, and storage applications. The Workshop will provide a
unique forum for the exchange of recent results and novel ideas relating to
research, development, and application of non-volatile memory systems.
&lt;br/&gt;.