* 1538580
* Integrating and ground truthing the profiling float microrosette
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2021
* Todd Martz, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 09/30/2021
* USD 504,387.00

The autonomous profiling float platform provides the potential for orders-of-
magnitude improvement in ocean observing, relative to ships. This fact has
already been realized by physical oceanographers studying the ocean heat budget
and large-scale mixing processes and is now gaining momentum in the ocean
biogeochemistry and ecological modeling communities. The development of new
chemical sensors for measurement of CO2 dissolved in the ocean will improve our
ability to quantify globally significant biogeochemical processes such as annual
net community production in the ocean; and, in addition, the process of ocean
acidification which is considered to be one of the most significant
anthropogenic threats to the marine ecosystem. This research will develop a new
technology known as the Micro-Rosette which will ultimately contribute a new
tool to the short list of sensors available for integration into autonomous
profiling floats.

The Micro-Rosette is a device intended to operate specifically on board a
profiling float. The system captures sub-milliliter volumes of seawater at pre-
determined depths, stores the samples for a period of time, analyzes all of the
discrete seawater samples ex situ (at the park depth), ejects them, and then
repeats the cycle. When combined with a typical profiling float cycle, this
approach adapts to the float's ascent/decent/park cycle, taking advantage of the
multi-day park cycle to perform all of the chemical analyses. Determination of
dissolved inorganic carbon is accomplished through acidification of the seawater
sample, equilibration across a gas-permeable membrane, and quantification via a
conductivity measurement. The Micro Rosette is purposefully built for profiling
floats, and by taking advantage of the extended park cycle to carry out chemical
analyses, this approach embraces the fact that many chemical analysis techniques
require a time-dependent reaction or diffusion step leading to response times
that make such analyses poorly suited for on-the-fly measurements. The
application of this research is the measurement of total dissolved inorganic
carbon, but the concept of a micro-rosette system is well-suited to several
other types of analyses such as ammonia, organic carbon, and iron, and may
potentially lead to a new family of profiling-float-ready wet chemical
analyzers.