* 1539361
* Stress at learning interacts with sleep to optimally consolidate emotional memories
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2019
* Jessica Payne, Boston College
* Standard Grant
* Kurt Thoroughman
* 06/30/2019
* USD 556,976.00

We spend nearly a third of our lives sleeping, yet research is just beginning to
shed light on the multitude of benefits that are conveyed by sleep. One
important benefit of sleep is to strengthen the memories we form during the day,
particularly if those memories have some future utility. But how is future
utility determined? This research tests a new model which proposes that sleep
selectively strengthens memories for events that are associated with elevated
levels of stress hormones or with elevated physiological arousal, such as
changes in heart rate or sweating, when we first encounter them. This research
is significant for a number of reasons. In a society in which many people are
chronically sleep deprived, and report high levels of stress, it is important to
understand how interactions between stress and sleep may influence the ability
for the human brain to store and remember information. This research will
clarify how stressful situations are remembered over time, which may yield new
insights into why sleep disruption often co-occurs with affective disorders
(such as depression) and memory problems. The project provides training in the
integrated use of functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), stress, and
sleep scoring and recording methods; it continues a summer research exchange
program between Boston College and Notre Dame; and it supports high school
internships, exposing diverse students to neuroscience, a field that is not
included in most high school curricula. The project also contains an outreach
component that strives to inform community members of the importance of
prioritizing sleep and the value of stress
management.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Emotional memories form the core of
our personal histories, marking our greatest achievements and worst defeats.
While our ability to remember and learn from these events is critical for
survival, how we remember them can also influence the development of affective
disorders, such as clinical depression and post-traumatic stress disorder
(PTSD). Negative experiences enjoy a privileged status in memory, being better
remembered than most neutral events, yet there is a limited understanding of how
such memories are consolidated and stored. The PIs' prior research demonstrated
that sleep selectively preserves emotional memories, but only if participants
had higher resting cortisol levels and elevated psychophysiological responses at
the time of encoding. We now propose to directly manipulate encoding levels of
stress and to examine how stress at encoding may enhance connectivity within
emotional-memory neural networks (Aim 1); how sleep may preserve this enhanced
connectivity over time (Aim 2); and how these effects of stress and sleep may
combine to enhance emotional memory performance (Aim 3) and neural cohesiveness
in emotional memory networks during memory retrieval (Aim 4). It is widely
thought that stress disrupts sleep, and sleep affects sensitivity to stress, yet
there are few empirical tests of their shared influence on cognition and
emotion. However, these interactions are critical to understand given the 1)
increase in stress-related illnesses and sleep disruption and the concurrent
rise in affective disorders, 2) prevalence of PTSD in the military, and 3)
likely impact of stress and sleep disruption in the classroom and workplace. By
uniting the traditionally separate fields of sleep and stress, and examining the
interactive effects of processes that unfold during encoding and consolidation,
this novel research is expected to yield transformative findings. The proposal
strengthens a productive collaboration between Elizabeth Kensinger at Boston
College (BC), with expertise in affective neuroscience and Jessica Payne at
Notre Dame (ND), with expertise in sleep and stress effects on memory.