* 1539774
* RAPID: Biostimulation for Biocementation at Field Scale Treatment Depths
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Jason DeJong, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 05/31/2016
* USD 42,754.00

Soil improvement is often required when the soil supporting the foundations for
structures, or soil used for embankments, and other earthworks lack sufficient
strength and stiffness to perform satisfactorily. Current engineering practice
relies primarily on the use of chemical grouts and mechanical methods to improve
soils, despite environmental concerns regarding high embodied energies and
documented groundwater contamination incidents. Microbially Induced Calcite
Precipitation (MICP) offers an environmentally conscious bio-mediated soil
improvement alternative that can improve a soil's engineering properties through
the precipitation of calcite at soil particle contacts (biocementation).
Although researchers have extensively demonstrated the ability of MICP to
improve soils, the need for cultivation and injection of specialized non-native
bacterial strains has restricted the technology from becoming a cost-competitive
and environmentally permissible soil improvement technique. This award supports
research critical to the advancement of the technology, by assessing the
feasibility of using native bacteria to complete the process at depths relevant
to practical engineering application. Stimulation of native bacteria will
eliminate cultivation costs and potential long-term environmental and ecological
impacts by forgoing the introduction of non-native bacteria into native soil
ecosystems. This advancement would provide industry with financial and
environmental incentives for adoption of the method into practice and therefore
attain important societal and environmental benefits. This research will involve
interdisciplinary expertise in microbiology, geotechnical engineering, and
geology by engaging an international collaboration of researchers.

The feasibility of stimulating native bacteria at depths typically required for
mitigation of geotechnical hazards such as liquefaction is unknown. This
research will provide important and unprecedented insight about the
distributions, relative abundances, and feasibility of stimulating native
bacteria in natural soil deposits to complete biocementation with depth.
Previous experiments have successfully demonstrated the ability of stimulated
native bacteria to enable biocementation, but these studies have only involved
surficial soils. Total concentrations of native soil microorganisms are expected
to decrease with depth however, due to reductions in total soil organic matter
and oxygen availability. In this study, a drilling and sampling program will be
conducted to obtain samples from discrete depths up to 15 meters within a
natural soil deposit for microbiological characterization and geotechnical
testing. Batch experiments will be performed on obtained samples to optimize
stimulation treatments using microbiological analyses and timed measurements of
process biogeochemistry. Column experiments will be also performed to evaluate
the effectiveness of stimulation techniques to enrich for native bacterial
populations and improve soil geotechnical properties with depth through
microbiological, biogeochemical, and geotechnical monitoring.