* 1539270
* CyberSEES: Type 2: Collaborative Research: A Computational and Analytic Laboratory for Modeling and Predicting Marine Biodiversity and Indicators of Sustainable Ecosystems
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2015,02/28/2019
* Peter Fox, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 02/28/2019
* USD 419,589.00

Marine ecosystems are complex and variable networks of interacting organisms
that support roughly half of global productivity and play important roles in
sustaining global processes. The lower trophic levels that are the focus of this
project include primary producers at the base of the food web, as well as
bacteria and a variety of small grazers that turn over rapidly and provide links
that transfer energy to higher trophic levels, such as fish, seabirds, and
marine mammals, helping to maintain healthy ecosystems. Mounting recognition
points to the societal value of not just timely information about the status and
change of marine ecosystems but how well we can model and predict them. While
existing and emerging observation systems are poised to contribute, there is a
large need for computationally-enabled marine biodiversity data and information
systems. Despite recognition as system-level science, the way specialists and
non-specialists think about ecosystems must move from reducing the problem
spaces into specialized and finer partitions to a significantly more integrative
and predictive one. This research effort brings together computational and
information scientists, oceanographers and microbiologists to develop a Marine
Biodiversity Virtual Laboratory (MBVL). In addition to research investigations
of marine ecosystems, the Virtual Laboratory provides a platform for education
via student diversity programs at the three institutions. The important learning
opportunities will be two-fold for students: (1) to learn about, model, and make
predictions for biodiversity in natural systems, and (2) to be exposed to
working in an interdisciplinary team that includes both natural scientists and
computer scientists. The project aims to foster a new generation of data
scientists with skills that can cross disciplines. There will be capabilities to
trace, verify and trust the original data and model sources that comprise key
indicators of diversity as part of ecosystem health; this has become a
requirement for technical (and societal) implementations. MBVL will contain a
knowledge base for such indicators. While this is essential for research, the
MBVL will also enhance education as students will truly probe, question, explore
and experiment with the health, risks, and possible changes in specific marine
environments.

MBVL will address multi-scale, heterogeneous data challenges with informatics
solutions that enable the cyber-generation and documentation of biodiversity
indicators, providing the traceability between data and information to be used
as a basis for sustainable ecosystem-based management and needed policy
decisions. Thus researchers and students will be further engaged to think and
act at the system-level. The research will have impacts beyond ocean sciences,
i.e. more broadly in management and policymaking regarding marine resources and
ecosystem services via key links with fisheries managers enabled by
collaborations external to this project and with industry partners to evaluate
and disseminate solutions to a much wider user base.