* 1539534
* CAREER: Ubilytics: Harnessing Existing Device Ecosystems for Anywhere Sensemaking
* CSE,IIS
* 08/31/2014,01/31/2020
* Niklas Elmqvist, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 01/31/2020
* USD 420,663.00

This research project addresses the fundamental question of how we can use the
existing ecosystem of networked devices in our surroundings to make sense of and
exploit massive, heterogeneous, and multi-scale data anywhere and at any time.
Assembling these devices into unified sensemaking environments would enable deep
analysis in the field. Examples include managing heterogeneous data in
scientific lab notebooks, scaffolding undergraduate classroom learning with
examples, manuals, and videos, and supporting police investigation by linking
facts, findings, and evidence. On a higher level, this concept would stimulate
our digital economy by supporting fields such as design and creativity, command
and control, and scientific discovery. However, despite this ready access to a
myriad of handheld devices as well as those integrated in our physical
environments, each individual device is currently designed to be the focus of
attention, cannot easily be combined with other devices to improve productivity,
and has limited computational and storage resources. This project introduces a
comprehensive new approach called ubiquitous analytics (ubilytics) for
harnessing these ever-present digital devices into unified environments for
anywhere analysis and sensemaking of data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ubilytics draws
on human-computer interaction, visual analytics, and ubiquitous computing as
well as a synthesis of distributed, extended, and embodied cognition, based on
three principles. First, universal interaction requires designing an interaction
model that combines several devices into a holistic distributed interface,
transparently bridges multiple devices, surfaces, and even physical objects, and
unifies interaction with various data types. Second, flexible visual structures
must be created in order to generate representations that adapt to varying
device dimensions, resolution, viewing angle, and distance, support space and
layout management in ego-centric and world-centric configurations, and can
utilize both novel and appropriated displays for output. Third, efficient
distributed architecture must be achieved through methods for discovering,
merging, and synchronizing heterogeneous devices with support for a generic
component model to facilitate reuse, offloading costly computation into the
cloud, and meshing ubilytics environments for collaboration.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sensemaking is often attributed to professional analysts
finding meaning from observed data, but this research will take a comprehensive
view of sensemaking for both casual and expert users, in both dedicated and
mobile settings, and with both large-scale and small-scale datasets. This work
will therefore benefit society by focusing on three example domains: (1)
scientific discovery, (2) classroom learning, and (3) police investigation. It
will also advance discovery and understanding by integrating the research in an
undergraduate programming course used as a testbed for learning in ubilytics
environments. Another goal is to broaden participation of underrepresented
groups by engaging in a women in engineering program as well as by mentoring
minority undergraduate students during summer research internships. Results,
software, and documentation will be disseminated under Open Source and Creative
Commons licenses.