* 1539982
* I/UCRC FRP:  Collaborative Research: Understanding and Modeling Competition Effects on Tree Growth and Stand Development Across Varying Forest Types and Management Intensities
* ENG,EEC
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2018
* Aaron Weiskittel, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* Andre Marshall
* 07/31/2018
* USD 65,944.00

Competition in plant communities is a fundamental ecological process that has
been studied through experimentation and by modeling. Given the long time
periods over which tree populations interact and the increasing availability of
extensive data bases with long-term measurements of tree growth and mortality,
this project aims to use advanced modeling methodology to develop enhanced
quantitative expressions of competition. Improved models of competition in
forest populations are required to further advance our predictive ability for
management options in a range of forest types. Understanding competition
dynamics is paramount for evaluating management activities such as deploying
genetic material, prescribing site preparation treatments and planting density,
predicting response to varying levels of inter-and intra-specific competition
resulting from vegetation control and thinning, and ameliorating nutrient
deficiencies through fertilizer applications. Increased understanding of
competition processes and formulation of improved models for quantifying
competition effects will enhance evaluation of a wide array of forest management
options. These results will have far-reaching implications, not only for forest
management decision-making but also for forest conservation and restoration, and
for understanding and modeling environmental influences, including climate
change, on forests. Additional broader impacts include an enriched educational
experience for graduate students and postdoctoral fellows due to the involvement
of industry scientists as well as university faculty in the conduct of this
research.

The overall goal of this research project is to use contemporary modeling and
statistical techniques and computing technology to exploit information in
forestry field studies in an effort to develop improved quantitative measures of
tree- and stand-level competition. Modeling is a powerful tool for integrating
and synthesizing existing theory and empirical evidence, identifying knowledge
gaps, and suggesting relevant hypotheses regarding underlying plant competition
that might be tested through experimentation. Relating resource availability and
competition intensity to growth and survival is central to understanding and
projecting forest stand dynamics. A key challenge is determining effects of
species, genetic variation, microsite heterogeneity, and local neighborhood
effects on tree-size variation through time. These effects are confounded,
highly interactive, and especially difficult to separate for stands of trees,
which interact over long time periods. Furthermore, tree-to-tree competition
cannot be measured directly, but rather is inferred based on measurements of
overall stand density, relative tree size, and/or point density measures that
include sizes of and distances to neighbors. Advanced statistical analyses and
modeling techniques will be applied to data bases to deal with the complexity of
forest ecosystem dynamics over extended time periods. Gaps in knowledge will be
identified and experimental approaches for testing relevant hypotheses regarding
competition process will be advanced.