* 1539228
* RIDIR:  Longitudinal Intergenerational Family Electronic Micro-Database (LIFE-M)
* SBE,SMA
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2022
* Martha Bailey, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 08/31/2022
* USD 2,554,897.00

Some of the most important questions in social science and public policy relate
to how individuals' lives and experiences have changed across time. However,
most data spanning the late 19th and 20th centuries are cross-sectional -- large
sets of individuals at one point in time. Cross-sectional data limit the study
of economic and geographic mobility, family formation and dissolution, and the
long-term impacts of adverse events, public policies, or family background. This
proposal seeks to transform vital records data into the Longitudinal,
Intergenerational Family Electronic Micro-Database (LIFE-M). LIFE-M
comprehensively covers individuals born in the United States from 1880 to 1930,
including representative samples of men and women, linking networks of families
across up to four generations, and census information with measures of health,
family background, and early life context. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;LIFE-M allows
for the comprehensive study of the economic and geographic mobility of
individuals and families, family formation and dissolution, and the long-term
effects of adverse events, public policies, and family resources on economic and
family processes. LIFE-M is constructed by linking digitized vita records
(birth, death and mortality certificates) with historical records from decennial
census. The major advantage of the data assembled is the ability to carry out
comprehensive, longitudinal analyses of large samples and subsamples of
individuals and families over multiple generations. The LIFE-M database will be
made accessible in a user-friendly format for researchers and policy analysts to
use. The project is of groundbreaking utility for researchers in demography,
geography, sociology, and economics. In addition, the project is of great
utility to policy makers and policy analysts interested in the historical
context for understanding mobility and demographic change in the United States
over the 20th century.