* 1539068
* RII Track-2 FEC: Innovative, Broadly Accessible Tools for Brain Imaging, Decoding, and Modulation
* O/D,OIA
* 08/01/2015,08/31/2021
* Sridhar Sunderam, University of Rhode Island
* Cooperative Agreement
* Jeanne Small
* 08/31/2021
* USD 5,999,853.00

Non-technical description&lt;br/&gt;This Research Infrastructure Improvement
Track-2 Focused EPSCoR* Collaboration (RII Track-2 FEC) project involves three
states: Rhode Island, Oklahoma and Kentucky. The project will be led by the
University of Rhode Island in partnership with the Warren Alpert Medical School
of Brown University/Rhode Island Hospital, the University of Kentucky, Kentucky
State University, the University of Oklahoma, Norman, the University of Oklahoma
Health Sciences Center, and the Laureate Institute for Brain Research. The
participants will form an interdisciplinary consortium to 1) develop innovative
and broadly accessible brain imaging and modulation technologies and tools for
acquiring fundamental insight about how the nervous system functions in health
and disease; and 2) develop a diverse workforce, with particular emphasis on
junior faculty, to create and implement these technologies and tools. These
tools are aimed at establishing a more comprehensive understanding of how
actions emerge from the dynamic activities in the brain and developing effective
treatments for neurological and cognitive impairment. The Rhode Island team
focuses on hardware development while the Kentucky and Oklahoma teams develop
algorithms and implement applications that could benefit from the integrated
systems developed by the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
description&lt;br/&gt;The investigators will accelerate development of tripolar
concentric ring electrode electroencephalography, and integrate it with
functional near-infrared spectroscopy and transcranial focal electrical
stimulation to create a portable, multimodal brain imaging and stimulation
system. This project seeks to realize the potential for combining these
techniques into hybrid devices that can take advantage of the strengths of each
modality to obtain a more comprehensive picture of brain activity and behavior.
Besides data acquisition, the project will also develop novel algorithms to
extract information about brain functions from data recorded in naturalistic
conditions. The methods are relevant to basic and clinical studies, with
applications in neuroscience, cognitive science and cognitive psychology. The
research will allow the invention and commercialization of low-cost, portable
brain imaging and stimulation devices as well as algorithms that will increase
accessibility of these technologies to a greater segment of the population. The
project also includes multiple components to develop a diverse, well-trained
workforce, and presents a strategy to engage each important phase of the
education and career process, spanning from K-12, undergraduate, graduate,
postdoctoral, to junior faculty.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;*Experimental Program to
Stimulate Competitive Research