* 1539388
* CyberSEES: Type 1: Collaborative Research: Large-Scale, Integrated, and Robust Wind Farm Optimization Enabled by Coupled Analytic Gradients
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2017
* Juan Alonso, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Rahul Shah
* 08/31/2017
* USD 200,000.00

Wind provides a renewable source of energy and is one of the most cost-effective
sources for new energy installations. Today, wind turbines are designed for an
isolated environment, as are their power regulation strategies. When turbines
are assembled into a wind farm their wakes significantly interfere with other
turbines resulting in energy underproduction of 10-20% relative to expectations.
This underproduction is a major barrier to increased wind energy growth. This
project hypothesizes that a significant increase in power production is possible
through simultaneous design of wind turbine layouts, power-regulation
strategies, and the turbines themselves, all in the presence of stochastic
inputs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Simultaneous layout-control-turbine design is
challenging, especially when considering uncertain inputs. Current research and
industry practices use simulation models that are non-differentiable or do not
provide gradients. As a result, most wind farm layout optimizations are limited
to around 10-100 variables, rely on sequential design processes, and only
include uncertainty in simple ways if at all. To enable design problems of
larger size and complexity, wake and turbine models must be reimplemented with
scalable optimization in mind, and new methods for uncertainty quantification
must be developed. The investigators' recent work suggests that by developing
wind turbine wake models that provide exact derivatives, wind farm layout can be
done effectively with 100 to 1,000 times more variables than those solved by the
industry today. This scalability will enable wind farm optimization that
includes a large number of design variables, integrates multiple disciplines,
and incorporates uncertainty in the design process. These proposed contributions
seek to advance energy sustainability, scientific computing, and education. The
wake and turbine models will be large-scale-optimization ready to allow
designers to solve problems that were previously out of reach. The new
uncertainty quantification methodologies will be widely applicable to multiple
disciplines, particularly as more industries move towards integrated system
design. Finally, a dedicated website will serve as a teaching tool to introduce
optimization and uncertainty quantification concepts to a general audience
through interactive wind farm design
problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Concurrently, the investigators will focus on
foundational methods for scalable uncertainty quantification that can be used
for both forward uncertainty propagation and statistical inversion. The emphasis
on scalability is required to address challenges related to the number of random
input variables, the number of output quantities of interest, and the efficiency
of parallel implementations on extreme-scale computers. As an example, the
research team is developing new methodologies for scalable uncertainty
quantification that take advantage of the exact derivatives provided by these
turbine and wake models. The research plan focuses on three main goals: 1)
develop new wake models with exact gradients, 2) perform integrated layout-
control-turbine optimization, and 3) develop scalable uncertainty quantification
methods to demonstrate expected performance improvements on robust wind farm
layout problems.