* 1539023
* Construction of a gas-handling system for measurement of bond ordering in methane gas
* GEO,EAR
* 04/15/2015,03/31/2016
* Edward Young, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 03/31/2016
* USD 31,025.00

This laboratory took delivery of the world?s largest gas-source isotope ratio
mass spectrometer. The instrument, referred to as the "Panorama", offers by far
the greatest mass resolution of any gas-source isotope ratio instrument. The
principle investigators will use the unique capabilities of the new instrument
for tracing the provenance of methane gas. This award will provide funding to
construct the infrastructure to allow them to process methane gases for isotopic
analysis. The benefits of the research program extend beyond basic research to
include numerous (and some unforeseen) practical applications that benefit
society in general. For example, methane is 20 times more effective as a
greenhouse gas than is carbon dioxide. An improved understanding of the sources
and sinks of atmospheric methane is of clear benefit to society in providing a
means for understanding the causes of variations in atmospheric methane
concentrations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Identifying the sources of methane gas with
certainty in any particular occurrence has been until now, inexact, but the use
of isotopic bond ordering holds the promise of greater certainty. The origins of
natural gas and the highly uncertain global budget of methane gas in the
atmosphere are two target applications of this novel approach for tracing the
sources of methane. Bond ordering will afford temperatures of formation where
thermodynamic equilibrium applies. Analyzing both 13CH3D/12CH4 and 12CH2D2/12CH4
will provide evidence for mixing of sources where it has occurred, thus
disambiguating the meaning of standard bulk isotope ratios. These isotopologue
ratios are also predicted to provide diagnostic patterns for different kinetic
pathways involving transport, formation, or destruction of methane.