* 1539992
* I/UCRC Phase II:  Collaborative Research: CIMJSEA Phase II Proposal
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2022
* John Lippold, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 08/31/2022
* USD 683,419.00

The Manufacturing and Materials Joining Innovation Center (Ma2JIC) - formerly
Center for Integrative Materials Joining Science for Energy Applications
(CIMJSEA) at Ohio State University and in conjunction with its partner
universities has established programs to advance the science and technology of
materials joining as it applies to advanced manufacturing. The mission of the
center is to 1) close the gap between material development and weldability, 2)
develop scientifically-based methodologies for assessing material
weldability/joinability that span nm to mm length scales, and 3) develop a new
generation of materials joining engineers and scientists. Materials joining is a
critical enabling technology essential to maintaining US leadership in
manufacturing. This technology impacts virtually every segment of US industry.
The center seeks to identify projects that are critical to these industries and
provide students with the scientific and engineering skills that will allow them
to contribute to society. Projects include aspects of welding processes,
materials science, design, and fitness-for-service. There is a strong focus on
the development of computational tools that facilitate the joining of
conventional and advanced materials.&lt;br/&gt;The center conducts a number of
projects that are organized into five technology thrust areas, namely 1)
Material Performance, 2) Weldability Testing and Evaluation, 3) Modeling, 4)
Process Development and Innovation, and 5) Additive Manufacturing. Projects
within the Materials Performance thrust area involve weldability issues
associated with conventional and advanced materials, with particular emphasis on
improving service performance, extending the lifetime of critical components,
and reducing manufacturing costs. The Weldability Testing and Evaluation thrust
area seeks to develop testing methods to validate new materials and processes
and provide input to material producers that allows the development of
"weldable" materials. The Modeling thrust area is developing integrated
computational materials engineering (ICME) techniques that predict the
performance of welded structures by rigorously considering the complex
interactions between materials and processes. The Process Development and
Innovation thrust area evaluates existing welding processes and seeks to
identify new welding processes that represent improvements over conventional
processes. Finally, the Additive Manufacturing thrust area consists of projects
that seek to develop a better fundamental understanding of metal deposition
processes and to identify applications of this technology. The results of these
projects influence both current application of existing materials and potential
use of advanced materials in a wide range of industrial applications.