* 1539947
* Planning Grant: I/UCRC for Necrobiome Research and Its Application in Decomposition Ecology and Forensics
* ENG,EEC
* 09/15/2015,12/31/2016
* Jeffery Tomberlin, Texas A&M AgriLife Research
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 12/31/2016
* USD 14,494.00

This award will assist in the planning activities for the proposed I/UCRC for
Necrobiome Research and Its Application in Decomposition Ecology and Forensics.
&lt;br/&gt;The Center will develop standard operating procedures that will be
validated, assessed for accuracy and precision, and subsequently integrated into
current crime laboratories and crime scene investigation units through training
centers currently in existence at the Harris County Institute of Forensic
Sciences, and Texas A&amp;M. This Center will create a network for researchers
to partner with forensic practitioners that will result in timely and effective
transfer of science-based discoveries and technology to forensic scientists in
the government and private sectors.Training programs currently in place through
Texas A&amp;M are accredited through the International Association for
Identification thus allowing for such training being accepted globally. An
undergraduate programs in the forensic sciences accredited by the Forensic
Programs Accreditation Commission is also available for training future
practitioners by integrating new techniques developed through the center into
their curricula.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposed Center represents a
combination of practitioner expertise and research capacity that positions the
center to serve as a global platform for: 1) Conducting multidisciplinary
discovery and translational research in the field and laboratory that
establishes a science-based foundation associated with the forensically
important phenomena of decomposition and ecological recycling of vertebrate
carrion; 2) Integrating the decomposition and ecological recycling research with
new discoveries in basic and applied forensic chemistry and biology to improve
forensic methodology and technology; and 3) Enhancing the forensics workforce
development programs already associated with each of the partner institutions.