* 1539831
* Joint NSF/ERA-CAPS: RegulaTomE - Regulating Tomato Quality through Expression
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2019
* James Giovannoni, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Clifford Weil
* 05/31/2019
* USD 2,848,881.00

PI: Harry J. Klee (University of Florida-Gainesville) CoPIs: James J. Giovannoni
and Zhangjun Fei (USDA-ARS/ Boyce Thompson Institute for Plant Research)

ERA-CAPS Collaborators: Cathie Martin (John Innes Centre, Norwich, United
Kingdom), Alisdair Fernie (Max Planck Institute for Molecular Plant Physiology,
Golm, Germany), Bjoern Usadel (Aachen University, Aachen, Germany), and Dani
Zamir (Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Rehovot, Israel) Producers are under
pressure to produce more, cheaper food with reduced inputs and impact on the
environment. Consumers need and want healthier, better tasting foods than those
produced by today's typical production systems focused on quantity rather than
quality. This project focuses on tomato, the most economically important
fruit/vegetable crop worldwide. The overall goal of this project is to elucidate
the genetic mechanisms controlling plant responses to environmental stresses
such as drought and to understand how the environment influences the endogenous
chemistry of flavor and nutritional qualities in tomato. This research will
deliver mechanistic knowledge as well as tangible tools for agronomic and
quality improvement of tomato and other crops. Specifically, naturally occurring
versions of genes permitting more robust responses to abiotic stress and
positively impacting flavor and nutritional quality will be identified and
disseminated to public and private breeders so as to inform their selection
processes. The effectiveness of these resources and the significance of the
knowledge acquired will ensure that the project contributes directly to food
security and sustainable fruit cultivation through use of currently untapped
genetic information residing in underutilized wild tomato varieties. With regard
to outreach and training, the project will provide unique cross-training
opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students as well as postdoctoral
scientists on both sides of the Atlantic. In addition, the project will provide
summer research internships in genomics and bioinformatics for undergraduate
students from Fort Valley State, California State University, Fresno and
California State University, Sacramento, all minority serving institutions. The
twin objectives of this project are to determine the importance of
transcriptional regulation of the metabolic pathways defining quality traits in
tomato and to identify such transcriptional regulators at the molecular level.
The selected quality traits include those determining antioxidant capacity that
impacts shelf life and nutritional value as well as those determining fruit
flavor. Loci contributing to abiotic stress tolerance will also be identified
with the goal of developing more nutritious and sustainable crops. Natural
variation available in introgression lines (ILs) resulting from wild species
crosses to tomato will be used to assess the importance of transcriptional
regulation, identify regulatory genes and assess epigenetic variation. To
accomplish these ends, resources that include a genome reference sequence for S.
lycopersicoides and metabolite, DNA methylation and transcriptome profiles of IL
fruit will be developed and made freely available. Deliverables include
regulatory gene identification and new tools for metabolic engineering of fruit
quality. This collaborative US-EU project will allow development of tools and
resources on a scale unavailable at a national level. All data produced will be
freely and continuously shared within the consortium. Specifically, sequence
based datasets will be accessible through a consortium database as well as
through publicly available data repositories including GenBank, European
Bioinformatics Institute (EBI), and the SOL Genomics Network (SGN).