* 1539820
* Multi-Scale Reconstructions of Human-Climate-Fire Interactions in Mixed-Conifer Forests of the Northern Rockies
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2015,02/29/2020
* David McWethy, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Scott Freundschuh
* 02/29/2020
* USD 329,993.00

This research project will reconstruct historical fires over the past several
thousand years in mixed-conifer forests on tribal lands in the northern Rockies.
Similar forests are widespread in the interior of western North America, but
little is known about their historical fire dynamics, and even less is known
about how humans may have influenced those fires. Recent large fires and
projections of increased fire activity in the decades ahead have prompted land-
management agencies in the U.S. to initiate widespread restoration efforts aimed
at reducing fire risk and hazard. At the same time, wildfire suppression costs
in the western U.S. have risen to more than $1 billion annually and now consume
nearly one-half of the U.S. Forest Service budget. There is a critical need to
better understand the historical context for applying fuel treatments intended
to reduce fire risk in mixed-severity forest types across the western U.S. The
need to better understand the historical context for forest management is
particularly compelling on tribal lands, where tribal members and forest
managers have a strong interest in preserving historical continuity and
incorporating culturally important practices into their management strategies.
The project will clarify the role of ancient and recent human influence on fire
regimes and mixed-conifer forests. Project results will provide a mechanistic
understanding of factors shaping current forest stand characteristics. The
project will contribute to scientific debates concerning the influence of both
ancient and recent human activities on temperate forests. The project will
enhance basic understanding of ecological resilience in the face of changing
climatic conditions and land use, and it will facilitate the development of
science-based management for ecosystems experiencing multiple natural and human-
caused stressors. This project will help educate and train a new generation of
fire and forest managers and researchers by employing more than ten
undergraduates and two graduate students, including Native American students and
students from tribal colleges. The project also will help build research
capacity at a tribal college.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will address the
following questions related to past and future controls on fire and forest
ecosystems: How variable were fire regimes in mixed-conifer forests of the
northern Rockies? Are drier mixed-conifer forests inherently more resilient than
mesic ones to recent increases in fire activity, insect outbreaks, and land-use
change? Are treatments aimed at restoring baseline ecosystem dynamics in mixed-
conifer forests representative of historical natural and human disturbance
processes? How can lessons from past fire-human-climate interactions help land
managers support forest resilience with future forest management in ways that
ultimately reduce fire suppression costs? The investigators will answer these
questions by combining fire and vegetation histories reconstructed from lake
sediments and tree rings sampled from a network of paired sites in which early
human activity was intensive versus paired sites that were largely isolated from
early human activity. They will compare these histories of fire to multi-century
reconstructions of climate. This project will clarify interactions between
natural and human factors that influence ecosystem change in order to inform
restoration and management strategies that support forest resiliency in ways
that ultimately reduce the cost of wildfire risk and hazard.