* 1539816
* Conference Proposal: Student and Junior Faculty Travel Support for the International Symposium on Sustainable Systems and Technology (ISSST) 2015
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2015,09/30/2015
* Gabrielle Gaustad, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 09/30/2015
* USD 15,000.00

1539816 (Gaustad). The International Symposium on Sustainable Systems and
Technology (ISSST) attracts participants from multiple disciplines to focus on
issues related to sustainability science and engineering. This conference covers
a spectrum of issues for assessing and managing products and services across
their life cycle, and the design, management, and policy implications of
sustainable engineered systems and technologies. The conference has significant
participation from students and young faculty members, which is critical for
generating the next generation of sustainable solutions. This grant is for funds
to help expand the participation of students, underrepresented groups, and
junior faculty from across the United States in ISSST
2015.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The solution of complex sustainability issues can
only be achieved via trans-disciplinary approaches. Cross pollination of ideas
among natural scientists, engineers, social scientists, and policy makers is
necessary for developing a holistic understanding of sustainability applicable
to engineered systems, products, and supply chains and the critical
infrastructures on which they depend. ISSST 2015's theme is collaboration and
this theme will be advanced with a variety of networking and learning
opportunities. By providing opportunities for educational exchange among
academics, government, and industry representatives, opportunities will be
enhanced for the design and development of sustainable systems and technology.
Further, ISSST 2015 is designed to fill key knowledge gaps and broaden the
existing sustainability community base to include social and ecological
scientists.