* 1539762
* 49th Spring Topology and Dynamics Conference
* MPS,DMS
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2016
* Elmas Irmak, Bowling Green State University
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 04/30/2016
* USD 40,000.00

The 49th Spring Topology and Dynamics Conference will take place May 14--16,
2015 at Bowling Green State University in Bowling Green, Ohio. The conference
will feature 7 plenary talks and 12 semi-plenary talks. In addition there will
be five special sessions: Continuum Theory, Dynamical Systems, Geometric Group
Theory, Geometric Topology, and Set-theoretic Topology. The conference will
promote the dissemination of new results in Topology and Dynamics, and will
facilitate interactions between different research fields as well as
interactions between graduate students, junior researchers and senior
mathematicians. The conference contributes to the training and professional
development of graduate students and young researchers. Furthermore, the
conference promotes applications of Topology/Dynamics in other areas of
mathematics as well as scientific disciplines such as biology, chemistry,
physics, finance, data science, and robotics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Spring
Topology and Dynamics Conference (STDC in short) is an annual conference that
started in 1967, and regularly attracts 150 to 200 participants. STDC covers
very diverse topics of current interests in Topology and Dynamics. A large
portion of the talks at STDC touch upon interplays of Topology/Dynamics with
other branches of mathematics. In recent years, STDC has featured several
invited talks on applications of Topology and Dynamics in other scientific
disciplines. STDC will bring together people from various fields related to
Topology and Dynamics to discuss recent progresses and chart new directions.
STDC seeks the active participation of graduate students, young researchers,
women and under-represented groups. The grant provides funds to support travel
for invited speakers, graduate students and researchers without external
support. The conference web site is http://personal.bgsu.edu/~xiex/STDC2015.html