* 1539990
* I/UCRC Phase I: Broadband Wireless Access and Applications Center at the University of Mississippi
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2021
* John Daigle, University of Mississippi
* Continuing Grant
* Behrooz Shirazi
* 08/31/2021
* USD 208,997.00

This award will help create a new I/UCRC Site at University of Mississippi (UM)
to join an existing IUCRC called BWAC (Broadband Wireless access and
Applications Center) led by University of Arizona which started in July 2013.
The UM site extends the scope of BWAC in the areas of computational
electromagnetics (EM), antenna design and testing, and telecommunications. This
Site will add two of the largest industries in the wireless space, Qualcomm and
Intel, to the BWAC Industrial Advisory Board. The BWAC site will help recruit
diverse and promising undergraduate and graduate students into electrical
engineering undergraduate and graduate programs at UM. By engaging them directly
in research on problems of actual interest to corporate partners, BWAC will help
prepare these students to compete and be productive in corporate jobs the day
they graduate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will bring to bear UM research
capabilities and real-world industry interest in areas that align with the focus
of BWAC. The UM faculty have identified potential industry-oriented research in
the areas of metamaterials for antenna cloaking, mmWave antennas, wireless
signaling from embedded sensors for concussion management in college athletic
sports, fountain codes for big data transfers, cognitive radios and radar
systems. Other possible applications areas include, wireless connectivity for
improved efficiency in factory, new wireless security algorithms, applications
of wireless sensor networks, and telemedicine.