* 1539141
* IDR: Nucleic Acid-Lipid Films - Programmable Structural Transitions for Drug Delivery and Regulating Gene Expression
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2015,08/31/2015
* Matthew Tirrell, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 08/31/2015
* USD 96,426.00

1015026&lt;br/&gt;Tirrell&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This interdisciplinary program aims to bring new
developments in self-assembled materials to bear on frontier problems in
bioactive nucleic acid (NA) delivery and gene expression. Materials comprising
nucleic acids and lipids, assembled based on a balance of electrostatic,
hydrophobic and hydration forces, form stable, layered films, alternating
nucleic acid and lipid layers. Recently published work from our group has shown
that this structure can be manipulated in various ways, for example, by changing
the temperature or state of hydration, or by varying the molecular weights of
the nucleic acids included. This provides a versatile platform of potentially
enabling technology to advance and develop new capabilities in gene delivery and
the regulation of gene expression. The first aim of the proposed work is to
optimize these constructs for the stated delivery applications. Preliminary work
included in the proposal demonstrates that nucleic acid delivery, leading to
transfection of stem cells, is possible with these constructs. Maximization of
this capability will be explored by varying lipid choices (to have the best
possible disassembly characteristics and to minimize any toxicity), by including
multiple nucleic acids to have the desired structural features, and more
importantly, to be able to have simultaneous, multiple transfection ability. The
structures and disassembly profiles of all of these constructs will be
thoroughly characterized. A second aim of this work, which will be conducted in
parallel with the first, is to use these constructs to examine transfection
efficiency for mouse embryonic stem cells in culture, using expression of green
fluorescent protein as an indicator of efficiency. Stem cells are notably
difficult to transfect; our aim is to exploit the high concentration of nucleic
acids in our constructs, and the direct physical contact of the cells with the
nucleic acid-lipid layers to increase transfection efficiency. A third aim of
the work will be to apply our new material delivery vehicles to the delivery of
microRNAs. MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are a novel class of small, regulatory non-coding
RNA, serving as potent regulators for gene expression at posttranscriptional
level. Contact-mediated delivery will be explored to accomplish this goal. The
further goal of the third phase of this work is to integrate plasmid DNA and
miRNA delivery to reprogram adult cells into induced, pluripotent stem cells.
iPS cells have numerous profound scientific and biomedical implications in
personalized therapies and platforms for high-throughput screening of
pharmaceuticals. The technical challenge with microRNA delivery for
reprogramming is not delivery efficiency, per se, but rather sustained delivery
to achieve sustained expression over a span of approximately ten days.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Interdisciplinary Nature of the Proposed Research:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The team assembled spans several different disciplines
from chemical engineering and materials science, to stem cell and tissue
engineering, to the molecular and cellular biology of gene regulation. The
proposed work will take a discovery in materials science quite far toward new
enabling technology in engineering nucleic acid delivery and gene expression.
The connection this team embodies, among chemical and materials engineering,
biology and biological engineering, is essential to realize the potential of
this new delivery system, both to have the insight into how to optimize the
materials involved, and to assure that the biological engineering objectives are
achieved in a meaningful way. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An exciting, interdisciplinary development project such as
this is an ideal opportunity to bring undergraduate engineering students to the
forefront of an important research area. The very nature of this project,
spanning three laboratories in chemical, materials and biological engineering,
as well as molecular and cellular biology, gives capacity to bring
undergraduates with varied interests into participation in this work. The
specific plan is to engage two undergraduate students per year, in the summer
(six total over the project lifetime), from underrepresented groups as
participants in this research. These students will be admitted to the Amgen
Scholars Summer Research Program at UC Berkeley. The Amgen Scholars Program is a
national program attracting approximately 25 participants each year. Joining
this group of 25, the two undergraduate participants will benefit significantly
in numerous ways as members of the summer research cohort. They will participate
in all program activities including weekly meetings and the poster session and
oral presentations at the end of the summer. As a result of these collaborative
activities, the undergraduate participants in this project will be fully
involved in a broad and comprehensive summer experience.