* 1539775
* RAPID: Avoiding Secondary Disasters: Wastewater Treatment Design and (Re)construction during Large-Scale Disaster Response
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2015,12/31/2016
* Heidi Gough, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* William Cooper
* 12/31/2016
* USD 99,989.00

1539775&lt;br/&gt;Gough&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aftermath of Hurricane Katrina
in the Gulf Coast demonstrated the potential for severe environmental impacts to
area waterways caused by displaced populations overwhelming wastewater treatment
facilities in host communities. The call for scholarly literature on rapid
response for wastewater treatment recovery after disasters has gone largely
unanswered. This proposal addresses a window of opportunity for obtaining data
on the wastewater treatment response in a refugee camp in the Azraq region of
the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan, where the population is expected to swell from
10,000 to over 100,000 during the next year.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A moving-bed
biofilm reactor was installed for wastewater treatment at this camp in December
2014. The camp population will grow substantially while the moving-bed biofilm
reactors will be brought on-line. Study of this unprecedented period of scale-up
will fill a data void regarding both the function of moving-bed biofilm reactor,
which are un-tested for extreme high loading conditions, and the response of
these extreme conditions on operator decision making. During disaster response,
such as this response to displaced persons, infrastructure decisions must be
made rapidly and often lead to misinformed decisions. Several organizations have
developed guidance for effective (re)construction (i.e. adjusts to the original
design after initial construction) by revisiting projects after completion.
Those efforts are incremental mainly focused on descriptive solutions, and have
rarely considered the wastewater treatment infrastructure. In fact, pit toilets
and latrines are among the most common recommendations for displaced populations
when local (host) community wastewater facilities cannot accommodate the extra
flow. However, lack of treatment places already vulnerable populations at risk
of waterborne diseases and places the local area at risk of long-term
environmental impacts. Thus, Azraq is a unique study situation in which
decisions have been made to use modern wastewater treatment technologies in a
situation where many of the treatment system design parameters were unknown so
that informed and organized (re)construction decisions will be critical to
operational success. This project will establish a framework for coordinated
comparison of the decision making framework on wastewater treatment performance
under real-time, high-stress operations. This project combines advancements in
two disciplines and will examine the complex relationship between people driven
actions through a decision making process and the impact on a wastewater
treatment system measured by its environmental qualities. Understanding delivery
of wastewater treatment at the Azraq refugee camp will establish a framework
against which research into other disaster response situations can be compared.
This project will be of broad interest, as the Middle East conflicts are gaining
more media coverage with increased US involvement, and will help educate the
general public on the importance of wastewater treatment in times of crisis.
Collaboration between University of Washington and the Jordan University for
Science and Technology will increase the international collaboration of the
investigators.