* 1539846
* International Workshop on Dynamic Modeling of Health Behavior Change and Maintenance: Moving the Field Forward
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2015,09/30/2016
* Michael Pavel, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 09/30/2016
* USD 25,000.00

Poor health-related behaviors and habits are responsible for approximately 40%
of preventable deaths and the majority of the chronic disease burden. However,
our current understanding of health-related behavior is largely based on static
snapshots of human behavior, rather than ongoing, dynamic feedback loops of
behavior in response to ever-changing biological, social and personal
environmental states. Rich streams of continuous data are becoming increasingly
available through emerging technologies, including wearable and deployable
sensors and mobile phones. This data, combined with sophisticated modeling
techniques emanating primarily from engineering fields, can provide
unprecedented opportunities to understand behavior in context and in real time.
However, to take advantage of these opportunities, dedicated collaborations
between behavioral/health scientists and data modelers, as well as across
different schools of complex data modeling techniques, are required. The
proposed workshop focuses on developing new concepts for modeling the temporally
dense, contextually rich and personalized data increasingly afforded by emerging
technologies. The major goals of this proposed workshop are to 1) amalgamate
techniques from sub-disciplines across different computational modeling
approaches, 2) facilitate development of a shared vocabulary/ontology to
facilitate communication between modelers, behavioral and health scientists and
3) advance the rigor of dynamic behavioral theories to the next level towards
causal and predictive dynamic models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The challenge to 21st
century data modeling and health behavior research is to move toward
computational, dynamic modeling of behavior that can capture complex and rapid
changes in behavioral state and related influencing factors. These new models
will pave the way for Just-In-Time, Adaptive Interventions (JITAI) that provide
feedback in context, in the moment, when people are most receptive and most
likely to benefit. To accomplish this, the workshop proposed here will bring
together experts in various types of modeling, for example (but not limited) to
systems dynamics, social networks, agent-based modeling, machine learning, and
Bayesian inference to work together with behavioral scientists and health care
professionals to move this endeavor to the next level. The proposed workshop
will follow the International Workshop on Methodologies for Developing and
Evaluating Digital Health Interventions, which will be held in London UK, 10-11
September 2015, led by Dr. Susan Michie and Dr. Jeremy Wyatt, sponsored by the
Medical Research Council (MRC), UK. The workshop proposed here brings the
international leaders in health behavior and mobile interventions together with
leaders in big data modeling. This workshop will facilitate an unprecedented
collaboration between different streams of "big data" modelers and behaviorists
to develop new paradigms for modeling temporally dense, contextualized
behavioral data that can guide future JITIAs across health and wellness domains.