* 1539833
* The Impact of Value Chain Approaches on Gender and Food Security
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2021
* William Munro, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Scott Freundschuh
* 08/31/2021
* USD 479,808.00

Food insecurity remains one of the most serious challenges facing humankind.
This research project will investigate dietary diversity as an indicator of
household food security, and it will generate evidence of the food security
consequences of agricultural value chain development. The project's comparative
approach will explore variation across national contexts, agrarian settings, and
sociocultural conditions. It will provide new insights regarding the
restructuring of the global agricultural system that has occurred over the last
20 years. Furthermore, it will reconceptualize agricultural value chains as co-
produced assemblages of diverse actors, processes, and practices in which
farmers are active participants rather than passive recipients of top-down
policy processes. The investigators will work with U.S. philanthropic
foundations and government agencies. They also will interact with international
organizations and policy makers to contribute to capacity-building, education,
and training in new methodologies to study the impacts of value chain
participation on families and communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through a
comparative study of three value chain initiatives, this project will focus on
two core questions: (1) How has gender been incorporated by a wide range of
development actors into efforts to promote a new green revolution for Africa?
(2) What has been the impact of green revolution projects on household food
security? The investigators will conduct surveys, semi-structured interviews,
and focus groups with key actors in a variety of value chain organizations to
determine how they articulate and advance their interests in interactions with
each other. With these data, the investigators will perform a comparative
analysis of policy directives, gender compositions, and organizational project
and investment plans. Through an assessment of how the state, development
agencies, and markets interact with rural actors to co-produce local
livelihoods, the findings will shed new light on the efficacy of such programs
on poverty reduction, hunger mitigation, and human security, all of which will
benefit the United States as it interacts with governments and other
organizations in Africa and elsewhere.