* 1539359
* EAGER:  Enabling Efficient Genome Editing for Advanced Biomanufacturing Applications
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2017
* Kelvin Lee, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 08/31/2017
* USD 300,000.00

This project addresses the challenge of identifying and correcting problems that
affect the efficiency of the cell culture system used to produce the majority of
therapeutic proteins. Such biomanufacturing using Chinese hamster ovary (CHO)
cells is part of a $100 billion industry. CHO cells are difficult to modify
using modern genetic engineering tools and are prone to random changes in their
genetic material (DNA). This project will examine proteins that repair damaged
DNA as a cause of the difficulties in genetic engineering as well as the genetic
instability of CHO cells, and promises to generate new insights into the biology
of cell lines as well as developing new tools for these cells. Students will be
trained in an interdisciplinary setting that will expose them to multiple
potential career paths. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is anticipated to
result in more efficient genome editing in Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cells;
performing synthetic biology on these cells is currently problematic, even using
CRISPR and other advanced approaches. The hypothesis will be tested that the DNA
double strand break repair system (a component of the molecular machinery that
is needed to perform genome editing) is flawed, thereby leading to the failure
of synthetic biology approaches in these cells. Defects in the DNA double strand
break repair system may also be the cause of the problematic genome instability
in CHO cells. The goals of the project are 1) to systematically replace each of
the DNA double strand break repair genes from CHO with the corresponding version
from the Chinese hamster following a priority list based on sequence similarity
and function; and 2) after each replacement, to quantitatively evaluate whether
the change has had a measureable impact on efficiency of genome editing and on
chromosomal stability.