* 1539987
* 2015 Plant Cell Dynamics Conferenc; Madison, WI - June 16-19, 2015
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Simon Gilroy, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Gregory W. Warr
* 05/31/2016
* USD 10,000.00

Lay Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is a strong need to develop the
knowledge base that will enable the rational design of improved crop species. To
attain this goal we must learn how plant cells integrate metabolism,
cytoskeletal organization, and vesicle trafficking during growth and in response
to environmental challenges. The focus of this meeting is unique, and seeks to
promote the use of innovative methods for live cell imaging, image
quantification, signal processing, and computational simulations. All
participants will network, have the opportunity to present posters, and many
early career scientists will have opportunities for oral presentations. Student
and post-doc presentations will be geared toward teaching all participants basic
methodology as well as data interpretation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;There is a growing core of plant cell biologists that seek to
better understand the underlying mechanisms of organelle and cell dynamics, who
share similar technical challenges to meet their research goals. The group as a
whole seeks to find the most effective ways to employ combinations of
quantitative imaging techniques, biochemical techniques, and computational tools
to gain a mechanistic understanding of plant cellular systems. Meeting these
goals will require development, implementation and training of faculty, post-
doctoral fellows, graduate and undergraduate students in state-of-the-art
quantitative cell biology methods. The Midwest Plant Cell Biology meeting
provides the opportunity for plant cell biologists to discuss their latest
research, develop collaborations, gain hands-on experience with current state-
of-the-art approaches, and to promote the development of new tools that will
accelerate mechanistic analyses of cell dynamics. The focus of this meeting is
unique, and seeks to promote the use of innovative methods for live cell
imaging, image quantification, signal processing, and computational simulations.
This year's meeting features useful workshops on high-resolution light and
electron microscopy. The keynote speakers for the 2015 meeting are recognized
experts in the analysis of organ and cell and cell growth. All participants will
network, have the opportunity to present posters, and many early career
scientists will have opportunities for oral presentations. The specific
objectives in terms of broader impacts are: 1) To provide an open and inclusive
forum for oral presentations that allows all labs to share research results.
Lead PIs are limited to a brief 5 minute overview of each research area to
define key knowns as well as important knowledge gaps. This limit in the time
allocated to established PIs is to help focus on postdoc, student and beginning
PI presentations. Student and post-doc presentations will be geared toward
teaching all participants basic methodology as well as data interpretation.
Ample time will be devoted for discussion; 2) To provide an opportunity for all
participants to present and discuss their results in evening poster sessions; 3)
To conduct hands-on demonstrations and workshop centered on the topics of super-
resolution light microscopy and imaging using electron tomography.