* 1539363
* 18th International Conference on Recent Progress in Many-Body Theories, August 16-21, 2015
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2016
* Jong Han, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 07/31/2016
* USD 10,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY This award provides partial support for the 18th
International Conference on Recent Progress in Many-Body Theory. The conference
brings together researchers from diverse fields within the discipline of quantum
many-body theory, which is a key component of modern theoretical physics. The
conference facilitates the exchange of methodological knowledge and ideas
between otherwise distant fields by disseminating recent advances that are of
common interest; it also highlights the emergence of new fields. NSF support
will enable the participation of young investigators and underrepresented
minorities who otherwise might not be able to participate, and will also be
available for students and young postdocs who wish to participate in lectures
and tutorials planned for the intervening day between the two conferences. The
conference provides an important educational experience and a networking
opportunity for students and young postdocs.

TECHNICAL SUMMARY This award provides partial support for the 18th International
Conference on Recent Progress in Many-Body Theory. This conference will be held
back-to-back with the 2015 Symposium on Quantum Fluids and Solids at Niagara
Falls on August 16-21, 2015. The conference brings together researchers from
diverse fields within the discipline of quantum many-body theory. The conference
facilitates the exchange of methodological knowledge and ideas between otherwise
distant fields by disseminating recent advances that are of common interest; it
also highlights the emergence of new fields. Topics covered include: many-body
problems in quantum fluids, nuclear physics, correlated electron physics,
relativistic many-body theory, cold gases, and new techniques. The invited
speakers include recognized international experts. The conference's relatively
small size offers the benefit of closer and more effective interactions among
the participants. NSF support will enable the participation of young
investigators and underrepresented minorities who otherwise might not be able to
participate, and will also be available for students and young postdocs who wish
to participate in lectures and tutorials planned for the intervening day between
the two conferences. The conference provides an important educational experience
and a networking opportunity for students and postdocs.