* 1539322
* Workshop on Data Science, Learning, and Applications to Biomedical and Health Sciences
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Nabil Adam, Rutgers University Newark
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 05/31/2016
* USD 49,280.00

This proposal requests funds to hold the Workshop on Data Science, Learning, and
Applications to Biomedical and Health Sciences with the New York Academy of
Sciences. The meeting will bring together experts from the areas of computer
science, health and medical research. Health research and healthcare have
undergone a decade of evolution in the expansion of available electronic data.
Notable among these areas are the digitization of electronic health records, the
aggregation of research and development data into databases by pharmaceutical
companies and the release of decades of stored patient data by the federal
government for research purposes and the onset of patient-self tracking.
Together, these unprecedented increases in data volume, variety, and velocity,
collectively termed 'Big Data', present a unique opportunity to gain insights,
derive knowledge and foster discovery that will result in improved patient
outcomes, reduced costs and accelerated biomedical advances. However,
effectively dealing with this massive information and enabling investigators to
enhance its utility will require a multidisciplinary approach. Multiple
capabilities must be applied in joint research programs to develop relevant
questions, to design approaches to address those questions and to develop tools
that can be disseminated to the entire scientific community to train tomorrow's
researchers in working with big data. The scope of this workshop will span the
following themes: neuroscience and cancer, and cardiovascular disease using data
from multiple sources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop is expected to have a
significant impact the area of big data and health. The focus of the workshop is
develop a big data research agenda for this area and enable connections and
collaborations among scientists from academia, industry, and government,
clinicians and investigators engaged in technology development, deployment, and
use. Specifically, the workshop will provide a forum for these investigators to
assess the state-of-the-art research in big data and health and identify related
challenges. The workshop results are likely to include new research directions
that will be identified by the participants will be publicized to the research
community through publications and a workshop website. The results dissemination
is expected to inform and motivate the big data in health research community,
interdisciplinary collaboration, educational activities, and spur other
innovative research directions. As noted above, the broader impacts of the
meeting are to facilitate progress in the field and stimulate conversations,
connections, and collaborations that will lead toward better informed and
effective generation and use of big data in health research.