* 1539900
* RCN-UBE: Network for Integrating Bioinformatics into Life Sciences Education (NIBLSE)
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2021
* Eric Triplett, University of Nebraska at Omaha
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 08/31/2021
* USD 499,937.00

The University of Nebraska at Omaha has received a Research Coordination Network
- Undergraduate Biology Education award for their project entitled Network for
Integrating Bioinformatics into Life Sciences Education (NIBLSE). The long-term
goal of this project is to establish bioinformatics as an essential component of
undergraduate life sciences curricula nationwide. The field of bioinformatics,
which uses techniques from computer science to store, manage, and analyze large
biological data sets, has arisen to meet the challenges associated with such
large data sets. It is now an important interdisciplinary field that is central
to studying many aspects of biology, yet it is not an integral part of most
biology curricula nationwide. The current project is informed by the results of
the successful conference held by the PI team for their RCN-UBE Incubator
project (DBI-134559).

In order to achieve full integration of bioinformatics into undergraduate life
sciences education, NIBLSE is establishing a permanent network of investigators
committed to this goal. The Leadership Team and Steering Committee are using the
literature and their collective expertise to identify, vet, and refine a set of
bioinformatics core competencies for inclusion in life sciences curricula. They
are also identifying and vetting assessment tools that align with the core
competencies and that will facilitate educational research related to the
integration of bioinformatics into biology curricula. Finally, they are
developing systems to organize and simplify dissemination of curricular
materials, assessment tools, and professional development resources. The
materials and resources developed by the network are having a broad impact on
undergraduate education in the life sciences by enabling educators nationwide to
effectively apply bioinformatics knowledge and skills to their teaching and
research. This project is funded jointly by the Directorate for Biological
Sciences, Division of Biological Infrastructure and the Directorate for
Education and Human Resources, Division of Undergraduate Education in support of
efforts to address the challenges posed in Vision and Change in Undergraduate
Education: A Call to Action http://visionandchange.org/finalreport/.