* 1539139
* Comparative Analysis of Bend Dominated and Stretch Dominated Titanium Lattice Structures
* EDU,EES
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2019
* Harry Whiting, Navajo Technical University
* Standard Grant
* Jody Chase
* 05/31/2019
* USD 348,396.00

A goal of the Tribal Colleges and Universities Program (TCUP) is to increase the
science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) instructional and
research capacities of specific institutions of higher education that serve the
Nation's indigenous students. Expanding the STEM curricular offerings at these
institutions expands the opportunities of their students to pursue challenging,
rewarding careers in STEM fields, provides for research studies in areas that
may be culturally significant, and encourages a community and generational
appreciation for science and mathematics education. This project aligns directly
with that goal, and moreover will increase the body of knowledge on the material
properties of sandwich beam parts created by selective laser melting using
titanium.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Navajo Technical University (NTU) will examine
data from two different designs and their meanings and lay the groundwork for
comparing other sandwich beam designs, thereby leading to designs for optimum
strength-to-weight ratio. The research will explore two constructs, stretch-
dominated (truss-type lattice cells) and bend-dominated (dodecahedron-type
lattice cells) beam structures, using simple supported bending experiments. The
research will explore creating and simulating 3D computer models of the test
specimens using off-the-shelf analysis software. NTU will collaborate with
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory (LLNL), which will include but not be
limited to guiding appropriate structure designs for testing and testing process
data collection. Another aspect of testing will use a high-speed camera system
to gain full view analysis of the forces, force vectors and in-process white
light scanning.The project also uses cutting edge techniques that capture real-
time force data to plot accordingly, which will provide a more expansive
interpretation of test data. Comparing test specimens created on two different
machines with dissimilar surface finishes may demonstrate an impact on the test
specimens' ability to resist bending forces.