* 1539133
* RIDIR:  Collaborative Research: Enabling Access to and Analysis of Shared Daylong Child and Family Audio Data
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2015,02/29/2020
* Mark VanDam, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 02/29/2020
* USD 281,958.00

A child's language development in the first few years of life predicts long-term
cognitive development, academic achievement, and expected income as an adult.
Early language development in turn depends on linguistic interactions with
adults. Increasingly, researchers are using daylong audio recordings to study
child language development and child-caregiver interactions. Compared to short
language samples, daylong recordings capture the full range of experiences a
child has over the course of a day. Daylong audio recordings are also being used
in applied settings. For example, studies show that by the time they enter First
Grade, children from higher socioeconomic backgrounds hear tens of millions more
words than children from lower socioeconomic backgrounds, perpetuating social
inequalities. Multiple large-scale intervention projects targeting low
socioeconomic households, including the Thirty Million Words Initiative in
Chicago and the Providence Talks program, are using daylong audio recordings to
provide automated, personalized feedback to parents on when and how often their
child hears adult words and experiences conversational turns. The features of
daylong recordings that are advantageous for researchers and practitioners also
pose unique challenges. For one, their long durations are ideal for studying the
temporal dynamics of child-adult interaction, but taking advantage of the long
durations requires the enlistment of automated speech recognition technology.
Current automatic speech recognition systems have difficulties with child speech
and are challenged by the noisy and varied acoustic environments represented in
the recordings. Another challenge is that the recordings capture private moments
that require long hours of human listening to remove. This makes it difficult
for researchers to share the recordings publicly, so that the potential value of
the recordings collected by individual research labs is not fully
realized.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will create a new resource, called
HomeBank, that will have three key components: (1) a public dataset containing
daylong audio recordings that have had private information removed by human
listeners, (2) a larger dataset containing about ten to one hundred times as
many hours of recording that have not had private information removed and will
be free but restricted to those who have demonstrated training in human research
ethics, and (3) an open-source repository of computer programs to automatically
analyze the daylong audio recordings. HomeBank will take advantage of an
existing cyberinfrastructure for sharing linguistic data called TalkBank. The
daylong audio recordings included in the datasets will represent both typically
developing and clinical groups, a range of ages from newborn infants to school
age children, and a range of language and socioeconomic backgrounds. We expect
the primary users to be basic and applied child development researchers as well
as engineers developing automatic speech recognition technologies. The free-to-
access database and the open source computer programs will ultimately improve
both the data on which early interventions are based and the tools available for
providing parents with feedback on the linguistic input they provide their
children.