* 1539712
* Explaining Transboundary Flows of Hazardous Waste in North America
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2015,02/28/2018
* Sarah Moore, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Antoinette WinklerPrins
* 02/28/2018
* USD 399,962.00

This project investigates transnational trade in hazardous waste among specific
municipalities in North America. It analyzes the interplay of different
regulatory regimes - those directed at maintaining free trade within the region
and those aimed at environmental protection for vulnerable populations - in
determining which locations export and import hazardous waste. Further, it seeks
to understand how specific actors (regulators, policy-makers, waste managers)
negotiate economic and environmental regulations in their daily decision-making
around trading waste transnationally. This project will explain and inform
decision-making around this trade by mapping the existing flows of hazardous
waste among Canada, Mexico, and the United States and analyzing the conditions
under which these flows concentrate hazardous waste in specific sites. A new
dataset, as well as an interactive web mapping tool, will be made available to
the public, regulators, policy makers, and researchers across disciplines.
Additionally, this project offers significant conceptual innovation through
focusing on how the transnational trade is conducted by and impacts subnational
sites like cities and metropolitan areas. The Commission for Environmental
Cooperation has recently called the transnational hazardous waste trade one of
the top environmental concerns in North America. To help inform reasonable
management of this trade, research findings will be disseminated to regulators
in Canada, Mexico, and the United States beginning with The Office of the
Inspector General at the EPA with whom the PI has agreed to share project
results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More than one million tons of hazardous waste are
traded among Canada, Mexico, and the United States each year. In addition to
managing a significant proportion of their own waste, all three North American
countries import significant amounts of hazardous waste. These facts are
somewhat at odds with two predominant ways of theorizing the trade in hazardous
waste: the "first-best world" of environmental economics and the "pollution
haven hypothesis". Both of these approaches assume that the trade in waste is
consistently from richer to poorer countries, an assumption that undergirds most
policy-making around the hazardous waste trade. Given the failure of these
theories to predict contemporary flows of hazardous waste in North America, this
project seeks to explain and inform decision-making around hazardous waste
trading among North American countries by asking: What are the existing flows of
hazardous waste among Canada, Mexico, and the United States and to what degree
and under what conditions do these flows concentrate hazardous waste in specific
sites? To address these questions, this project will map the volume and
directionality of trade transactions using interactive and web-based geographic
visualization techniques, 2) analyze regulatory regimes in importing sites and
3) conduct case studies in selected sites.