* 1539804
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Levels and Social Determinants of Nutritional Outcomes
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2016,02/28/2018
* Michael White, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Toby Parcel
* 02/28/2018
* USD 11,844.00

SES-1539804 Michael White Vaidya Yashas Brown University

Shifts in diets, physical activity and nutritional outcomes are taking place
across the world and are producing poor nutritional outcomes at different
extremes. That is, malnutrition and obesity might co-exist within a particular
society. This dissertation research will collect body measurements and biomarker
data to investigate whether outcomes on the extremes of nutritional spectrum co-
exist together and at what units of analysis. Specifically, the investigator
will study nutritional and health outcomes and their causes at finer spatial
scales and link these individual outcomes to household and background factors
that contribute to health. The project takes advantage of existing longitudinal
data from the mid-1990s, and ongoing fieldwork that tracks demographic and
social changes. This project will also looks at early-life and other influences
on health. Thus, prospective and retrospective data will be analyzed to
determine early-life factors that might affect current nutritional outcomes. The
literature on the nutrition transition has focused on trends at the country or
region-level. The dual burden of undernutrition and over nutrition is one
feature of this nutritional transition.

Lower and Middle Income (LMICs) countries are now also experiencing spatial and
urban transformations, changes in food production, globalization and increasing
social inequalities that are pinpointed as factors responsible for shifts in
nutritional outcomes and towards increased diet-related Non-communicable
Diseases (NCDs). The social, and not necessarily economic, roots of this shift
has allowed "epidemics" of over nutrition and related chronic NCDs to extend
beyond high-income countries to those usually classified as developing
countries. The public-health- interpretation often presents a linear theory of
this societal transformation. This project takes a sociologically informed view,
which recognizes that the social processes driving these shifts are unevenly
distributed. It focuses more on the micro processes within the community and
household that might result in heterogeneous consequences like extreme
nutritional outcomes, now referred to as the dual burden. This dual burden
phenomenon allows a possibility where undernutrition and over nutrition might
represent different facets of deprivation. The high and continued prevalence of
undernutrition at early ages does not negate the possibility of later-life
problems of over nutrition. The related burden of NCDs for South Asia, the
region being studied, has risen at a rate exceeding global rates. The dual
nutritional status burden examined in this project has a potential impact on
national healthcare policy, international aid objectives and more. Thus, the
detection and determinants of such a dual burden is a concern for both
individuals and communities. The study builds on collaboration with an existing
research site in Nepal, the Chitwan Valley Family Study (CVFS).