* 1539767
* Gendering Science: International Conference Travel
* SBE,SES
* 05/15/2015,04/30/2016
* Donald Opitz, DePaul University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 04/30/2016
* USD 15,876.00

General Audience Summary

This project will support the participation of US scholars in the international
conference, "Gendering Science: Women and Men Producing Knowledge," to be held
at Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic. The conference is organized by
the Commission on Women and Gender Studies in the History of Science, Technology
and Medicine in collaboration with the Czech National Contact Centre for Gender
& Science, the Czech Academy of Sciences, and several units of Charles
University. The goal of the conference is to bring international scholars
together to advance scholarly efforts to move beyond a focus on how women have
been marginalized in science by analyzing the collaborations between women and
men in knowledge production. The outcomes of this conference will include
promotion of international intellectual interchange, scholarship, and broad
dissemination. STEM fields remain underrepresented by women, and this is
especially true in the physical sciences, engineering, computer sciences, and
mathematics. Within the history of science, gender questions in science continue
to be neglected at an extent incommensurate with the attention they deserve.

Technical Summary

The US participants on this grant include both senior scholars, some of whom are
founding members of the Commission, and junior scholars whose work would greatly
benefit from the intellectual dialogue that this conference will promote. All
seven of the participants plus the principal investigator are scheduled to
present in sessions at the conference, which is organized to promote STS
scholarship on gender and science internationally. Since 1981, the commission
has advanced scholarship in this area of STS. In recent years, the Commission
has been particularly focused on increasing participation of early career
scholars and scholars from economically distressed regions, and promoting
scholarship that highlights continuing areas of gender underrepresentation in
STEM fields. This conference is a pioneering attempt to expand the focus beyond
"women in science," by posing a theme that concerns the dynamics of both women
and men producing knowledge. Both the historiography of science and gender
demographics of science will benefit from this conference and the US
contingent's participation.