* 1539234
* CAREER: Water and Energy Cycle Research and Education from the Stable Water Isotope Budget Near a Tall Tower in the Colorado Front Range
* GEO,AGS
* 10/13/2014,10/31/2017
* David Noone, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 10/31/2017
* USD 217,887.00

This project will observe and analyze the stable isotope composition of water
vapor and precipitation, primarily at the 300 meter Boulder Atmospheric
Observatory tower. The measurements will be made using an optical measurement
technology which has only recently become available, and which allows continuous
in-situ observations to be made on a practical basis. Further measurements will
be taken of the size distribution of precipitation hydrometeors at the top and
bottom of the tower, as well as measurements of the surface fluxes of sensible
and latent heat (using a sonic anemometer and a high speed hygrometer) and soil
heat flux (using a conductive plate). These measurements will complement
existing measurements of carbon monoxide (CO), and carbon dioxide (CO2), and
meteorology at the tower, and the water vapor measurements would be taken at the
same heights as the CO and CO2 measurements, at 22, 100, and 300 meters. In
addition, measurements of the isotopic composition of precipitation and soil
water would be taken by students at several middle schools in the region and
analyzed for isotopic composition. The middle schools will also be supplied with
meteorological observing stations, and students will take meteorological
measurements and receive instruction on atmospheric processes and the science of
isotope hydrology. The research seeks to evaluate 1) the role of rainfall
evaporation (virga) in controlling the isotopic composition and humidity of the
summertime boundary layer, 2) the partioning of the surface energy and water
fluxes, through isotopic constraints on the transpiration fraction of surface
latent heating, and 3) the degree to which pairing water isotope measurements
with other gas measurements, such as CO2 concentration, yield improved estimates
of gas exchange between the surface and the overlying atmosphere. The
measurements will be used to constrain and validate simulations from the
Community Land and Community Atmosphere Models.

The isotopic composition of precipitation and water vapor contains a wealth of
useful information, including the temperature at which evaporation occurs over
the ocean, the extent to which evapotranspiration over land serves as a source
for subsequent precipitation (i.e. the strength of the land-atmosphere
coupling), the pathways of water vapor transport in the atmosphere, and the
strength of trace gas exchange (including CO2) between land and atmosphere. But
the multitude of factors determining isotopic composition makes it difficult to
extract the useful information, particularly given our limited quantitative
understanding of some of the physical processes. Research conducted under this
project will thus serve the climate science community by helping to deconvolve
the factors determining isotopic composition, and unlock the valuable
climatological information contained in it. In addition, the participation of
middle school students in the project will serve the general public, including
underrepresented groups, in surrounding communities by offering an early
exposure to scientific research. Educational activities will also take place at
the University of Colorado involving graduate and undergraduate students,
including a project in which engineering students design and build a mechanical
device to collect rain and snow samples.