* 1539817
* Tracking Mobile Marine Species: Spatial Data, Visualization, and the Science-Policy Interface
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2015,01/31/2019
* Andre Boustany, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Jacqueline Vadjunec
* 01/31/2019
* USD 167,587.00

This research project will examine how scientific studies that yield
spatiotemporal data and visual representations of mobile species shape policy
debates about control over highly migratory ocean resources and property. The
project will provide new insights regarding the connections among the
production, visualization, and interpretation of tracking data and their
subsequent interpretation in science-policy relations. The interdisciplinary
team of investigators will integrate the research areas of mobile marine
resources and the control relations governing them to address questions dealing
with resource control in the oceans. Project findings will provide new
perspectives to resource managers and policy makers about the geographic range
of transboundary marine resources and information to facilitate the development
and implementation of meaningful conservation measures. Building on their
extensive collective experience in advising governments, international, and
regional and local organizations about the scientific and policy aspects of
ocean management, the investigators will develop and disseminate study findings
in academic and policy circles as well as to conservation and industry
stakeholders engaged in marine resource management.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By
studying the origins, products, and uses of tracking projects, this research
project will link the relationship between science and policy to scholarship on
resource control. The investigators will focus on four sets of core questions:
(1) How do scientific representations of tagging data inform management debate
and practice? (2) How have tagging data influenced the ways resource claims are
made and assigned by and among nation-states, and how do interpretations of
tagging data influence policy? (3) How do scientists determine the ways they
visually represent their data to stakeholders? (4) How have policy and
management needs influenced the research questions, species and study areas on
which tagging studies are initiated? The investigators will analyze seminal
studies, and they will employ an information cycle analysis, survey tools,
meeting observations, and structured and semi-structured interviews to explore
the intersections between representations of mobile marine resources and the
policy-building processes to control or claim them at multiple governance
levels. Data will be analyzed through transcription, coding, and the use of
quantitative and qualitative survey and textual analysis software. Project
findings will provide new perspectives regarding how science-policy
relationships intersect with questions of resource-control decision making
involving local, regional, and global stakeholders.