* 1539727
* Big Data Regional Innovation Hubs Workshops: Charrettes for Accelerating the Big Data Innovation Ecosystem
* CSE,IIS
* 03/15/2015,02/29/2016
* Camille Mulligan, USENIX Association
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 02/29/2016
* USD 372,334.00

As a part of a White House sponsored "Data to Knowledge to Action" event held in
November 2013, dozens of public and private organizations met to announce an
array of Big Data related collaborations. To sustain the forward momentum of the
Data2Action event, the National Science Foundation has been working to establish
a national network of "Big Data Regional Innovation Hubs." These hubs will
stimulate, track, and help sustain new regional and grassroots partnerships
around Big Data. This series of 5 workshops will support four Big Data Regional
Innovation Hubs centered in the Northeast, West, Midwest, and South regions the
United States. These hubs will help Big Data stakeholders from different sectors
(e.g. industry, academia, non-profits, local government) partner around
collaborative projects that will further Big Data innovation in their geographic
region. The Hubs could take on activities including but not limited to
accelerating development of Big Data solutions, forging collaborations across
sectors, help share best practices, speed up technology transfer, instigate
dialogue between thought leaders on social impacts of Big Data, and supporting
the education and training of the Big Data workforce. The first four events will
provide a space for stakeholders to exchange ideas, discuss potential projects,
and devise a set of actionable goals within their region. The final summary
event will bring together members of each of the four regions together to
synthesize their conclusions and develop action items, as well as discuss cross
regional-collaboration. As a part of this workshop series, a virtual community
platform will be established so that interested stakeholders that are not able
to attend the live events can connect and collaborated with other interested
parties in their region; this platform will be made available and open to users
for one year. The primary outcome of this meeting will be a consensus on the
design and governance of each regional Hub by major Big Data stakeholders in the
region and plan of action for implementing the Hub. A summary of this
information will be made available in written form by workshop organizers;
supplemental information will be available on the virtual platform and supplied
by workshop participants.