* 1539795
* RUI: Coping with Food and Water Insecurity: Vulnerability and Resilience of Small Farmers to Environmental Hazards
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2015,02/29/2020
* William Sundstrom, Santa Clara University
* Standard Grant
* Scott Freundschuh
* 02/29/2020
* USD 272,555.00

This project will develop an integrated assessment of smallholders' food and
water insecurity and analyze the factors that contribute to livelihood
resilience in the context of multiple hazards. In spite of their significant
contributions to food supplies and resource conservation, smallholders
constitute a substantial portion of the world's food insecure population. This
study focuses on the coffee-growing regions of northern Nicaragua as a case in
point, where a rapidly spreading coffee pathogen (coffee leaf rust), drought,
and sharp increases in food prices for several staples threaten a humanitarian
crisis, while the region continues its slow recovery from decades of violent
conflict and prepares for the effects of climate change. The analysis will
incorporate data that will be collected from household-level surveys and
interviews, governmental and non-governmental organizations, biophysical
measurements, GIS (geographic information systems) mapping and analysis, and
climate modeling to identify what factors strengthen smallholders' food and
water security. The findings will inform global efforts to link climate adaption
and disaster risk reduction with sustainable development, and have particular
relevance for Latin American producers as well as the coffee industry in the
United States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study uses a livelihoods perspective to
examine both food and water security within an entitlement and capabilities
framework. The interdisciplinary research team will involve faculty, local
residents, and underrepresented undergraduate students in a participatory
process that uses focus groups, interviews, and community-based water resource
monitoring to develop household-level survey tools for an integrated assessment
of food and water access and responses to past and present hazards. Using a
nested scales approach, longitudinal survey results will be integrated with
quantitative, qualitative, and geospatial data on household coping experiences,
gendered responses, local institutions, markets, international development
assistance, the extent of the coffee leaf rust outbreak, variability in
precipitation and water availability, and downscaled models of future climate
projections. Exploiting this rich data set, the team will combine qualitative
results and regression models to analyze (1) the relationships linking farmer
food insecurity and water insecurity to vulnerability and livelihood resilience;
(2) the relationships connecting hydro-climatic variability with the coffee leaf
rust outbreak and livelihood vulnerability; and (3) the determinants of
household vulnerability as well as the adaptations, food and water systems, and
institutions that are more likely to advance smallholder' livelihood resilience.
This project will generate new methods for the integrated evaluation of
household food and water insecurities that are linked to local waterscapes,
climatic conditions, livelihoods, and institutions, and will inform broader
theories of vulnerability and resilience in the context of risk from global
change.