* 1539047
* Real-Time Indoor and Outdoor Simultaneous Localization and Mapping
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2015,02/29/2020
* Ting Zhu, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 02/29/2020
* USD 266,000.00

Location-based service has been ranked as #1 in top 10 technology trends by Time
magazine, with potential applications in the area of location-based advertising,
recommendation, navigation, asset recovery, gaming, etc. Lots of companies are
investigating and improving the location-based services. For example, Google Map
is working on adding Google Store Views. However, most of the existing indoor
and outdoor maps are relatively static. In reality, the indoor and outdoor
environments may dynamically change over time. Therefore, there is a pressing
need for novel technologies and systems to improve simultaneous localization,
mapping, and navigation in modern cities (both outdoor and indoor). Moreover, in
many applications, such as disaster recovery, rescuers have to cooperate with
other team members to perform their tasks. Therefore, it is highly desirable
that rescuers can accurately know the relative positions of their peers in real-
time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project introduces a holistic approach for
providing real-time light-weight and accurate relative positioning techniques to
detect peers in both indoor and outdoor environment. The outcome of this
research will constitute a significant advance in the development of theoretical
foundations and practical algorithms for simultaneous localization and mapping.
The broader impact of this work will be further amplified by (i) improving
curriculum development with enhanced course projects; (ii) disseminating
research results through high-profile tutorials and open-source sites; (iii)
raising interest in technology among K-12 students and under-represented
minority groups through open houses; and (iv) supporting a talented minority PhD
student to successfully accomplish the doctoral study.