* 1539936
* MEETING: Evolutionary Endocrinology: Hormones as Mediators of Evolutionary Phenomena (SICB Symposium, January 5, 2016 in Portland, OR)
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2016
* Frances Bonier, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* emilia martins
* 07/31/2016
* USD 14,680.00

This conference will bring together leading experts to explore the importance of
hormones in evolutionary research. A central goal of modern biology is to
understand the complex networks through which genes are translated into
organisms. Historically, the field of endocrinology has played a large part in
this endeavor by discovering the many pathways through which hormones regulate
the behavior, development, and physiology of organisms. In parallel, the field
of evolutionary biology has developed the statistical tools for predicting how
both genes and organisms evolve in response to selection, as well as a variety
of experimental techniques for testing these predictions. Yet, evolutionary
biologists have rarely sought to incorporate hormones and endocrine pathways
into evolutionary theory, and most endocrinologists still focus on a handful of
"model organisms," providing relatively little evolutionary context for their
mechanistic studies. With the increasing availability of genomic data from non-
model species and the relative ease with which "next-generation" sequencing
technologies now permit scientists to assess the roles of hormones in
coordinating the expression of thousands of genes, these fields are ripe for
synthesis under the emerging framework of Evolutionary Endocrinology.

Held at the annual meeting of the Society for Integrative and Comparative
Biology, this conference will bring together endocrinologists and evolutionary
biologists to explore the many roles of hormones in mediating phenomena that are
at the forefront of modern evolutionary research. It will establish SICB as the
home for this emerging field while leveraging this society's diverse network of
Divisions with complementary views (Comparative Endocrinology, Ecology &
Evolution, Evolutionary Developmental Biology, Animal Behavior). The award will
support symposium speakers who encompass a diverse mix of genders, career
stages, focal species, endocrine pathways, and evolutionary phenomena. It will
also support a complementary session by a similarly diverse lineup of students,
postdocs and early career scientists, along with online resources and networking
events designed to foster collaboration between these young investigators and
established leaders in the field. Participants will each contribute a peer-
reviewed article to a special issue of Integrative and Comparative Biology.
Conference organizers will provide a synthetic overview and prospectus piece
designed to identify and develop actionable strategies for a synthetic field of
Evolutionary Endocrinology to emerge as a foundation for training the next
generation of integrative scientists.