* 1539090
* Can Network Measures Serve as Indicators of Knowledge Creation and Flow? A Workshop Proposal
* SBE,NCSE
* 09/01/2015,04/30/2017
* Caroline Wagner, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Mark Fiegener
* 04/30/2017
* USD 28,222.00

Government sponsored research and development (R&D) is widely viewed as
providing social and economic value whose full extent is challenging to measure.
The spectrum of R&D activities - hypotheses, trials, reflections - involves
communications processes that are rarely seen or accounted for in evaluation
processes. Yet we know that effective and efficient communications are essential
for optimal outcomes. The challenge of measuring or gaining insight into these
processes means that funders understand little about how to guide or assess
communications within science. Very few studies have attempted to quantify or
assess the contribution of these "intangible" processes within R&D. This
workshop will bring together leading theorists, analysts, and users to explore
the possibility that network measures are indicators of dynamics of knowledge
creation.

Network analysis offers tools and measures to analyze communications
interactions in scientific research. With the advent of advanced computing,
network analysis has been vitalized as a tool for studying communications
processes. Huge networks, such as the Worldwide Web or global linkages among
scientists, can be created. Deductive reasoning has been applied to these
networks as common patterns have been observed. Amazingly, many real-world
networks have been shown to exhibit highly reproducible and often universal
characteristics. These features suggest that network analysis may serve as
indicators of the underlying activities which they represent, aiding evaluation,
planning, and guidance with centrality, clustering, and flows emerging as
possible indicators of dynamics in science research. While we continue to lack a
general predictive framework that can treat dynamical models using unified
theoretical tools, it may be possible to begin to standardize measures related
to communications processes within basic sciences.