* 1539746
* Financing Strategies and Reducing Carbon Emissions from Cookstoves
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2015,02/29/2020
* Gregory Simon, University of Colorado at Denver-Downtown Campus
* Standard Grant
* Scott Freundschuh
* 02/29/2020
* USD 200,000.00

This research project will examine the impacts of new forms of financing on the
adoption and use of new cookstove technologies designed to reduce toxic and
environmentally harmful emissions and improve the health of household members
using the stoves. Efforts to spur the replacement of traditional, high
pollution-emitting stoves with cleaner, more modern devices have been supported
by a number of international programs, with efforts led by the Global Alliance
for Clean Cookstoves, which was created by the United Nations. This research
project will investigate whether carbon financing is aiding or hindering the
delivery of cooking technologies, their compatibility with household
preferences, and their effectiveness at reducing indoor air pollution. The
project will improve understanding of carbon market impacts on household-scale
development as well as how carbon mitigation programs produce benefits and
burdens that often accumulate in geographically and socially uneven ways. The
project will advance scholarship in development geography by contributing to
debates assessing the development impacts of carbon markets and by pinpointing
the roles played by a diverse set of actors within complex carbon-based
development projects. Project findings will help increase the health and
development benefits of low carbon technology interventions and provide new
perspectives on ways in which rural sustainable development activities can
complement new strategies for livelihoods that rely on less carbon.

With nearly one-half of the world's population using rudimentary cookstoves, the
likelihood of toxic emissions leading to severe health problems is extremely
high. Traditional cookstoves also emit large amounts of greenhouse gases,
thereby contributing to atmospheric pollution and increasing the carbon
footprint in many parts of the world. This project will focus on three core
questions: (1) How does carbon financing influence the distribution of stoves
with respect to stove affordability, household suitability and emissions
performance? (2) How can supply chains using carbon finance be modified to
improve results along each of those factors? (3) How do households influence
development outcomes along the supply chain? The investigators will conduct
household and production chain surveys as well as management agency interviews
in two cookstove project regions in India to gain insights into decisions made
for allocating flows of carbon finance to cookstove projects and strategies for
improving the integration of carbon markets. They will statistically analyze
data to determine the relationships among responses, subject attributes, and
other conditions. Preexisting stove emissions data for all stoves will be
analyzed to determine household air pollution levels for all pre- and post-
carbon finance stove models. Project findings will shed light on the
effectiveness of programs supported by the U.S. that encourage the adoption of
energy-efficient affordable stoves that release fewer pollutants, improve human
health, reduce environmental degradation, and foster economic growth.