* 1539724
* Joint US-Africa Materials Advanced Studies Institute
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2015,12/31/2019
* Peter Green, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 12/31/2019
* USD 326,530.00

Non-technical Abstract: With support from the Office of Special Programs in the
Division of Materials Research and the Office of International Science and
Engineering, the Joint U.S.-Africa Materials Advanced Studies Institute is a
two-week educational institute that serves to connect materials students and
researchers in the United States with those in Africa and other parts of the
developed world. It will benefit U.S. participants because it will immerse them
in a rich, transcontinental network of collaborators from Africa and Europe. The
June 2016 school on "Materials for Sustainable Energy" will enable them to
explore shared scientific challenges and to help co-generate new knowledge and
innovative solutions with colleagues who bring different national, cultural and
institutional perspectives. World-renowned experts drawn from the United States,
Africa and Europe will teach the courses and provide opportunities for hands-on
learning. The institute, part of an ongoing effort called the Joint Undertaking
for an African Materials Initiative (JUAMI), promises to strengthen the capacity
of the African Materials Science community by providing short-term graduate
level training of African students and researchers by some of the world's top
scientists during the two-week school in Arusha, Tanzania.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract: Motivated by the need to develop and
sustain positive international scientific relationships between the United
States and African scientific communities, the Joint U.S.-Africa Materials
Advanced Studies Institute employs a unique format to address four primary
concerns: the creation of new knowledge and innovative solutions through cross-
cultural collaborations, the need for U.S. graduate students and faculty to be
engaged in international research collaborations and networks, the value to the
United States of remaining a desired collaboration partner for African
counterparts, and the need for graduate level training in materials science in
Africa. This two-week school, which follows on earlier such schools, will focus
on "Materials for Sustainable Energy", a topic at the frontier of materials
research, with lectures offered by world-renowned experts recruited both
internationally and locally. The curriculum includes directed hands-on
activities, lectures, and the preparation/presentation of group proposals that
give rise to ongoing cross-cultural collaborative research projects. Experts
from the Searle Center for Advancing Learning and Teaching at Northwestern
University will provide ongoing assessment to quantify educational outcomes and
improve pedagogy and program structure. The 2016 school takes advantage of
JUAMI's existing clearing house to connect researchers and resources across
international boundaries. The institute's unique format, essentially a hybrid
between a state-of-the-art conference, advanced seminars and hands-on learning
opportunities, augmented with a virtual gathering place, is key to achieving
mutual benefit for the United States and for Africa. This advanced studies
institute will also tap into the rich talent pool in Africa, focusing that
potential on a topic of great importance to Africa, the United States and the
world. By building and sustaining links with African students, researchers and
institutions, this institute and JUAMI's ongoing efforts could also prove
valuable for recruiting excellent students to the United States for graduate
study.