* 1539750
* Urban Agriculture, Policy Making, and Sustainability
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2015,02/29/2020
* Eugene McCann, Portland State University
* Standard Grant
* Scott Freundschuh
* 02/29/2020
* USD 249,978.00

This research project will examine the complex and sometimes contradictory
contributions of examines urban agriculture to urban sustainability efforts as
well as the role of policy and regulation in these processes. Widely celebrated
as a key component of the "sustainable city," urban agriculture has enjoyed
growing popularity in recent years, with new municipal policies following suit.
Debates among different groups have called into question issues related to the
equity of access, social justice, and possible developmental by-products of
gardening activity. This project will provide new information and insights
regarding the immediate concerns of food systems planners, policymakers, and
practitioners concerned with urban food access and food system resilience. The
project will expand knowledge about the multiple motivations and forms of urban
agriculture as well as how these differ across race, class, and gender lines.
More broadly, project findings will enhance understanding in urban geography by
emphasizing the complex relational processes that interact to shape cities. By
examining how urban agriculture differs within and among cities and among
diverse cultural or socioeconomic groups, this project will facilitate the
development of more inclusive food policies that are better tailored to the
needs of low-income, underrepresented populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
investigators will use geospatial analysis, a mail survey, focus groups, in-
depth interviews, participant observation, and document analysis to answer sets
of research questions: (1) How do various forms of urban agriculture, the
motivations of urban agriculturalists, and engagement with urban agriculture
advocacy and food policy making differ within and among cities? (2) How have the
institutionalization and implementation of municipal food policies contributed
to and/or perpetuated the uneven social and spatial distribution of urban
agriculture? (3) How have cities learned and borrowed food policy models from
each other, and how have these policies opened and/or closed spaces for
political engagement? The investigators will examine urban agriculture as a
social and spatial phenomenon that both fosters and contests processes of
urbanization. They will conduct a comparative study of urban agriculture and
related processes in Portland, Oregon, and Vancouver, British Columbia, but
project findings will have implications for many other cities in North America
and elsewhere.