* 1539938
* I/UCRC Phase III:  Center for Child Injury Prevention Studies
* ENG,EEC
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2020
* Flaura Winston, The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 07/31/2020
* USD 495,506.00

This third phase of support for the Center for Child Injury Prevention Studies
builds on a strong foundation that will, at the end of five years, transition
into sustainability with the help of a broad base of industry and interested
government agency support. This Industry/University Cooperative Research Center
is the only one devoted to the study of child, youth, and young adult automotive
injury and injury prevention; and it applies its leadership position, cutting
edge research, and synergistic partnerships to achieve its mission, by
facilitating the conduct of scientific inquiry into child automotive injuries
and translating these findings into commercial applications, interventions,
policies, and public education programs for prevention. The fundamental idea
behind the Center is that children, youth, and young adults are not small adults
(mechanically, psychologically, developmentally, or socially) and car crash
injuries are one of their leading causes of death and acquired disability.
Effective interventions, based on sound scientific foundations to car crash
injuries in these age groups and their causes, are a national priority. As
regulation, technology and consumer behavior and demand become increasingly
complex and sophisticated, industry and government research and findings from
the Center are able to guide strategies to protect our nation's children. The
Center for Child Injury Prevention Studies works collaboratively with industry
across five related themes: biomechanics; technological solutions; human
factors; safety promotion and education; and evaluation; and over the course of
the last ten years the Center has more than quadrupled its dues paying
membership from 5 to 22 members, initiating and completing 92 individual
research projects that heavily leverage private sector funds. Broader impacts of
the Center include student education and engagement in research, promoting the
national health by providing fundamental research on child injuries and
strategies for prevention, and performing precompetitive research of interest to
a wide variety of private sector and governmental sponsors.

In this renewal phase (Phase III), Center leadership and its Industrial Advisory
Board will continue to refine Center processes that they develop collaboratively
to ensure that research carried out by the Center is diverse and responsive to
scientific and industry needs. In the new phase, the Center is expanding its
intellectual and research reach from automotive injuries and prevention to
include those of injuries related to sports and aviation.