* 1539602
* MATH:EAGER:Promoting Undergraduate Success in Early College Mathematics through Graduate Teacher Training (PSECM-GTT)
* EDU,DUE
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2020
* Gary Olson, University of Colorado at Denver-Downtown Campus
* Standard Grant
* Sandra Richardson
* 06/30/2020
* USD 359,877.00

Mathematics is a central part of all STEM disciplines, and undergraduate success
in mathematics courses is an increasingly critical piece of the growing national
need to train the next generation of U.S. STEM professionals. Despite this,
early undergraduate mathematics courses are often gatekeepers that prevent
students from reaching their goals of obtaining a college degree. The Promoting
Success in Early College Mathematics through Graduate Teacher Training project
at the University of Colorado Denver (CU Denver) will address this critical
national issue through improved teaching preparation for Graduate Teaching
Assistants (GTAs) in the Mathematical Sciences. In particular, the project will
focus on how a more comprehensive approach to training GTAs can impact their
classroom practice and benefit their students, ultimately increasing success,
particularly in early undergraduate mathematics courses. Further, a large
proportion of PhD graduates, with appointments ranging from community colleges
to large research universities, have a significant part of their professional
responsibilities focused on teaching undergraduates. By providing an effective
model of broad graduate student training that encompasses a wide variety of
components, the project will study the impact on the overall undergraduate
teaching and student learning effectiveness of the GTAs. This training will also
result in a cadre of mathematical sciences faculty who will be prepared to
provide thoughtful, skilled, and pedagogically knowledgeable responses to the
growing challenges to enabling and supporting student success in early college
mathematics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will conduct a multi-part
research study with the intended purpose of investigating the impact on GTAs
during and after the time they complete their enhanced multi-component
instructional and pedagogical training. The project will develop several new
components for the CU Denver Department of Mathematical and Statistical Sciences
GTA preparation program, which will provide the GTAs with: (1) a deep
understanding, grounded in relevant literature, of issues in undergraduate
mathematical sciences instruction; (2) opportunities to be mentored by peers and
faculty; (3) opportunities to provide peer-mentoring; and (4) outreach
opportunities in order to gain an understanding of the student pipeline.
Research will include analysis of data on undergraduate student performance and
success, retention and satisfaction, a longitudinal qualitative and quantitative
analysis of observations of GTA classrooms, an examination of how the training
program impacts GTA perceptions of mathematics teaching and learning, and a
qualitative analysis on how peer mentoring impacts the experienced GTAs both
inside and outside of their classrooms. The project will provide a transportable
model and materials that can be adopted and/or adapted by mathematical sciences
programs across the country.