* 1539585
* CyberSEES Type 2: Achieving Clean Power System Flexibility: Sensing, Modeling, and Optimal Control
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Daniel Kammen, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Ralph Wachter
* 08/31/2020
* USD 1,199,914.00

Growing renewable generation capacity is leading to unprecedented variability
and uncertainty in power system operations, and a lack of power system
flexibility threatens further increases in global sustainability in electricity
sectors across the globe. This project seeks to aggregate and control demand-
side resources to provide this flexibility through a distributed control
framework that is robust to failures in cyber-infrastructure, and is scalable
across institutional dynamics, energy markets, and levels of power system
development infrastructure. Research objectives in this proposal will advance
current applications and theories in computing, modeling and control, and the
effectiveness and scalability of this work will be rigorously demonstrated
through a field trial in Nicaragua. This project will result in new tools to
facilitate sustainable energy systems throughout the globe, an open data
platform that strengthens the ability of global researchers to develop global
solutions to challenges underling the integration of renewable sources, and
advances in education to equip the workforce with new tools to tackle
sustainability challenges.

The envisioned system employs a centralized computing infrastructure to produce
optimal control laws for individual thermostatically controlled loads. The
control laws can operate with or without reliable cyber-infrastructure in real
time; in the absence of cyber-infrastructure, control can be based on time of
use and local frequency measurements only. Control laws will be published by a
central server and periodically accessed by local intelligence at each load.
Challenges to this work include creating computing infrastructure that can
actively distribute control laws and validate participation, modeling and
control methods that are effective on real-world loads, and identifying control
strategies with effective incentive mechanisms for consumers to participate. At
the conclusion of the project the investigators will have: (1) built a framework
by which an innovative, cloud-based data management platform called Mezuri can
robustly track the provenance and processing of all data and disseminate control
laws; (2) developed hierarchical statistical models for state estimation and
prediction of large fleets of thermally controlled loads that directly include
the effects of human behavior, and adapt models to require as few observations
as possible; and (3) devised new stochastic optimal control formulations that
account for human activity and accommodate both system- and local-level
objectives. Taken together, these contributions build a new framework for
control of demand-side resources that is globally scalable in a short time
horizon.