* 1539916
* MIP: 2D Crystal Consortium (MIP-2DCC)
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/2016,02/28/2022
* Nitin Samarth, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Cooperative Agreement
* Z.  Ying
* 02/28/2022
* USD 20,413,870.00

Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;NSF has created a new mid-scale instrumentation
program managed by the Division of Materials Research focused on the discovery,
development, and deployment of new materials - the Materials Innovation
Platforms. The Two-Dimensional Crystal Consortium Materials Innovation Platform
(2DCC-MIP) at Pennsylvania State University (PSU) will advance the state of the
art in the crystal growth of chalcogenides and two-dimensional (2D) thin film
chalcogenides through transformational research and mid-scale investments in
bulk crystal and thin film growth instrumentation. The recent advent of new
classes of 2D layered materials has created exciting opportunities in this
context for fundamental scientific discovery and for transformative routes to
high-impact technology. The restricted electron motion in 2D films gives rise to
new physical phenomena not present in three dimensions and new frontiers in
computing, displays and communications that reach beyond current silicon-based
electronics. The Platform's in-house research team, housed at PSU, will focus on
advancing our knowledge and understanding of synthetic routes and approaches
that result in the application of 2D chalcogenide thin film systems in current
electronic architectures and the next generation of electronic materials and
devices. External researchers from across the U.S. also working on next-
generation electronic devices will have access to the Platform's growth
capabilities and its expertise in synthesis, characterization, and theoretical
modeling. Along with access to mid-scale level tools and expertise, a unique
feature of the Platform is the access to new chalcogenide bulk crystal samples
and thin films produced and curated by the 2DCC-MIP. At the heart of the
Platform's synthesis capabilities are MOCVD and MBE tools with unique in-situ
diagnostic capabilities. In addition, several bulk crystal tools are available
to grow a variety of chalcogenide systems, yielding crystals for fundamental
studies, surfaces of new materials for exfoliating 2D films, and bulk substrates
on which to grow unexplored thin film phases and structures. To this end, 2DCC-
MIP seeks to inspire and enable diverse new ideas and new researchers in 2D
synthesis, supporting investigators nationwide at all career stages with
capabilities that will transform their research. The research activities of
these external users and those of the 2DCC-MIP in-house team will together
create a community of researchers poised to make transformational gains in the
accelerated discovery and deployment of chalcogenide 2D
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The 2DCC-MIP will also serve as a leader in
education and outreach, with several programs designed to disseminate the
science and technology of 2D materials developed by the Platform. 2DCC-MIP will
create and share a range of educational materials on various aspects of crystal
growth and advanced characterization techniques accessible at the Platform or
remotely. A major activity will be the Grow With Us workshop designed to combine
hands-on experience and seminars to transfer knowledge in exciting and emerging
areas. In addition, the Materials Research Facility Network Faculty Fellows and
the STEP FORWARD programs will help faculty and student researchers gain access
to the 2DCC-MIP shared facility.&lt;br/&gt;For more information, see
www.mri.psu.edu/materials-innovation-
platform&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;The
recent advent of new classes of two-dimensional (2D) layered materials has
created exciting opportunities for fundamental scientific discovery and for
transformative routes to high-impact technology at the frontiers of computing,
displays, and communications that reaches beyond current silicon-based
electronics. The 2D Crystal Consortium Materials Innovation Platform (2DCC-MIP)
aims to develop a national resource to meet the synthesis challenges of two-
dimensional (2D) chalcogenide materials. Importantly, these 2D materials open up
new fabrication approaches for flexible electronics and new routes to
information technology beyond the present day confines of silicon CMOS. The full
realization of the scientific and technological potential of these new 2D
materials will require developing atomic-level mastery over the wafer-scale
synthesis of samples with high crystalline quality and low defect densities.
Internal MIP research will develop synthetic capabilities that extend the state-
of-the-art in both chemical vapor deposition and hybrid molecular beam epitaxy,
thus enabling new ways to control nucleation and growth kinetics. These
synthesis methodologies will be accompanied by a comprehensive suite of in-situ
characterization techniques that probe materials from the atomic scale to the
macroscale, guided by theoretical modeling of materials synthesis and predictive
design of materials properties. External researchers from across the U.S. will
be engaged to advance the frontiers of known chalcogenide materials, to
accelerate discovery of new systems, to develop cost-effective processes for
large-area single-crystal 2D films to transition toward commercialization, and
to disseminate knowledge, samples, and techniques within a national user
facility that acts as a hub for scientific cross-fertilization.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ultimate goal of the 2DCC-MIP is to revitalize the
science of crystal growth in the U.S.: this will be accomplished by combining
compelling scientific capabilities with comprehensive user support and a suite
of educational workshops, tutorials and webinars that serves a broad audience of
students and academic, government and industrial researchers and fosters the
growth and development of the nationwide community of researchers in the
synthesis of 2D systems. Planned educational activities include monthly 2D
research webinars, on-line tutorials on experimental and computational tools and
techniques and an annual Grow with Us workshop that highlights emerging
opportunities in the science and practice of crystal growth and thin film
epitaxy. The 2DCC-MIP seeks to engage the full materials research community
across academia and industry, and in particular, early career researchers and
students and researchers at minority serving and primarily undergraduate
institutions. The 2DCC-MIP will provide affordable access to unique equipment
and computational tools, and deliver comprehensive support from science experts
to a diverse group of users. &lt;br/&gt;For more information, see
www.mri.psu.edu/materials-innovation-platform