* 1539597
* Addressing the Scientific, Technological and Societal Challenges of the Energy, Water, and Food Nexus: Enabling Resiliency in Energy, Water, and Food Systems for Society
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2015,09/30/2015
* Neal Armstrong, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Bushey
* 09/30/2015
* USD 49,450.00

Transformative changes in our production of secure and sustainable energy, food,
and water sources, and in the efficient use of energy, are among the most
significant challenges of the 21st Century, initially manifesting in regions
like Arizona and the Southwestern U.S. and eventually the entire country.
Professors Neal Armstrong, Kimberly Ogden, and Ardeth Barnhart, MPA of the
University of Arizona are organizing a workshop that seeks to address those
challenges in a focused manner, producing outcomes that will inform: i) the
academic participants who will be called upon to create the research efforts
required to address these challenges; ii) the agencies who will be required to
create optimized funding opportunities which ensure broad based participation,
and significant outcomes; and iii) the decision makers and general public who
will be the consumers of these scientific, technology development, and policy
and economic analysis research efforts.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The workshop,
supported by the Division of Chemistry, is entitled, "Addressing the Scientific,
Technological and Societal Challenges of the Energy, Water, and Food Nexus:
Enabling Resiliency in Energy, Water, and Food Systems for Society," is to be
held April 16-17, 2015 at Biosphere 2 near Tucson, Arizona. This workshop will
bring together a select group of representatives from academic institutions,
government and industry to help identify the top scientific questions that
address the pressing global need to secure the availability of energy, water and
food for future generations. Underlying the discussions will be the recognition
from the outset that proposed solutions cannot a priori require more energy (and
water) than they deliver, which has been a common occurrence in technological
developments in the recent past. Formal presentations and breakout discussions
will occur in parallel sessions organized around five general topics: 1) New
energy sources for water and food, 2) Energy efficient water re-use and
purification, 3) Energy, water and food systems, 4) Economics, policy, business
and society, and 5) Technology and infrastructure. The outcomes of these
sessions will be integrated during a final plenary session. The results of the
workshop will be disseminated through a workshop report.