* 1539838
* Joint NSF/ERA-CAPS: Collaborative Research: BEAN-ADAPT - Genetic Architecture of Rapid Evolutionary Adaptation to Changing Environments in Domesticated Phaseolus Bean Species
* BIO,IOS
* 05/15/2015,04/30/2019
* Scott Jackson, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 04/30/2019
* USD 742,879.00

PIs: Paul L. Gepts (University of California-Davis) and Scott A. Jackson
(University of Georgia)

ERA-CAPS Collaborators: Roberto Papa (Universita Politecnica delle Marche,
Italy), Alisdair R. Fernie (Max-Planck-Institute of Molecular Plant Physiology,
Germany), and Andreas Graner (Leibniz Institute of Plant Genetics and Crop Plant
Research, Germany)

Worldwide, legumes serve an important nutritional role as a source of protein,
minerals, vitamins, and dietary fibers, and their ability to fix nitrogen (i.e.
convert nitrogen in the atmosphere into a form that can be used by the plant)
makes legumes natural contributors to sustainable agriculture. As domesticated
crops, legumes have adapted to growth in many different environments, but the
genetic basis for such adaptation is largely unknown. This project will take
advantage of large gene bank collections of two legume species, common bean and
runner bean, to discover the genes responsible for adaptation to new, changing,
and variable environments. The results will allow better use of the genetic
resources represented by these gene banks for improvement of legume crops. The
project will include collaborators in the U.S., Colombia, Italy and Germany.
Exchanges of students among the participating research groups will offer
opportunities to learn new techniques and integrate information across the
coordinating research efforts. In addition, outreach to undergraduates from the
Southwest U.S. will provide exposure to hands-on research experiences in plant
genomics.

In this project, multi-location, multi-year field evaluations of large gene bank
collections will be combined with high-throughput genomic tools to understand
the genetic basis of adaptation in the legumes common bean (Phaseolus vulgaris)
and runner bean (P. coccineus). Approximately 10,000 common bean and 1,000
runner bean accessions will be genotyped using a DNA sequencing approach and
tested in contrasting environments and conditions in Europe (higher latitude)
and South America (near the Equator) to associate genes with adaptation to
environmental variables, such as day length, temperature, altitude, and
rainfall. The two Phaseolus species have contrasting life histories,
reproductive systems, and population structures, providing an opportunity to
compare different adaptation paths. Sequence information will be complemented
with transcriptomic and metabolomics profiling on a select subset of accessions
to produce datasets that will be used to build models of how common bean adapted
to new environments after its dispersal from two domestication centers in
Mesoamerica and the Southern Andes. Prospectively, this information will be
useful for developing new crop varieties adapted to changing or variable
environments.