* 1539903
* RCN-UBE:Biology Teaching Assistant Project (BioTAP 2.0): Advancing Research, Synthesizing Evidence
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/2015,09/30/2021
* Elisabeth Schussler, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Sophie George
* 09/30/2021
* USD 499,685.00

The PI team from the University of Tennessee Knoxville, the University of
Maryland College Park, Middle Tennessee State University, University of Georgia,
and Ohio State University has received a Research Coordination Network -
Undergraduate Biology Education (RCN-UBE) award for their project entitled
Biology Teaching Assistant Project (BioTAP 2.0): Advancing Research,
Synthesizing Evidence. The project is building a sustainable collaborative
network to support, synthesize, and disseminate biology Graduate Teaching
Assistant (GTA) Teaching Professional Development (TPD) research results and to
advocate for community TPD standards with the potential to increase the
effectiveness of GTA TPD nationwide. BioTAP 2.0 is improving undergraduate
biology education by expanding the network of 80 institutions developed during
their RCN-UBE Incubator project. In that way the project is increasing the
number and diversity of institutions involved in GTA TPD, both practice and
research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BioTAP 2.0 also is creating and implementing
Research Development Sessions and Virtual Learning Communities to foster
collaborative research on biology GTA TPD. These are inter- and intra-
institutional collaborative teams to develop TPD research projects using common
research tools and methods. BioTAP 2.0 is also synthesizing, disseminating, and
advocating for research to identify empirically-based best practices in GTA TPD.
By developing standardized TPD research practices and innovative face-to-face
and virtual sessions to guide research practitioners, the project is fulfilling
the potential to synthesize research results that will improve undergraduate
biology education across the nation. This project is funded jointly by the
Directorate for Biological Sciences, Division of Biological Infrastructure and
the Directorate for Education and Human Resources, Division of Undergraduate
Education in support of efforts to address the challenges posed in Vision and
Change in Undergraduate Education: A Call to Action
http://visionandchange.org/finalreport/.