* 1539880
* Meeting: A Bigger Picture: Organismal Function at the Nexus of Development, Ecology, and Evolution; Society for Integrative and Comparative Biology; Portland, Oregon; January 2016
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2016
* Paul Gignac, Society for Integrative and Comparative Biology
* Standard Grant
* William E. Zamer
* 07/31/2016
* USD 15,000.00

This award provides partial support for a symposium at the annual meeting of the
Society for Integrative and Comparative Biology (SICB) in Portland, Oregon in
January 2016 entitled, "A bigger picture: Organismal function at the nexus of
development, ecology, and evolution." The symposium will focus on a fundamental
question in integrative biology: What links the developmental stability and
instability of phenotypes with the patterns of morphological diversity seen
across the tree of life? The symposium will constitute a platform to foster
dialogue and collaborations among junior and senior career scientists conducting
cutting-edge research on the ontogeny, function, and evolution of phenotypes.
Due to its multidisciplinary nature, the SICB meeting is an ideal venue for the
symposium. Importantly, the symposium will be the first to help recruit Native
American undergraduates to attend the meeting and to provide a mentoring
framework for these first-time minority student attendees. Through an explicit
assessment of these activities, the symposium will also aid in creating a model
of direct intellectual and financial support for future conference participation
by students of underrepresented groups. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Comparative
anatomists tend to approach the question of ontogenic and morphologic diversity
from one of two perspectives. For key anatomical complexes (e.g., feeding
apparatus, locomotor systems, sensory structures), morphological changes during
ontogeny are often interpreted in functional terms and linked to their putative
importance for fitness. Across larger time scales, morphological transformations
in these complexes are examined through character stability or mutability during
cladogenesis. Because the fittest organisms must pass through ontogenetic
changes in size and shape, it is predicted that addressing such transformations
at different time scales, from life histories to macroevolution, would
illuminate major factors contributing to phenotypic diversity. The symposium
will feature contemporary questions in integrative and comparative biology and
the cutting-edge tools used to study them, hence creating a platform for
discussion about the frontiers of functional morphology, evolutionary, and
ontogenetic research. The symposium and its products (a minimum of 11 peer-
reviewed publications, along with supplementary data, published in the journal
Integrative and Comparative Biology) will contribute to the understanding of the
patterns and processes that characterize phenotypic diversity at various scales.