* 1539608
* CyberSEES: Type 1: A Novel Machine Learning Framework for Urban Heat Island Causal Analysis: a Fusion of Observations and Physical Models
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Yan Liu, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 08/31/2019
* USD 400,000.00

The urban heat island is a phenomenon whereby urban areas have higher surface
and atmospheric temperatures than surrounding suburban and rural regions. These
higher temperatures lead to increases in building cooling energy use during
summer, and can exacerbate urban air pollution, human thermal comfort, and heat
waves. This project unites expertise in three fields---machine learning, civil
and environmental engineering, and earth science---to develop a novel framework
that integrates data-driven approaches and physics-based climate simulation
models to better understand the physical process drivers of urban heat islands
around the world. Better understanding the main drivers of urban heat islands in
cities is critical for identifying the appropriate engineering solutions for
mitigating urban warming from heat islands. This research will have broad
societal impact by changing the ways that people participate in scientific data
analysis tasks, and will build a stronger body of research in computational
sustainability. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed framework will integrate
data-driven approaches and physically based models in one discovery process. It
consists of three important steps: (i) latent feature discovery, which aims to
automatically infer high-level feature representations from large scale
observational data via deep networks. These latent features capture the complex
nonlinear transformation of observed variables as a metaphor of latent physical
processes; (ii) latent feature interpretation, which generates candidates of
urban heat island drivers from the latent features via a compiled dataset. It
provides insights into how these latent features are associated with physical
processes; and (iii) urban heat island driver identification, which designs
effective experiments to identify the causes of heat islands by varying observed
variables from simulation models. The project is expected to advance the
knowledge of key physical process drivers causing urban heat islands in cities.
In addition, the developed framework has the potential to advance machine
learning, including feature learning, causal analysis with confounders, and
causal experiment design. The source code for computational tools and the data
sets collected through the project will be freely disseminated to the broader
research and educational community.