* 1539527
* CyberSEES: Type 2: Human-centered systems for cyber-enabled sustainable buildings
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Robert Proctor, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 08/31/2019
* USD 1,200,000.00

In the U.S., the building sector accounts for about 40% of primary energy usage,
71% of electricity and 38% of carbon dioxide emissions. For this reason,
development of efficient solutions to reduce energy consumption and
environmental impact of buildings is of critical societal importance. Occupants
play a significant role in energy use of office buildings, affecting up to 30%
of the energy use. To manage occupants' energy impact due to their presence and
behavior, environmental control systems (e.g., HVAC, shading, lighting) have
been automated based on the use of "widely acceptable" visual and thermal
comfort metrics. However, occupants have a strong preference for customized
indoor climate, and there is a strong relationship between occupants' perception
of control over their environment and productivity, health and well-being. To
address the challenge of customized control of the environment, the objective of
this project is to realize a new paradigm for human-centered sustainable
buildings, enabled by conducting research with computing innovations in
probabilistic methods and machine learning, linked to sustainability, and with
broader impacts in multiple domains of science and engineering. Broader impacts
are: (1) New computing methods and algorithms on probabilistic classification,
inference and optimal control that may impact a number of scientific
communities, including Architectural, Mechanical, Electrical, Computer and
Industrial/Human Factors Engineering, Computer and Psychological Sciences.
Potential application areas include genomics, traffic flow prediction,
infrastructure systems including power, transportation, etc. (2) Integration of
the project's modeling, simulation, and experimental platforms into new teaching
modules and experiential learning activities that support the curriculum and
workforce development in four engineering schools (Civil, Mechanical, Electrical
and Computer, Industrial Engineering) and the Department of Psychological
Sciences. (3) Dissemination of research outcomes to the academic community and
to the industry through publications, workshops, conferences and a customized
external evaluation process. (4) Creation of outreach and engagement initiatives
for K-12 teachers and students in STEM learning and research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project takes a multidisciplinary approach that is
grounded in (1) new algorithms for automated identification of the relevant
human perception-attributes of buildings; and (2) new concepts for intelligent
and self-tuned comfort delivery systems for customized thermal and visual
environments in buildings. The research includes: (1) Laboratory and field
studies with human test-subjects that map indoor environment conditions, thermal
and visual perception and comfort, occupant-building interactions and control
actions, as well as corresponding space performance for perimeter building
zones. (2) Probabilistic classification of human perception, comfort, and
satisfaction profiles for a typical population. (3) Computationally-efficient
inference algorithms for online learning of individual and population-level
human preferences. (4) Optimal control algorithms and simulation tools for
implementation in building management systems. The research outcomes will be
integrated into a new cyber-enabled technological solution for self-tuned
comfort delivery devices (thermostats, shading and lighting actuators). The
experimental prototypes and field demonstrations will achieve improved
performance with quantified building energy use reduction and occupant
satisfaction, as well as robustness to uncertainty due to the reduction in the
frequency of overrides.