* 1539843
* RAPID: Collaborative Proposal: Dental health and the transition from foraging to agriculture
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2016
* Alyssa Crittenden, University of Nevada Las Vegas
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 04/30/2016
* USD 16,695.00

The transition from foraging to agriculture was a decisive turning point in
human history that affected many aspects of society. Previous bioarchaeological
research has focused on apparent changes in human oral biology, including
increases in cavities and other dental problems, during this transition, but
modern cross-cultural data have suggested that the relationship between
subsistence strategy and oral health is more complicated. This project will
investigate incidences of dental disorders among living foragers who are
transitioning from a diet of wild foods to one dominated by crops. Issues such
as resource depletion, shared land use, ethnotourism, and increased land
regulations are rapidly making the foraging way of life unsustainable, and this
project may represent the last opportunity to witness firsthand the effects of a
transition from hunting and gathering to agriculture on human oral biology. In
addition to addressing longstanding anthropological questions about the effects
of subsistence strategies on human cultures, this research has several broader
impacts, including: support of a junior female scientist; advancement of
scientific research and capabilities at the University of Nevada, Las Vegas and
the University of Arkansas, both public universities in states historically
underrepresented in federally funded research; and dissemination of results
beyond biological anthropology to the dental research community, given possible
implications for understanding oral environments and improving preventative
dentistry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Most models relating declining dental health to
a shift from foraged foods to cultigens have been based on data from
bioarcheological samples as well as living foragers at higher latitudes. This is
problematic because it misses a large segment of humanity, warm-climate
foragers. All tropical foraging populations today consume fermentable
carbohydrates, which are cariogenic. The aim of this project is to study the
Hadza of Tanzania, sampling approximately 30 individuals each of: (1) Hadza
residing in camps where diet includes mostly cultigens, (2) Hadza residing in
bush camps where diet is largely, or exclusively, wild foods, and (3) Hadza
residing in camps in transition, where diet is composed of a mixture of wild and
cultivated foods. The extent of orthodontic disorders (dental crowding,
impaction, malocclusion) and periodontal disease will be scored, and number of
identifiable caries will be recorded for each subject. In addition, data on diet
composition (using 24-hour dietary recalls), group affiliation (i.e. camp
setting), duration of residence in village and bush camps, sex, and age will be
recorded for each individual. The effects of these factors will be assessed with
a statistical model designed to determine the influences of each on oral health.