* 1539536
* CyberSEES: Type 1: Enabling Sustainable Water Supplies Through Self-Powered Sensor-Based Monitoring
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Abdul Khan, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 08/31/2019
* USD 396,011.00

The worldwide demand for freshwater is increasing rapidly while water resources
are becoming increasingly scarce. Exacerbating this imbalance is the
deteriorated state of the water distribution infrastructure, which is afflicted
with leakages of 15-25% of the total water supply. Consequently, the severe
deterioration of this infrastructure poses a serious challenge to water
sustainability. Leakage detection is an essential, but challenging, aspect of
water supply management. Real-time monitoring schemes based on the changes in
the vibration characteristics of the water pipelines have potential to detect
leaks in a timely manner. Embedded wireless sensor networks are essential for
such monitoring schemes; however, model designs and architectures of currently
available wireless sensing networks remain severely constrained by the small
energy reserves of environmentally-harmful batteries that last only for a
limited period of time. This CyberSEES project is exploring possible hardware
and software schemes for embedded wireless sensing systems, powered by locally
harvested energy, to detect leakages in water distribution
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Leveraging a real-size, experimental pipeline set-
up, this project explores (1) the energy harvesting potential in the water
distribution system environment for use in sustainable powering of smart
embedded sensing networks; (2) the use of vibration sensing-based methods to
detect and locate pipeline leaks in water distribution systems; and (3) energy-
efficient sensing and communication schemes suitable for use in constrained and
variable energy environments. With advancements on several fronts, the research
outcomes will make it possible to build smarter and adaptable water supply
infrastructures for a more sustainable future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By adopting
the developed sustainable monitoring set-up, water utilities will be equipped to
prevent leakage of treated fresh water, conserve energy, and potentially prevent
catastrophic failures in water distribution systems through early-detection of
defects. The developed wireless sensing-based monitoring scheme can be easily
adapted to other harsh, dynamic and energy-constrained environments for defect
detection. The impact of this project on research infrastructure, especially the
expansion of the pipeline test bed on the Clemson University campus, is
significant as it offers several follow-up research and educational
opportunities. This project also offers research opportunities for
undergraduates and underrepresented students in addition to graduate student
mentoring.