* 1539972
* The Influence of Recent Volcanic Eruptions on Stratospheric Ozone Recovery:  A Data Analysis and Modeling Study Including Estimated Uncertainties
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Susan Solomon, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 08/31/2019
* USD 470,709.00

This project focuses on an investigation of the effects of recent small volcanic
eruptions on stratospheric ozone. It was once believed that only very explosive
volcanic eruptions could affect the content of small particles in the
stratospheric. However recent observations suggest that substantial volcanic
enhancements of the stratospheric aerosol layer have occurred due to a series of
smaller eruptions since about 2005. These eruptions have occurred just at the
time when ozone recovery should be becoming more and more discernible. Volcanic
aerosols have had major, well-documented effects on past changes in ozone, but
have received only qualitative rather than quantitative attention in efforts to
identify recovery to date. This research will advance the understanding of the
sensitivity of ozone to changes in stratospheric aerosols and improve the basis
for estimating uncertainty in ozone recovery.

A broad range of aerosol data since 2000 from satellite- and ground-based
methods will be compared and used to improve the characterization of recent
stratospheric aerosol changes and the uncertainties across different
measurements. Data to be used include the CCMI (Chemistry-Climate Model
Initiative) project aerosol data together with lidar data from distributed
stations, satellite observations, and the University of Wyoming balloonsondes.
The Specified Dynamics Whole Atmosphere Community Climate Model (SD-WACCM) will
be used in the conduct of sensitivity tests to examine how uncertainties in
kinetic rate constants, in background aerosol levels, and in variability of
water vapor influence how volcanic surface area changes affect ozone depletion
in the lowermost stratosphere, including the region close to the tropopause.

The largest stratospheric aerosol burden since 1991 was observed in 2011
following the Nabro eruption. At that time, reported column abundances of
stratospheric aerosol at some locations and times reached as high as 30-50% of
the maximum values obtained after Pinatubo. To date, the implications of these
perturbations for mid-latitude and global ozone loss and recovery have not been
assessed. Ensuring that the signature of chemical recovery can be fully
understood is broadly acknowledged as a needed step in the comprehensive
evaluation of scientific understanding and its role in the science-policy
interface on this highly visible issue.