* 1539105
* RII Track-2 FEC: Catalysis for Renewables: Applications, Fundamentals and Technologies (CRAFT)
* O/D,OIA
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2020
* Bala Subramaniam, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Cooperative Agreement
* Andrea Johnson
* 07/31/2020
* USD 4,000,000.00

Non-technical description&lt;br/&gt;The conversion of carbohydrates in plant-
based biomass (lignin) to ethanol and other useful products is an important area
that holds promise for renewable energy production. This Research Infrastructure
Improvement Track-2 Focused EPSCoR* Collaboration (RII Track-2 FEC) award
focuses on developing catalysts and technologies for the efficient conversion of
lignin into fuels and useful chemicals. Research groups from the University of
Kansas (KU) and the University of South Carolina at Columbia (USC) are
collaborating in this project. This collaboration synergistically combines
expertise of in catalyst synthesis, advanced characterization, and computational
work to design novel catalysts and develop enabling research tools for the
separation of useful products from lignin. The project will provide
multidisciplinary training for a postdoc and six graduate students and leverage
existing Research Experience for Undergraduates and Teachers (REU, RET) programs
as well as Industry/University Collaborative Research Center (I/UCRC) for
Rational Catalyst Synthesis at USC to engage undergraduates, K-12 teachers, and
industry professionals. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
description&lt;br/&gt;This multidisciplinary work aimed at improving catalyst
designs and chemical separation methods for converting biomass into fuels has
four integrated research thrusts: (1) synthesis and characterization of catalyst
systems based on nanoparticulate metals supported on different substrates; (2)
study of catalyst surface properties and reaction intermediates; (3) experiments
to understand the catalytic conversion kinetics of biomass model molecules and
lignin; and (4) computational simulations to interpret experimental results and
provide guidance for the design of new, efficient catalysts. The project
combines expertise at the Center for Renewable Fuels at USC and the Center of
Environmentally Beneficial Catalyst at KU for the synthesis, characterization,
and computational modeling of heterogeneous catalysts for the depolymerization
of lignin compounds into cyclic hydrocarbons. Systematic experimental and
computational studies will be performed to understand catalytic mechanisms,
reaction kinetics, and to design and evaluate efficient catalysts for lignin
deconstruction. The project employs a team approach to mentor junior faculty,
postdoc, and students and offers opportunities to discuss topics such as time
management, work-life balance, grant writing, strategic planning, leadership
training, and facilitate activities on intellectual property management, lab
safety, ethics, outreach and communicating science to the public. An evaluator
provides formative and summative assessment of the project's
progress.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;*Experimental Program to Stimulate Competitive
Research