* 1539857
* 2nd International Next Generation Wind Energy Workshop
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2017
* Ryo Amano, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 03/31/2017
* USD 25,000.00

Proposal Number: 1539857&lt;br/&gt;Principal Investigator: Ryoichi S
Amano&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Wind energy is gaining momentum internationally as
renewable source of electricity production. The 2nd International Next
Generation Wind Energy Workshop will be tentatively held from October 6-8, 2015
at Lund University in Sweden. This workshop will highlight the complex processes
involved in harnessing wind energy for the generation of electricity, and their
impacts on current and future wind turbine development issues facing the
expansion of wind farm operations in both the United States and Europe. The
workshop will provide support for both senior and early career researchers based
in the United States to travel to Sweden to attend this international workshop.
The senior scientists will provide the keynote lectures, and both senior and
junior scientists will participate in the panel discussion
sessions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop will be a forum to promote the
development and application of new wind turbine designs of the 21st century,
based on state-of-the-art experimental, computational, and/or theoretical
research methods being developed in the academic community. The diverse and
complex processes encountered in wind energy harvesting have fundamental
considerations that drive new concepts for wind turbines. The workshop will
bring together researchers working on many of the central challenges facing the
fluid dynamic, aerodynamic, material science, structural, and manufacturing
aspects of the wind turbine rotor blade performance and design. The participants
will define new frontiers in wind energy aerodynamic and structural modeling
research needed to guide the development of computational tools to explore the
commercial potential of future wind turbine blade designs, including vertical
axis turbines, blade-less systems such as turbines with cyclone technology, and
hybrid wind turbines. The workshop will also focus attention on common problems
of current wind turbine designs and their manufacturing challenges that are
faced by the commercial wind energy industry both in the United States and
Europe. The participants will come from academia, independent research
organizations, governmental agencies, and industry, from both the United States
and Europe. The workshop proceedings will be published in a special issue of
ASME Transactions - Journal Energy Resources Technology (JERT), and workshop
outcomes will be posted the workshop website.