* 1539911
* [RCN UBE Incubator] Next Generation Careers - Innovation in Environmental Biology Education
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2018
* Teresa Mourad, Ecological Society of America
* Standard Grant
* Mark Pauley
* 08/31/2018
* USD 48,166.00

The Ecological Society of America, in collaboration with the Society for
Conservation Biology, has received a Research Coordination Network -
Undergraduate Biology Education award for their project entitled Next Generation
Careers - Innovations in Environmental Biology Education. The PI team is forming
a network to support workforce development for college graduate career
progression into environmental biology, including fields such as ecology,
evolution, conservation, plant biology, and natural resource management. The
network is forging connections among academic faculty and administrators and the
private sector, government, and non-governmental organizations. Next Generation
Careers is bringing 40 representatives from across these sectors to a workshop
to identify potential resource needs, training courses, workforce development
and alignment, and directions in environmental biology
teaching.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To inform participants, Next Generation Careers
is surveying the chairs of Biology departments, undergraduate career development
officers, biology faculty and faculty at the nexus of mathematics and biology.
Examination of job ads for entry level positions in related jobs is providing
further information concerning the most commonly sought skills for graduates
with Associate's or Bachelor's degrees. In addition, eight interactive sessions
at collaborating disciplinary society and professional association meetings are
providing input into the work of the network. Assessment of the level of
participation, the network space, including electronic platforms for information
and document exchange, and project outcomes is informing both the process of
effective network development and the design of valuable undergraduate career
progressions. This project is funded jointly by the Directorate for Biological
Sciences, Division of Biological Infrastructure and the Directorate for
Education and Human Resources, Division of Undergraduate Education in support of
efforts to address the challenges posed in Vision and Change in Undergraduate
Education: A Call to Action http://visionandchange.org/finalreport/.