* 1539717
* Two-process model of sleep consolidation in perceptual learning
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2018
* Yuka Sasaki, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Uri Hasson
* 07/31/2018
* USD 549,413.00

Every one needs to sleep. Many people may think that the purpose of sleep is a
quiescent status with minimum level of brain activation to merely take a rest
and passively remove fatigue accumulated during wakefulness. However, a growing
body of evidence in neuroscience indicates that sleep plays much more active
roles. One of the most important roles of sleep is to augment, or consolidate,
learning and memory obtained during wakefulness. A better understanding of how
sleep consolidates learning and memory would provide important knowledge of how
students and adults can effectively learn and memorize. In the proposed
research, we will specifically use visual perceptual learning (VPL), which
refers to a long-term improvement of visual task performance by repetitive
training on a particular visual task. By taking advantages of neural and
behavioral characteristics of VPL and advanced non-invasive neuroimaging
techniques, Dr. Sasaki and her team at Brown University will investigate
detailed neural activation of the visual cortex during sleep. Investigations on
how sleep functions to consolidate VPL may lead to better understanding of
visual and brain plasticity (learning and memory) in human adults. Thus, the
proposed activity will promote the progress of science in sleep and learning and
advance the national health. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There has been a controversy
whether consolidation of learning and memory during sleep occurs by reactivating
what was learned or memorized during wakefulness (reactivation), or by removing
unimportant information (downscaling). Based on our preliminary findings, we
propose a two-process model of the sleep consolidation of VPL, in which both
reactivation and downscaling occur in a serial and integrative fashion. In the
first reactivation process, neural circuits only for the trained visual feature
are reactivated for enhancement of learning where sigma activity is mainly
involved. This reactivation process is followed by the downscaling process that
occurs both with the circuits for the trained and an exposed but unlearned,
therefore unimportant, feature. The validity of two-process model will be tested
using psychophysics, and advanced neuroimaging techniques including concurrent
measurements of polysomnography and magnetic resonance imaging, magnetic
resonance spectroscopy and a decoding technique on blood-oxygen-level dependent
signals as well as retinotopic mapping. Successful research results would verify
the two-process model and provide invaluable information with which the quality
of learning and memory will be enhanced.