* 1539853
* I/UCRC Phase III:  Collaborative Research Program for I/UCRC for Lasers and Plasmas
* ENG,EEC
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2019
* Radovan Kovacevic, Southern Methodist University
* Continuing Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 08/31/2019
* USD 61,000.00

Southern Methodist University (SMU) has been a university site in the I/UCRC for
Lasers and Plasmas, led by the University of Virginia, since 2005. SMU has
played a major role in promoting R&amp;D work in laser-based materials
processing driven by the need of its industrial partners. The mission of SMU's
site is to promote and apply R&amp;D work in laser materials processing that is
of interest to industry and to promote the conditions to educate and train new
generations of engineers and researchers capable of responding to the
technological challenges of 21st century. This work has been supported by well-
equipped laboratories and well-trained research teams that consist of graduate
students and research engineers. The presence of industry through the I/UCRC for
Lasers and Plasmas has been changing the culture in the education of engineers
and researchers at SMU. The Center has been used for recruiting undergraduate
and graduate students in the mechanical engineering program as well as for
building a strong relationship with industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For the last
15 years, there has been a huge advancement in manufacturing of high-power
lasers of high-quality beam with improved reliability and energy efficiency. A
new generation of lasers such as fiber lasers, disk lasers, and fiber coupled
diode lasers have been finding applications for welding, cutting, heat
treatment, additive manufacturing, repair, etc. There is a gap between the speed
of development of the new generation of lasers and the capability of industry to
integrate this development in their production lines. There is also lack of
qualified personnel capable to introduce this new technology. The I/UCRC for
Lasers and Plasmas for Advanced Manufacturing has undertaken an effort in
providing R&amp;D work in laser-based material processing of interest to its
industrial partners, in training industrial leaders, designers and manufacturing
engineers, as well as in educating a new generation of engineers and researchers
in order to speed the acceptance of this new technology by relevant industry.
The researchers and graduate students in direct cooperation with practitioners
from diverse industry will work on the understanding of interaction of high-
energy beams with different materials, and on the development of sensing and
control systems to control laser-based material processing techniques, on the
development of new technologies for welding difficult-to-weld and dissimilar
materials, and on the development of new surface treatment technologies capable
of protecting high-value components against heat, wear, erosion, and corrosion.