* 1539239
* WORKSHOP: Doctoral Consortium at the IEEE VR 2015 Conference
* CSE,IIS
* 03/15/2015,02/29/2016
* Amy Banic, University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 02/29/2016
* USD 22,165.00

This is funding to support participation by approximately 9 graduate students
from the United States (along with 7 graduate students from non-US institutions
and 5 senior members of the academic and industrial research communities as
mentors, for whom funding is not requested from NSF), in a Doctoral Consortium
(workshop) to be held in conjunction with the IEEE Virtual Reality 2015
conference that will take place March 23-27 in Arles, France, and which is
collocated since 2006 with the IEEE Symposium on 3D User Interface. Virtual
reality (VR) is a multidisciplinary field involving human-centered computer
simulations that seek to imitate or augment real world senses (usually sight,
sound, and touch) and experiences. VR research includes developing and assessing
methods and systems, and facilitating and understanding user perceptions,
beliefs, and behaviors. First organized by the IEEE Computer Society in 1993 and
held annually since 1995, IEEE Virtual Reality is the premier international
conference and exhibition in this field and includes technical paper
presentations, workshops, tutorials, research demonstrations, and exhibits from
industry. More information about the conference may be found online at
http://www.ieeevr.org/2015. The goal of the Doctoral Consortium is to provide an
interactive and supportive mentoring opportunity for mid-level graduate students
in virtual reality, to afford these students a valuable opportunity to get
independent perspectives on their research from senior individuals with a wide
collective breadth and depth of knowledge, and to build a cohort of young
researchers within the VR community. Special efforts have been made by the
organizers to achieve diversity among the students across institutions, and to
recruit participants from groups traditionally underrepresented in the field of
computer science, including women, persons of color, and people with
disabilities.

This year's IEEE VR Doctoral Consortium is inspired by builds on the successful
format of the first two such events, which were also supported by NSF. The main
activities of the DC will take place on Tuesday, March 24, immediately prior to
the start of the IEEE VR conference proper and in parallel with the second day
of the IEEE Symposium on 3D User Interfaces. A dinner will be held the previous
evening to welcome the students and provide initial mentorship and tips for
networking at the conference, and additional smaller activities will take place
at scattered times over the rest of the week. The workshop will include morning
and afternoon sessions in which each student presents his/her work to the other
student participants and a panel of senior VR researchers, with sufficient time
set aside after each talk for discussion and constructive feedback that
addresses the strengths of the work, challenges and issues that may arise, and
implications of the results. A group working lunch attended by all the students
and mentors will be particularly valuable for unifying the individual goals and
projects presented within the group as part of a "big picture" envisioning of
the future of the field over the next 10-20 years. Each student will also be
asked to prepare a poster on his/her research that will be on display during the
conference as part of the poster sessions, and to submit a short (2-page)
abstract to be archived in the IEEE Digital Library. In an effort to enable
student participants to discuss their work and plans freely, an explicit
requirement in selecting the mentors has been that none of them is a current
advisor (formal or informal) of any of the participating students.