* 1539931
* A Bridge to the Future
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Marcel Agüeros, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* James Neff
* 08/31/2019
* USD 403,210.00

Students who enter college interested in Science, Technology, Engineering, and
Mathematics (STEM) disciplines persist, excel, and advance by being exposed to a
combination of intellectually challenging classes, rewarding research
opportunities, and meaningful mentoring relationships. Unfortunately, many
students, and particularly those from groups historically underrepresented in
STEM disciplines, do not experience this combination, and are lost from the pool
of prospective scientists, with serious consequences for the scientific
workforce in the U.S. The Columbia University Bridge Program is designed to give
underrepresented post-baccalaureates who may have missed on one or all of these
elements the opportunity to make themselves more competitive Ph.D.-program
applicants. The Program's emphasis on research experience advances scientific
discovery; its flexible coursework, professional development, and mentoring
enhance participants' skills while creating a structured, rigorous, and
supportive environment in which they can prepare themselves for a successful
transition into a graduate program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This program will fund
participants in the Bridge Program, thereby contributing directly to a wide
range of research projects across the physical sciences and increasing the
participation of underrepresented groups in STEM. Bridge participants are hired
as full-time research assistants for up to two years. They conduct research
under the mentorship of faculty members, post-doctoral researchers, and graduate
students, are provided with funds to support professional expenses, and are
eligible for university benefits. The participants enroll in at least one course
per semester, and attend monthly one-on-one progress meetings with the Program's
Assistant Director. The Program also organizes a number of professional
development workshops, provides access to GRE test preparation, and partners
with Columbia's School of Continuing Education to ensure success while at
Columbia and to facilitate application to Ph.D. programs. In the next few years,
a dozen Bridge alumni will earn their Ph.D.s, enabling a start-to-finish
evaluation of the impact that the Program has had on its participants'
trajectories. The Program's evaluation team will conduct assessments of
programmatic elements and develop a data-driven model of best practices that can
be shared with the STEM community.