* 1539071
* RII Track-2 FEC: Strengthening the scientific basis for making decisions about dams: Multi-scale, coupled-systems research on ecological, social, and economic trade-offs
* O/D,OIA
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2020
* Arthur Gold, University of New Hampshire
* Cooperative Agreement
* Timothy VanReken
* 07/31/2020
* USD 6,000,000.00

Non-technical description&lt;br/&gt;This Research Infrastructure Improvement
Track-2 Focused EPSCoR* Collaboration (RII Track-2 FEC) involves researchers
from three New England states: New Hampshire (NH), Maine (ME) and Rhode Island
(RI). The research team will develop and test a framework for engaging
stakeholders in understanding how the multiple functions of dams are impacted by
the outcomes of management decisions. The project is led by the University of
New Hampshire (UNH) in partnership with Keene State College (KSC), the
University of Rhode Island (URI), Rhode Island School of Design (RISD), and the
University of Maine (UM). The research team will develop role-play simulations
and design charrettes to foster dialog among stakeholders with diverse
perspectives. The interdisciplinary Science, Technology, Art, Engineering, and
Mathematics (STEAM) research activities will be integrated with training and
leadership development of 12 early-career faculty, two post-docs, two research
staff, and 13 graduate students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
description&lt;br/&gt;The RII Track-2 FEC project will address two overarching
and interrelated questions: 1) What are the major trade-offs, thresholds, and
feedbacks among ecosystem services for different dam management options? and 2)
How does collaborative knowledge production influence scientific understanding
about dam SES, and the use of science in dam decision making? Research topics
include fish migration, nitrogen flux, energy economics, media discourse
analysis, choice experiment surveys, and multi-criteria decision models. This
project will contribute to sustainability science through coupling biophysical
and socioeconomic research with mixed-methods social science research to
understand the roles of knowledge systems in decision processes. The team will
investigate the dynamic behavior of dams in the context of coupled social
ecological systems (SES) and the multiple functions of dams (e.g. ecosystem
services, water storage, flood control, hydroelectric power generation, and
recreation). The number of high-hazard dams in New England coupled with their
significant clean energy role will provide a basis for hypothesis testing and
delineating the consequences and trade-offs of rehabilitating, restoring,
rebuilding, removal, decommissioning, or other alternative dam futures.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;*Experimental Program to Stimulate Competitive Research