* 1539622
* CyberSEES: Type 2: Collaborative Research: Cyber-infrastructure and Technologies to Support Large-Scale Wildlife Monitoring and Research for Wildlife and Ecology Sustainability
* CSE,CCF
* 11/01/2015,10/31/2019
* Roland Kays, Friends of the North Carolina State Museum of Natural Sciences
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 10/31/2019
* USD 309,982.00

Minimizing the impact of human actions on wildlife is a priority for
conservation biology. Distributed motion-sensitive cameras, or camera traps, are
popular tools for monitoring wildlife populations. Recent work has shown that
camera trap surveys can be expanded to large scales by crowdsourcing through
citizen science, producing big data sets needed to evaluate the effect of
sustainability strategies on wildlife populations. However, these large-scale
surveys create millions of photographs that create new challenges for data
processing and quality control.

This project seeks to develop advanced computing technologies for cloud-based
large-scale data sensing, analysis, annotation, management, and preservation for
wildlife and ecological sustainability to inform effective resource management,
decision-making, and polices on human actions to protect wildlife and natural
resources. Specifically, the project aims to: (1) explore a citizen scientist-
based approach and system for large-scale sustainable data collection; (2)
develop deep-learning based fine-grain animal species recognition from large
data sets and automated content annotation; (3) study cloud-based computing with
thin-client access and resource allocation for scalable deployment and easy
access by citizen scientists; and (4) develop a comprehensive data annotation
quality monitoring and control framework with tightly coupled computer
annotation, crowd-sourcing, and expert review to ensure a high scientific
standard of data quality. These tools will be integrated into the eMammal
infrastructure to study three questions on wildlife sustainability: energy
development, housing development, and wildlife harvest. These tools will also be
available to other wildlife researchers using the eMammal system, enabling an
improved understanding how humans can live sustainably with wildlife.

Collaborative wildlife monitoring and tracking at large geographical and time
scales will contribute to the understanding of complex dynamics of wildlife
systems, and provide important scientific evidence for informed decisions and
effective solutions to sustainability issues in wildlife environments. This
project will provide unique, exciting, and interdisciplinary opportunities for
mentoring graduate students and involving K-12 and undergraduate students into
professionally guided research. The citizen science approach used in this
project should accommodate hundreds of students in research.