* 1539822
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Process and Consequences of the Work of 911 Dispatchers
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2016
* Bart Bonikowski, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 07/31/2016
* USD 9,383.00

This doctoral dissertation research seeks to understand the process and
consequences of 911 dispatchers' daily work. The study focuses on how
dispatchers understand and respond to citizens' emergency situations
communicated through 911 lines, how dispatchers code citizens' calls in the
Computer Aided Dispatch (CAD) system, the source of dispatcher stress, and how
dispatchers cope with stress, are trained, treated and perceived by their
colleagues and related organizations. Extensive fieldwork will be conducted in
an urban police department's emergency communication center where 911 calls are
answered and units dispatched. An analysis will be completed of data from day-
to-day actions in the center, interviews with dispatchers, directors,
supervisors and trainees, records of past calls, incoming calls, information
from CAD system, casual interactions in the operation room and dining area,
training manuals and books, as well as other relevant documents and files from
the media, the city, state court, and the state police. This study contributes
to three bodies of literature in the field of sociology: state classification
practices, street-level bureaucracy and the sociology of the professions. The
empirical analysis seeks to answer the classical and present-day theoretical
question of how the state is represented to and experienced by citizens.

The research examines the process through which the state classification system
is applied and the costs and consequences of this process. The field site
provides access to all incoming phone-calls, phone records, training materials,
on-site observation interviews as well as CAD log-ins from an urban, big-city
police department. The study will potentially demonstrate how street-level state
employees (911 dispatchers) engage in state classification that bridges complex
social life and clear-cut bureaucratic categories. It contributes to an
increased understanding of how state categories are applied and reproduced, and
how the correspondence between the outside world and state forms of
representation is accomplished through the constant efforts of human agents. The
research will also provide practical and policy-relevant guidance regarding the
stress and trails experienced by 911 dispatchers and provide for citizens a
greater understanding of how the 911 dispatch system works.