* 1539870
* Research Coordination Network-Undergraduate Biology Education: Promoting Active Learning &amp; Mentoring (PALM) Incubator Program
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2017
* Elizabeth Ruedi, American Society For Cell Biology
* Standard Grant
* William Hoese
* 12/31/2017
* USD 59,648.00

The American Society for Cell Biology, in collaboration with the American
Society for Plant Biology and the Genetics Society of America, has received a
Research Coordination Network - Undergraduate Biology Education award for their
project entitled Promoting Active Learning &amp; Mentoring (PALM). This project
is forming a network to promote Vision and Change-guided reforms in
undergraduate teaching and learning through effective, long-term professional
development. Long-term mentorships are being organized between faculty and
postdoctoral fellows (PALM Fellows) seeking to learn pedagogical best practices
and faculty mentors who have already transformed their classrooms with effective
active learning strategies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PALM Fellows visit the
classrooms of their mentors and participate in redesigned classes on the
mentor's campus. Based on this experience, and guided by their mentors, PALM
Fellows restructure all, or a portion, of one of their own classes using
effective, active learning pedagogies. Fellows are required to report their
findings to the scientific community and will be invited to become mentors when
they have acquired several years of experience in their own classrooms. The
Classroom Observation Protocol for Undergraduate STEM (COPUS), which involves
direct observation of classroom pedagogies, is being used in project evaluation
to measure the progress of the PALM Fellows, as well as the effectiveness of the
program. The results of the project evaluation are advancing our knowledge of
best practice in faculty professional development through mentoring. This
project is funded jointly by the Directorate for Biological Sciences, Division
of Biological Infrastructure and the Directorate for Education and Human
Resources, Division of Undergraduate Education in support of efforts to address
the challenges posed in Vision and Change in Undergraduate Education: A Call to
Action http://visionandchange.org/finalreport/.