* 1539131
* VEC: Small: Collaborative Research: Wide Field of View Monocentric Computational Light Field Imaging
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Gordon Wetzstein, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Jie Yang
* 08/31/2018
* USD 235,000.00

This project targets the development of monocentric camera systems for high-
resolution, wide field-of-view (FOV) light field imaging in small device form
factors. Building on the benefits of recently-developed monocentric optics -
ultra-high resolution, small physical footprint, low weight, and high light
collection - monocentric light field imagers provide a transformative platform
for a range of future experiential imaging and computing applications. In
particular, light field-enabled monocentric optics allow for spatially-varying
digital focus for complex and wide FOV scenes, 3D imaging capabilities, stereo
view synthesis, and imaging through partial occluders. As opposed to any
existing technology, monocentric light field imagers enable immersive content
for emerging head-mounted displays with support for focus cues to be captured
with low-cost, mobile devices. A range of computer vision algorithms directly
benefit from the targeted computational imaging platform, including 4D feature
detection, localization and mapping, segmentation, recognition, tracking, depth
estimation, matting, object removal, and hole filling. The developed monocentric
light field imaging system provides benefits for society at large; the enabled
3D image capture and editing capabilities offered in a small device form factor
could profoundly impact future means of inter-personal digital communication,
remote collaboration and education as well as remote operation of vehicles.
Newly-developed computer vision algorithms are beneficial for navigation of
autonomous vehicles. Live content for a range of applications can be easily
recorded and edited, for example for simulation, training, phobia treatment, and
cultural heritage. Light field optics and algorithm design will be tightly
integrated into the syllabus of multiple graduate-level courses at Stanford and
UCSD and made available to industry professionals via online learning
platforms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research investigates a viable solution for
these challenges and provides a next-generation computational imaging platform.
Leveraging the expertise of PIs from University of California San Diego and
Stanford University, this project aims at (i) designing and fabricating a wide
field of view light field imager via monocentric optics, conformal microlenses,
and fiber coupling, (ii) developing end-to-end computational imaging pipelines,
from coded capture to display on emerging head mounted displays, and (iii)
evaluating computer vision and scene understanding algorithms, including feature
detection, localization, mapping, segmentation, classification, tracking,
matting, classification, and object removal. The research question driving this
project is the quest for a small, computational imaging system that is flexible
enough to unlock a range of visual and experiential computing applications that
cannot be easily provided by cameras available today. Monocentric optics offer
great benefits for such applications: wide field of view, high resolution, high
light collection, and a small form factor. Yet, future visual computing
applications require even more functionality: 3D imaging, adaptive digital focus
over a large FOV, compatibility with emerging virtual and augmented reality
displays, enhanced image editing modes, such as object segmentation, removal,
insertion, localization, and more.