* 1539850
* Travel Support for Students to attend the ICS-NSF Vouchering the Stratigraphic Record Workshop and the Second International Congress on Stratigraphy Graz, Austria
* GEO,EAR
* 04/15/2015,09/30/2015
* Dena Smith, The Geological Society of America, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Judith Skog
* 09/30/2015
* USD 25,000.00

Travel Support for Students to attend the ICS-NSF Vouchering the Stratigraphic
Record Workshop and the Second International Congress on Stratigraphy

Dena Smith, Geological Society of America

This award will provide partial support for the international travel of 10 US
graduate and post-doc, stratigraphers to attend the Second International
Congress on Stratigraphy (STRATI 2015) and the ICS-NSF Workshop - Vouchering the
Stratigraphic Record (VSR) in Graz, Austria from 19-25 July 2015. It is expected
that more than 800 stratigraphers and sedimentologists from around the globe
will attend STRATI 2015. The ICS-NSF Vouchering the Stratigraphic Record
Workshop will bring together a group of international researchers and students
to work on ways to synthesize and make available stratigraphic data from around
the world. Those selected to receive travel support will be chosen from across
the stratigraphic sciences, ensuring that a diverse group of graduate students
and early professionals have the opportunity to attend and present their
research results.

Stratigraphy is a vibrant discipline that includes such currently relevant
topics as geochronology, cyclostratigraphy, lithostratigraphy, sequence
stratigraphy, tectono-stratigraphy, astronomical tuning, natural resource
exploration and development, etc., all of which are needed to develop a detailed
understanding of the history of the earth, its sedimentary crust, life,
paleoenvironments, and anthropogenic impact. The STEPPE coordinating office, in
collaboration with the American Geosciences Institute (AGI), Geological Society
of America (GSA), the Society for Sedimentary Geology (SEPM), and the
Paleontological Society (PS) will read and evaluate applications, ensuring that
there is equal representation from across the disciplines and that there is
balance in terms of gender and participation by those from underrepresented
groups. Such participation in the 2nd International Congress on Stratigraphy and
the ICS-NSF Vouchering the Stratigraphic Record workshop will uniquely
contribute to the earth sciences because it will bring together a cross section
of stratigraphers and sedimentary geologists from around the world, of all
career stages, to share their research methods, findings and experiences in the
field. This will lead to new opportunities for collaboration and the creation of
novel approaches to studying our world.