* 1539302
* RIDIR:  Modernizing Political Event Data for Big Data Social Science Research
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Latifur Khan, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 08/31/2019
* USD 1,497,358.00

The project creates a general research platform to study civil protests,
international conflict, and civil unrest using texts from Spanish, Arabic, and
French, in addition to English. This expands the development of programs, data
and services available for coding regional conflict and cooperation methods
beyond the current English-only approaches to enable data-rich research that
will advance new approaches to core questions in the social, behavioral, and
economic sciences. The project includes an openly available website that allows
for the extraction and reporting of conflict events across the globe as well as
the identification of their causes and diffusion. The project's data and methods
help make data-driven decisions about foreign policy, civil war prevention,
human rights policies, and the effects of other factors such as environmental or
economic policies on these phenomena. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project creates
large-scale civil and inter-state conflict measures, covering multiple news
sources and with a common methodology in an open framework. Using multiple news
data sources reduces the biases inherent in coding from a single or small set of
news sources, a common approach in the past. The project aims to facilitate the
coding of more, and better, data across languages, space and time, thus
facilitating the study of substantive questions in traditionally
underrepresented countries, peoples, and topics. Further, usability
considerations generate new software for the user interface for dealing with big
data like that proposed in this research, as well as server-side optimizations
that scale large datasets across a diverse set of users. The scale of the event
data, covering multiple years and large-scale news databases, will generate many
millions of observations over space and time. Research tools, data extraction,
and other user interfaces are developed to allow the relevant research
communities to have access to, queries of, and citation streams for these data.
Finally, machine-coded data from news reports is validated across news sources,
languages, actors, ontologies, and against human-coded gold standard records.
The research and data serve as inputs for understanding the effects of climate
on spatio-temporally referenced civil conflict events in Latin American, Africa,
the Middle East, and worldwide.