* 1539918
* MIP: Platform for the Accelerated Realization, Analysis, and Discovery of Interface Materials (PARADIM)
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/2016,02/28/2022
* Tyrel McQueen, Cornell University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Z.  Ying
* 02/28/2022
* USD 27,816,072.00

Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Cornell University will lead a Materials Innovation
Platform, a new NSF mid-scale instrumentation program supported in the Division
of Materials Research. Cornell University, in partnership with Clark Atlanta
University, Johns Hopkins University, and Princeton University form the Platform
for the Accelerated Realization, Analysis, and Discovery of Interface Materials
(PARADIM). PARADIM seeks to advance fundamental understanding of oxide-based
hetero-interfaces with a range of two-dimensional (2D) material systems
including oxides, chalcogenides and graphene through transformational research
and mid-scale investments in instrumentation for bulk and thin film crystal
growth and characterization. Fabricating interfaces and heterostructures between
complex oxides and 2D materials allows for the creation of an atomically-precise
"active substrate" that can itself have novel electronic and magnetic
functionality, such as ferroelectricity, ferromagnetism, or superconductivity.
Creating interface materials with designed properties opens up untold degrees of
freedom that may result in transformational evolutions in next generation
electronics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PARADIM's in-house research team will focus on
developing hetero-interfaces that exhibit broken valley symmetry at interfaces
between 2D materials and active substrates with novel electronic and magnetic
functionality. External researchers from across the U.S. also working to advance
the next generation of electronic devices; specifically those researching
valleytronics, spintronics, and multiferroics; will also have access to the
Platform's growth capabilities and the expertise in synthesis, characterization,
and theoretical modeling. Along with access to mid-scale level tools and
expertise, a unique feature of the Platform is the access to new oxide bulk
single crystal samples and epitaxial thin film heterostructures produced and
curated by PARADIM. Signature mid-scale instruments of the Platform include a
suite of specialty bulk single crystal growth instruments with in-situ
characterization tools capable of growing manganites, ferrites, cobaltates,
nickelates, ruthenates, iridates and other compelling oxide systems. An MBE tool
with unique in-situ diagnostic capabilities and a tandem MOCVD instrument for
depositing non-oxide systems such as chalcogenides is also available. The
combination of instruments allows for the growth of a wide variety of inorganic
systems, yielding crystals for fundamental studies, novel heterostructures
exhibiting novel properties, and bulk substrates on which to grow unexplored
thin film phases and structures. In addition, the Platform makes available an
impressive range of TEMs capable of high-throughput structural and chemical
analysis as well as magnetic imaging and low-temperature spectroscopic mapping.
The research of external users and those of the PARADIM in-house team together
create a community of researchers poised to make transformational gains in the
accelerated discovery and deployment of new electronic materials, specifically
enabling new oxide bulk single crystals and novel
heterostructures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Along with an annual REU program, PARADIM
will offer hands-on research experiences for local undergraduates year-round in
the crystal growth facilities. In addition, educational materials will be
available to users of PARADIM in the form of on-line short courses as well as a
Materials-by-Design Toolbox that provides open-source software and databases to
users on-line. A signature outreach program will be the annual PARADIM Summer
Schools, where graduate students, post-docs, young faculty, and industrial
scientists are immersed in a seminar and hands-on workshop environment to learn
techniques in bulk and thin film crystal growth, theory, and characterization.
Workshops will also be held that are industry
focused.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;http://www.paradim.cornell.edu
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;The
Platform for the Accelerated Realization, Analysis, and Discovery of Interface
Materials (PARADIM) will help users design and create new interface materials -
materials that do not exist in nature - with unprecedented properties for the
next generation of electronic devices. Creating new interface materials with
unprecedented properties, by design rather than by serendipity, is accomplished
in PARADIM through a synergistic set of user facilities dedicated to theory
(figuring out where to put the atoms for useful behavior), synthesis (putting
the atoms in the targeted positions), and characterization (seeing that the
atoms are indeed in the desired positions). Each of these world-class user
facilities is equipped with the latest tools, techniques, and expertise to
realize this materials-by-design dream. Users from throughout the nation will
use PARADIM to discover and create interface materials for the next generation
of electronics and optoelectronics. These new materials will enable novel ways
for electrons to carry information in solid-state devices and efficiently
interact with magnetic, electrical, and optical stimuli. To balance the desire
for a rich nation-wide user group and the practicality of managing physical
resources across different locations, PARADIM locates its web-based theory user
facility at Clark Atlanta University, its bulk crystal growth user facility at
Johns Hopkins University, and its thin film growth and characterization user
facilities at Cornell University. Researchers from Princeton University will
participate in the in-house research activity. PARADIM's user facilities
leverage existing user facilities including the Cornell NanoScale Facility, the
Cornell Center for Materials Research, and the Johns Hopkins Materials
Characterization and Processing Facility. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to
training materials innovators to work effectively in teams, PARADIM will conduct
free summer schools involving hands-on use of PARADIM facilities to help educate
PARADIM's "community of practitioners" and advance the field through the cross-
fertilization of ideas. PARADIM will also serve as a focal point for training
the next generation of technologists - people who are accustomed to designing
and creating new interface materials with atomic precision and have the skills
necessary to capitalize on useful new interface material ideas and make them a
reality. This platform marks the beginning of a new PARADIM in materials
discovery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;http://www.paradim.cornell.edu