* 1539716
* Meeting: 5th Pan American Plant Membrane Biology Workshop  June 1-5, 2015; San Pedro de Aracama, Chile
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2016
* Erik Nielsen, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* elsbeth walker
* 04/30/2016
* USD 10,000.00

When people eat, they consume organisms that provide them with calories, amino
acids, and essential mineral ions required for their bodies to continue to
function normally. People do this primarily by either consuming plants directly
or by consuming animals that have eaten plants that have accumulated these
essential biological molecules. But how do plants mine the soil for essential
mineral ions that often are present in extremely limiting concentrations? This
occurs because plants have evolved specific membrane proteins that can
efficiently recognize and selectively transport these mineral ions from the
extracellular environment into the cell. The understanding of these processes,
and the proteins involved in this selective enrichment of biologically important
mineral ions within plant cells, is undergoing a revolutionary change, based on
both the recent ability to identify potential proteins involved in these
enrichment processes using genome-based methods, and the recent understanding of
the complex membrane sorting events associated with the appropriate regulation
of these biological processes. This workshop is aimed at supporting interaction
and transfer of knowledge between two previously distinct biological research
areas, the study of the sorting of proteins between membranes in plant cells,
and the study of the mechanisms by which membrane proteins selectively transport
essential ions (and other small molecules) across biological membranes. It is
anticipated that the scientific interactions supported by this proposal will
facilitate advances that will prove important to expanding the understanding how
plants are able to selectively accumulate biologically important mineral ions
and small molecules.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This application is for partial
support of the 5th Pan American Membrane Biology Workshop to be held in San
Pedro de Atacama, Chile June 1-5, 2015. This proposed workshop will focus on
topics covering the most important breakthroughs in understanding both basic and
applied aspects of plant membrane biology. This meeting will largely focus on
transport, signaling and trafficking, as these fields of investigation are
expanding at an extremely rapid pace. Given the importance of membrane biology
and its potential to continue to make groundbreaking discoveries of broad
fundamental importance and the large scientific demand for opportunities to
communicate and interact, the topic of this meeting is both exciting and timely.
The specific objectives are to (1) organize and support a meeting on the latest
scientific advances in the research area of plant membrane biology (2) promote
interactions between scientists and trainees to share new discoveries in the
field of membrane biology as it relates to normal growth, development and
nutrition and to enhance training and new collaborations that will move the
field forward and (3) to directly involve newly independent scientists and
trainees including graduate students and postdoctoral fellows, women, minorities
and the disabled in the conference. The broader impacts of the conference
include providing access to cutting edge science via oral and poster
presentations, to allow opportunities for interactions between trainees and
established investigators and to encourage and support long-term and significant
advances in this important area of research.