* 1539698
* Effects of Early Adversity on Autonomic and Neural Mechanisms Underlying Self-Regulation
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2015,10/31/2018
* Helen Neville, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Kurt Thoroughman
* 10/31/2018
* USD 594,785.00

Early developmental exposure to chronic stressors associated with poverty leads
to profound disparities in multiple social and health outcomes that persist into
adulthood. One specific aspect of brain function that is important for success
in school and success in adulthood is self-regulation, which is traditionally
studied from a strictly cognitive perspective. However, to meet the demands of
different stressful or non-stressful situations, in a healthy system the brain
and heart must interact to appropriately prepare the body and brain to respond.
Very little is known about how this dynamic interaction between the heart and
brain is associated with self-regulation in children and adults or how chronic
stress associated with early adversity affects this interaction. This project
will significantly improve our understanding of these relationships, which has
the potential to contribute to the achievement of a broad range of societally-
relevant outcomes for national health and prosperity. Results from this project
will provide a critical link between the field of developmental cognitive
neuroscience and pediatrics, behavioral medicine, health psychology, and
intervention science. This research may also identify potential protective
factors to the adverse effects of chronic stress on cognition, which would
provide neurobiological targets to inform the development and refinement of
interventions. Evidence-based interventions have the potential to improve health
outcomes, with numerous and substantial economic benefits, including but not
limited to reductions in health care costs, expansions in labor supply, and
greater productivity. Work by economists has shown that effective early
interventions have substantial positive economic impact, with conservative
analyses estimating a return on investment of approximately 7 to 1.
Interventions targeting self-regulation also promise to improve individual
academic outcomes and quality of life for children from backgrounds of
adversity. Greater academic opportunity for underrepresented populations can
also increase the diversity and the competitiveness of the domestic workforce,
both of which are crucial to the development of a more globally competitive
workforce in the 21st century.

The objective of this project is to determine how the dynamic interaction
between the heart and brain is associated with attention and self-regulation in
childhood and in adulthood, and to identify which aspects of this interaction
are the most vulnerable to early adversity and stress. These vulnerable systems
are likely to respond positively to early-childhood interventions. The central
hypothesis is that two branches of the autonomic nervous systems, the
parasympathetic nervous system (PNS) and sympathetic nervous system (SNS),
interact with behavior and brain systems involved in attention and self-
regulation in young children and adults, and that these functions will influence
the relationship between early adversity and attention/self-regulation. We will
test this hypothesis with three specific aims: Aim 1. To determine the relative
contributions of PNS and SNS mechanisms to behavior and brain function for
attention and self-regulation in young children and adults; Aim 2. To determine
the extent to which autonomic nervous system functions interact with the brain
response to feedback and errors in self-regulation on a trial-by-trial basis;
and Aim 3. To develop and refine models of the role of PNS and SNS functions in
the relationship between early adversity and behavior and brain function for
cognition. We will measure PNS and SNS function at the same time as brain
measures of attention and self-regulation using electrophysiology in children
and adults from a wide range of socioeconomic status backgrounds. This will
contribute to understanding how early adversity impacts brain systems underlying
the control of attention and behavior.