* 1539347
* Synthesis, Self-assembly and Morphology Transitions in Linear and Star Polypeptide-based Block Copolymers
* MPS,CHE
* 01/01/2015,07/31/2016
* Daniel Savin, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* George Janini
* 07/31/2016
* USD 104,250.00

In this project funded by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry
Program of the Chemistry Division, Daniel Savin of the University of Southern
Mississippi will synthesize study the interplay between the chemical composition
and environment of coil-rod-coil triblock copolymers and their interchange
between vesicle, disk and nanotube assemblies. The approach is to synthesize
symmetric, linear triblock copolymers and three-arm star copolymers; to explore
their solution self-assembly as a function of composition; to use pH and
temperature to induce changes in the solution morphology of the polypeptide-
based block copolymer assemblies; and to determine what factors of helix
assembly, pH and temperature responsiveness dictate the interfacial curvature
for block copolymer assembly into vesicles, disks or nanotubes. The broader
impacts involve training graduate and undergraduate students to gain a
comprehensive understanding of polymer chemistry, characterization and
morphology from a fundamental and applied standpoint as well as outreach
activities including the Kids' Science Challenge, web-based educational modules
through NBC Learn, and the ACS Science Coaches
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Polymers are long chain organic molecules and are
found in many facets of everyday life, including food packaging, structural
materials for automotive and aerospace transportation, and lightweight
electronic devices. Block copolymers are long chain organic molecules in which
two or more chemically distinct polymer chains are attached by their ends. When
a block copolymer is placed in a liquid that preferentially dissolves one of the
segments, the individual chains assemble into a range of structures with
nanometer scale dimensions. This work aims to enhance our fundamental
understanding of the chemistry behind the block copolymer assembly process. The
results of these studies could have important long term impacts on many
applications including drug delivery, biosensing, pharmaceutical processing, and
nanotechnology.