* 1539651
* Stress-Related Neural Responses Linking Toddler-Mother Attachment and Adolescent Adjustment
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Nancy McElwain, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Fritz
* 07/31/2019
* USD 450,000.00

Early family relationships lay the foundation for children's successful
development across the lifespan. One particularly important aspect of early
family relationships is child-mother attachment security. A child whose
attachment-related bids (e.g., clinging, crying) are consistently met with a
timely and sensitive response by the caregiver will likely develop a secure
attachment to that caregiver, whereas a child whose bids are met with rejection,
hostility, or inconsistent responsiveness will likely form an insecure
attachment. Variations in early attachment security play a role in 'sculpting'
the brain of the developing child. Yet, we know little about the potential
neurobiological mechanisms linking child-mother attachment to children's later
adjustment. The goals of this research are twofold: (1) to examine how early
child-mother attachment security (measured at age 2.5 years) relates to stress-
related neural responses at age 13, and (2) test whether stress-related neural
responses are associated with adolescent adjustment at age 14.

To carry out this work, participants will be recruited from an existing
longitudinal study, the Children's Social Development Project (CSDP), in which
child-mother attachment was assessed at 2.5 years. Ten years later, at age 13,
mother-adolescent interactions will be observed and adolescents will be
interviewed about current attachment relationships. Adolescents' neural
responses in two stress-eliciting tasks will be assessed using functional
magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI). At ages 13 and 14, adolescent adjustment in
multiple domains will be assessed via self, maternal, and paternal reports. The
proposed study will be the first of its kind to assess how child-mother
attachment security in early childhood relates to stress-related neural
processes and, in turn, adjustment in adolescence. Project findings have the
potential to shed light on fundamental questions regarding how early experiences
set the stage for later adjustment and will provide a much needed window into
the extent to which typical variation in early human attachment predicts brain
functioning in later development.