* 1539960
* I/UCRC Phase II: Collaborative Research:  I/UCRC Center for Surveillance Research, Phase II
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2015,03/31/2022
* Brian Rigling, Wright State University
* Continuing Grant
* Behrooz Shirazi
* 03/31/2022
* USD 456,000.00

The Center for Surveillance Research (CSR) was founded in 2010 as a Phase I NSF
I/UCRC. This award enables the Center to become a Phase 2 I/UCRC. Both founding
sites of the Center, at Wright State University and at Ohio State University,
will move to Phase 2. The main objective of CSR is to develop the theory and
practice for modern surveillance. It has a healthy membership profile that has a
mix of federal and industry members. In Phase 2, Wright State University seeks
to become the Lead Site of the Center, as opposed to Phase 1 lead site of Ohio
State. The fundamental intellectual issues addressed by the Center's continuing
research portfolio have immediate application in application domains including
medical imaging, transportation, and law enforcement. Further, the center will
continue to host summer internship programs, in collaboration with the Air Force
Minority Leaders Program and others, to attract participation by a diverse
population of students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While use of sensor technology is
pervasive in modern society, fundamental questions about the performance of
sensor systems remain unaddressed. The inability to answer these questions, or
even properly phrase the questions, impacts not only the development of sensors
themselves, but also the development of data exploitation algorithms. Further,
these unanswered questions are critical for eventually providing human users the
ability to understanding the reliability of sensor performance under new and
changing operating conditions. Specifically, sensors are developed under an
assumed mode of use, and the exploitation algorithms are then left to extract
whatever information the resultant sensor may afford, without that prior
development having been properly informed by a realistic performance model.
Moreover, the exploitation algorithms themselves are developed under presumed
statistical models that may have varying degrees of agreement with actual sensor
phenomenology, and these algorithms are then trained (e.g., to set operating
parameters) based on a representative set of training measurements. However, the
sensor community lacks any means to propagate mismatch between statistical
assumptions and sensor phenomenology, or mismatch between training data and
operational data, into the sensor algorithm or to even reliably predict a
sensor's ultimate performance. Under Phase II, the Center for Surveillance
Research will continue to address these shortcomings in existing sensor
technology.