* 1539709
* EAGER: Exploring Radical Anions as Catalysts in Conjugated Polymer Synthesis
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2018
* Anne McNeil, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 04/30/2018
* USD 200,000.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Catalysis Program and the Macromolecular,
Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor
Anne McNeil of the University of Michigan is developing new methods to prepare
conjugated polymers. Polymers are long chain organic molecules that derive many
of their properties from the entanglements and interactions between the chains.
Polymers have become ubiquitous materials in our daily lives, impacting most
industries, including agriculture and food, health and safety, as well as
transportation. While most of these materials are insulating a subset, known as
conjugated polymers, can conduct charge and have been used as active components
in light-harvesting solar cells and light-emitting displays. Professor McNeil
will study new chemistries to connect molecules together to form conjugated
polymers. The market for conducting polymers is estimate to grow to $ 1.6
billion by 2017, so the impact of developing a this polymerization methodology
is potentially significant. The broader impacts further involve training
undergraduate and graduate students, mentoring undergraduate students from
minority groups underrepresented in the chemical sciences, and disseminating
research results broadly through presentations at conferences and publications
in journals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Chain-growth polymerization methods for
synthesizing conjugated polymers remains limited to a narrow set of electron-
rich monomers. In this project, Professor McNeil is studying radical anion
catalysis to synthesize conjugated, electron deficient polymers in a chain-
growth fashion. Model systems for the putative radical anion mechanism-based
olgomerization of the subject compounds are being developed and studied with the
goal of understanding and controlling the initiation and propagation
chemistries. A combination of kinetic and mechanistic analyses using reactivity
studies, EPR spectroscopy, mass spectrometry, are being applied to gain insights
into the chemistries of these systems and then to convert this knowledge into
polymerization methodology. These studies should make a significant impact on
the field as donor/acceptor copolymers with specified compositions, sequences,
lengths and dispersities will be accessible for the first time.