* 1539244
* ALOHA Cabled Observatory Continuing Operations and Maintenance
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2018
* James Potemra, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 09/30/2018
* USD 986,000.00

The long-term ocean monitoring site 100 km north of Oahu, Hawaii known as
station ALOHA (A Long-term Oligotrophic Habitat Assessment) has been the
location of repeated observations since the late 1980¡¦s. More recently, a deep-
sea observatory, cabled to shore, was established near station ALOHA. The ALOHA
Cabled Observatory (ACO) was deployed in June 2011 and supports innovative
scientific research at Station ALOHA. The ACO provides the ocean science
community with essential infrastructure and access for sustained science at
Station ALOHA, an oligotrophic (¡§desert¡¨) site representative of a large
fraction of the global ocean. As the deepest operational cabled station, it
enables the development, testing and operation for science of new ocean
observing sensors and technology, from the abyss to the surface. ALOHA is one
setting where it will be possible to connect the ocean from top to bottom, both
literally and figuratively, to improve understanding so we can model and predict
for human impacts biogeochemical and physical processes at all temporal and
spatial scales.

For the past 27 years on a monthly schedule, the Hawai'i Ocean Time-series (HOT)
project has been collecting ship-based oceanographic data; for the last 11
years, the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution (WHOI) HOT Site (WHOTS) mooring
has provided comprehensive meteorological and upper ocean data. These data
together with those from many associated process studies form a unique,
multivariate, long-term data set of the ocean state centered at one location.
With the availability of relatively high power (1200 W), data bandwidth (100
Mb/s) and precise timing (1 ?Ýs), a basic suite of core observations, and a new
remotely operated vehicle (ROV) coming on-line, the ACO can support new and
innovative science studies, in their own right as well as to complement HOT and
other Station ALOHA science. Science questions include: How much carbon is
exported to pelagic depths, the benthos and the sediment? What governs nutrient
injection events into the euphotic zone, and export events to the deeper sea?
What are the coupled biological and physical details and impacts of mixing
throughout the water column? What are the biological and physical energetics in
the abyssal ocean? How well are infra-gravity wave models performing? How do
marine mammal populations and behaviors change over time? Can passive acoustics
be used to infer ocean temperature? What can we learn about tsunamis and seismic
events from the bottom pressure? Addressing such challenging questions will
require technology advances such as distributed bottom arrays and water column
profiling moorings. This grant supports continued ACO operations and maintenance
for the scientific community. Core instrumentation will be repaired, deployed,
and maintained, including a second basic sensor package (pressure, fluorometer,
and temperature/salinity). All data, including real time video and audio
streams, are publically available. The ACO, the deepest operating cabled ocean
observatory on our planet at 4728 m water depth, provides the infrastructure for
new and exciting, globally relevant science and technology at ALOHA.