* 1539179
* BPC-AE: ACCESSCOMPUTING - THIRD EXTENSION
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2023
* Richard Ladner, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Allyson Kennedy
* 08/31/2023
* USD 4,469,252.00

The University of Washington (UW) proposes an extension for the Alliance for
Access to Computing Careers (AccessComputing). AccessComputing is the
cornerstone of the national effort to broaden the participation of persons and
students with disabilities in computing. Through an array of institutional
partnerships and research on universal design for inclusion of students with
disabilities, AccessComputing is directly aligned with NSF goals of broadening
participation. AccessComputing focuses on students with disabilities who are a
critically underserved group in STEM
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;AccessComputing engages individuals with
disabilities as well as those who support, serve, guide, educate, and employ
them in transformational efforts to make the computing disciplines more
welcoming and accessible to individuals with disabilities, including post-9/11
veterans. AccessComputing is a combined effort of UW's Department of Computer
Science and Engineering and DO-IT (Disabilities, Opportunities, Internetworking,
and Technology) Center, in partnership with diverse set of postsecondary
institutions, Broadening Participation in Computing (BPC) Alliances, and
computing organizations. The Alliance aims to (1) increase the capacity of
postsecondary institutions, precollege educators, BPC Alliances, and industry to
fully include individuals with disabilities in computing fields; (2) provide
direct services to individuals using evidence-based practices that support those
individuals as they move through critical junctures on the way to computing
careers; (3) build synergistic and lasting relationships among stakeholders to
promote systemic changes toward inclusiveness in computing education and
careers; and (4) expand an online resource center to share research and
successful practices worldwide. Applying methods grounded in knowledge
management, collaboration, and social network theory and practice, this
extension to the AccessComputing award will formalize earlier and new
relationships into a multitier organizational structure of partners,
collaborators, and affiliates. Outcomes for individuals with disabilities will
be documented by tracking the progress of student participants as well as
institutional enrollment and graduation data; and results will be compared to
local, regional, and national data with respect to the academic and career
success of people with disabilities.