* 1539687
* The Role of Frontal Cortex in Primate Metacognition
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2019
* Jeff Beck, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Fritz
* 06/30/2019
* USD 638,862.00

Award Title: &lt;br/&gt;The Role of Frontal Cortex in Primate
Metacognition&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Award Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Rarely do we stop
thinking. The mental experience of humans is one of continuity, with thoughts
leading to other thoughts. When we reflect on our past decisions and ponder how
we may act in the future, we are manipulating our own thought processes, a
process termed metacognition. Most research on thought processes at both the
psychological and neural levels has focused on single events such as how we
remember a picture or decide our next move in a game of chess. Little is
understood about serial cognitive events, such as the chain of decisions
required to plan several moves ahead in chess. Understanding how individual
thought processes influence each other -- venturing beyond cognition to
metacognition -- is a challenging but important next step for brain research.
Dr. Marc Sommer at Duke University studies metacognition using novel approaches
that combine psychological experiments with direct recordings of neurons in the
brain. With his Duke colleague, computational neuroscientist Dr. Jeff Beck, he
examines not only how decisions are made, but also how they are remembered and
controlled. Psychological testing of humans and non-human primates reveal how
well they adjust their decision-making when circumstances change, and computer-
aided modeling of the data allows for precise comparisons of metacognitive
abilities between subjects and species. Neural recordings from the frontal
cortex of non-human primates while they control their own decisions sheds light
on how the brain is able to link thoughts across time. Specific implications of
this work include a better understanding of human cognition and behavior in
fast-paced and unpredictable situations that require constant evaluation and
planning of decisions. The project will offer hands-on laboratory training
opportunities for undergraduates and high school students and will be
highlighted in STEM outreach to K12 schools, community lectures, and lay
articles on cognitive neuroscience. The research aligns with the public's
emerging interest in metacognition as an important factor in education, mental
health, and the management of oneself and others.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
experimental approach is to use an integrated set of psychophysical and
neurophysiological studies in which all data are analyzed and interpreted with
computational modeling. The rationale for the project is that humans are adept
at metacognitive operations, for example thinking about how to make a later
decision, but little is known about the underlying neural mechanisms. Dr. Sommer
previously recorded from neurons in the monkey frontal lobe and discovered
signals in one area, the supplementary eye field (SEF), that maintained a trace
of past decisions. The overall hypothesis of this proposal is that the SEF
contributes, as well, to the metacognitive control of future decisions. The
first objective is to quantify metacognitive behavior in monkeys as compared
with humans. Both species will be tested on a novel rule selection task. Within
a trial, subjects select a rule for making a visual decision (metacognitive
control), but across trials, subjects bias their rule selection based on past
outcomes (metacognitive monitoring). The second objective is to determine
whether SEF activity is related to metacognitive control and monitoring. The
approach will be to record from neurons in monkey SEF during the rule selection
task. The third objective is to test whether the SEF is necessary for
metacognitive control and monitoring. The approach will be to reversibly
inactivate the monkey SEF during the rule selection task. Dr. Beck will assist
with modeling and analysis of the data to ensure all results are statistically
sound and clearly interpretable.