* 1539035
* RII Track-2 FEC: Feeding and Powering the World - Capturing Sunlight to Split Water  and Generate Fertilizer and Fuels
* O/D,OIA
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2020
* Russell Schmehl, University of Mississippi
* Cooperative Agreement
* J.D. Swanson
* 07/31/2020
* USD 6,000,000.00

Non-technical description&lt;br/&gt;This Research Infrastructure Improvement
Track-2 Focused EPSCoR* Collaboration (RII Track-2 FEC) award to the University
of Mississippi includes Mississippi State University, Tulane University, and the
University of Alabama Tuscaloosa as partners in a collaborative project. The
project?s research focus is at the nexus of water-energy-food. It aims to
develop low-cost, high-efficient methods and devices that integrate water
splitting by sunlight to produce hydrogen and to reduce carbon dioxide and
ammonia to generate fuels and fertilizers. The research is highly desirable for
developing sustainable fuel and synthetic fertilizer technologies. This
collaborative project will directly engage and train seven faculty, five
postdocs, nine graduate and 14 undergraduate students, eight faculty and 16
students from community colleges, as well as 60 secondary school teachers and 10
high school students from Mississippi, Louisiana, and Alabama. The fundamental
science focus of this project is anticipated to advance knowledge and technology
in the water- energy-food nexus in the US gulf coast region and potentially
connect with the private sector for future technology transfer and
commercialization possibilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
description&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative project among four institutions in
Mississippi (MS), Louisiana (LA), and Alabama (AL) has three closely integrated
sub-projects in solar photo-catalysis: (1) Production of hydrogen by splitting
water ? establish low-cost and high-efficiency approaches that use sunlight and
integrate plasmonic metals with semiconductors or use nanoscale carbon-oxygen-
titanium catalysts and organometallic pincer complexes; (2) Reduction of carbon
dioxide to methane or ethanol fuels - explore photo-electro-chemical methods
that employ rhenium complexes to modify semiconductor catalysts for use in high-
voltage dye sensitized solar cells; and (3) Fixation of nitrogen to produce
agricultural fertilizers ? prepare catalysts with sufficient reduction potential
to convert nitrogen to ammonia. The ultimate goal is to integrate catalysis
technologies into a low-cost, high-efficiency solar cell that is devoid of toxic
materials. The device is expected to have sufficient voltage to split water for
hydrogen production and reduce carbon dioxide and nitrogen to usable fuels and
fertilizers. The research is integrated with education at K-12 to collegiate
levels and provides training and mentoring to junior faculty, postdocs, and
students at the University of Mississippi, Mississippi State University, Tulane
University, and the University of Alabama Tuscaloosa as well as those from
Community Colleges and Historically Black Colleges and Universities in MS, LA,
and AL.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;*Experimental Program to Stimulate Competitive
Research