* 1539395
* CONFERENCE: Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Synthetic Biology Course-July 27-August 10, 2015
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2018
* David Stewart, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Edward Crane
* 06/30/2018
* USD 99,900.00

Synthetic biology is a rapidly expanding multi-disciplinary research area that
relies on the integration of expertise in biology, engineering, mathematics,
chemistry, and physics. This field uses theoretical and engineering principles
to advance fundamental biological understanding and develop bio-inspired
products. The challenge of synthetic biology today is that interdisciplinary
expertise is often minimal, whereas a basic comprehension of the various
underlying fields is crucial to foster successful collaborations. This course
(July 27 - August 10, 2015) offered through the Cold Spring Harbor summer course
educational program represents a significant effort to address this need. The
series of lectures include laboratory exposure to cutting edge advances in
experimental and theoretical synthetic biology. The course is structured to
motivate the participants to share their knowledge with colleagues at their home
institutions, which may inspire more broadly a systems and synthetic biology
course and curriculum development. This course will help advance an emerging
interdisciplinary science that, in addition to providing insights into the
complexity of biology, will also inspire innovations that can provide critical
solutions for many current and impending societal needs.

The course fulfills an important need for development of an interdisciplinary
research workforce that is more aware of the opportunities that can be realized
from interdisciplinary collaborations including effective communication between
students and experts. The teaching material includes cutting edge training in
such areas as the theory and use of CRISPR technology to alter the genome of
complex biological systems; proficiency in cell-free transcription-translation
(TX-TL) methods; rapid molecular cloning using the Golden Gate assembly method;
and gaining fundamental understanding of computational biology using ordinary
differential equations. In addition, the course will provide sessions to develop
specific biosensors for metabolic engineering.