* 1539069
* VEC: Small: Collaborative Research: The Visual Computing Database: A Platform for Visual Data Processing and Analysis at Internet Scale
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2018
* Kayvon Fatahalian, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 09/30/2018
* USD 110,228.00

This project develops a new parallel computing platform, namely Visual Computing
Database, that facilitates the development of applications that require visual
data analysis at massive scale. The developed system combines ideas from
traditional relational database management systems (to more easily and
powerfully organize and manage visual data collections) with modern graphics
programming abstractions for efficiently manipulating pixel data. This project
implements a prototype of the visual computing database, release it as an open
source project to the community, and deploys the system at scale as a service to
scientists and researchers on the Google Cloud Platform. There is strong
evidence that in domains ranging from personal digital assistants that interpret
one's surroundings, to management of critical infrastructure in smart cities,
and to scientific data analysis, a fundamental requirement of the next
generation of visual and experiential computing (VEC) applications will be the
efficient analysis and mining of large repositories of visual data (images,
videos, RGBD, etc.). Scaling visual data analysis applications to operate on
collections such as the photos and videos on Facebook and YouTube, the traffic
cameras in a city, or petabytes of images in a digital sky survey, presents
significant computer science challenges due to the size of visual data
representations and the computational expense of algorithms understanding and
manipulating large image datasets. The difficulty of developing efficient,
supercomputing scale applications from scratch inhibits the field's ability to
explore advanced data-driven VEC applications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A central
aspect of the project is the design of a new visual data query language that
integrates concepts from high performance, functional image processing languages
with relational operators and spatial and temporal predicates, providing the
ability to execute sequences of complex image/video analysis operations with
high efficiency in the database (near the data store). Since visual analysis
workloads involve tight integration of data retrieval operations and processing
of the result sets (e.g., largescale machine learning, image
registration/alignment, and 3D reconstruction), a key design challenge is making
the results of database operations easily accessible to non-relational,
supercomputing scale computations. All together the project addresses
fundamental systems design questions such as: what is a good visual query
language for future visual data analysis tasks? How can key operations be
implemented efficiently on throughput hardware at scale? What are the
appropriate benchmarks for evaluating visual data analysis systems at
scale?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;URL: http://graphics.cs.cmu.edu/projects/visualdb