* 1539306
* EAGER: Metapopulation and metacommunity dynamics in a changing spatial and environmental mosaic - The importance of dispersal and gene flow
* BIO,DEB
* 06/15/2015,05/31/2019
* Angela Strecker, Portland State University
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 05/31/2019
* USD 197,081.00

Water development projects have transformed aquatic landscapes by changing
vegetation, altering seasonality of wetlands, and increasing connectivity via
canals. The ecological and evolutionary effects of these changes on aquatic
plants and animals are poorly understood, but will likely become more common in
the coming decades. This project will make use of 70-year records of the largest
water development project in U.S. history to determine how changes in water flow
and amount have altered the ecology and evolution of small aquatic animals. An
exciting part of the study involves resurrecting these animals from eggs buried
in mud for up to 70 years. Their genes will be compared to modern-day
individuals to understand what changes have taken place and why those changes
have occurred. Graduate and undergraduate students will be mentored, learning
cutting-edge genetic techniques, experimental design, statistical analyses, and
scientific writing. Results will be communicated to the public through outreach
to public schools, collaboration with volunteer citizen scientists, a blog and a
website.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the structure of spatial processes
is a critical need in ecology. Dispersal is one such process and a primary
mechanism by which species respond to a rapidly changing environment; it is also
important in determining the structure of communities and functioning of
ecosystems. However, understanding dispersal's role can be confounded by rapid
adaptation of species, which is affected by the spatial structure of the
environment and priority effects. The goal of this study is to measure
ecological and evolutionary responses of invertebrate populations across a
period of change in a complex environmental mosaic, using a new approach:
landscape paleogenetics. Hypotheses will be tested using the Columbia Basin
Project as an extraordinarily large experimental system. The study will exploit
a unique feature of some invertebrates, prolonged dormancy, to trace population-
level shifts over decades of changes in water distribution. A combination of
landscape surveys, historical ecological data going back 70 years, DNA analysis,
and landscape genetics will be employed.