* 1539034
* RII Track-2 FEC:  Bridging Cognitive Science and Neuroscience Using Innovative Imaging Technologies
* O/D,OIA
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Paul Gamlin, Medical University of South Carolina
* Cooperative Agreement
* Jose Colom
* 07/31/2019
* USD 4,000,000.00

Non-technical description This Research Infrastructure Improvement Track-2
Focused EPSCoR* Collaboration (RII Track-2 FEC) project involves the Medical
University of South Carolina as the lead and the University of Alabama at
Birmingham, Furman University, and University of South Carolina, Beaufort Campus
as collaborative partners. Much of our knowledge of brain function comes from
experiments using functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), which directly
measures blood flow to regions of the brain, but remains an indirect measure of
neural activity. The precise relationship between neural events and hemodynamic
response (increased blood flow) is unclear. This project will test the
hypothesis that universal rules relate these two brain activities, using direct
measurements in the brain and retina of mice and macaques.

Technical Description The research will develop new instrumentation for in vivo
imaging and cell subtype-specific stimulation in both the brain and the retina
necessary for interpreting functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging (fMRI)
measurements. These activities will help determine the extent of neurovascular
coupling and provide a description of the micro-circuitry, which represents a
critical and necessary step in understanding the full complexity of the brain.
The consortium will track neural and vascular activity with micron-scale
resolution, using two-photon microscopy and adaptive optics to measure the
presence of synthetic dyes interacting with genetically encoded sensors. Cell
subtype-specific stimulation will be monitored using optogenetic techniques. A
computational team will analyze the data obtained to tease out hemodynamic
signals. Experiments will be performed on macaques, selected because of the
similarity in size and functional repertoire with the human brain. Studies in
mice, where genetic and molecular tools are more readily available, will also be
performed.

*Experimental Program to Stimulate Competitive Research