* 1539798
* The Future of Center-Based, Multidisciplinary Engineering Research
* ENG,EFMA
* 07/15/2015,09/30/2017
* James Lancaster, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Kerstin Mukerji
* 09/30/2017
* USD 1,131,250.00

This collaborative project between the National Academy of Engineering (NAE) and
the National Research Council (NRC) aims to study the future of NSF's center-
based, multidisciplinary engineering research. NSF's multidisciplinary, center-
based, engineering research programs address a variety of key research,
education, and innovation needs of the United States. Given the changing global
context for engineering research, education and innovation, it is important to
consider new guiding principles for constructing a new vision of such centers
for the benefit of the nation. In addressing this goal, the proposed study will
consider a variety of questions, including: 1) What models might most
effectively enable breakthrough engineering research and discoveries that
require center-scale investment considering the convergence of physical science,
engineering and life science? 2) What educational models of center-based
engineering research programs are best suited to creating a more diverse,
internationally aware, and flexible engineering talent pool that is capable of
addressing complex, real-world problems?; 3) What academic-industry partnership
models might most effectively promote advances in use-inspired basic and
translational research, accelerate technology commercialization, and strengthen
the broader innovation ecosystem?; and 4) What metrics can be used to define
successes and risks of such center programs?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; This study
will inform NSF and other stakeholders about future directions of
multidisciplinary, center-based, engineering research. The results will
potentially influence decision making by several federal agencies, state
economic development offices, research universities, R&amp;D intensive industry,
and non-profit foundations interested in more effective and impactful investment
in and management of large-scale, multidisciplinary engineering research. The
study will be managed by a committee of experts, appointed by the presidents of
the NAE and the National Academy of Sciences. The committee will conduct
extensive data gathering and host a public symposium to help it articulate a new
vision for NSF's multidisciplinary, center-based, engineering research over the
next 10-20 years. The study will identify needs and gaps of current approaches,
and provide guiding principles and possible strategies for implementing the new
vision. The committee's conclusions will be published in a peer-reviewed report.