* 1539593
* CyberSEES: Type 1: Collaborative Research: Sustainability-aware Management of Interdependent Power and Water Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 01/01/2016,04/30/2018
* Josue Medellin-Azuara, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* richard brown
* 04/30/2018
* USD 40,441.00

While extensive attention has been given to sustainability in the energy
systems, including the subsystems of electricity, petroleum, and natural gas, an
oft-overlooked aspect is the interdependence between energy and other
infrastructure systems, such as water and transportation systems, and the
potential adverse impacts to economics, reliability, and sustainability caused
by such interdependence. For example, regulations in the water sector to
preserve freshwater may restrict water usage in the power sector, likely causing
reduced available generation capacities and hence jeopardizing the reliability
of power systems. On the other hand, environmental policies only focused on the
power sector, such as those encouraging retrofitting or installing carbon
dioxide capture and sequestration capabilities to existing and new coal plants
would further constrain the water system as coal plants with carbon
sequestration are among the heaviest users of water. Thus, there is a clear need
to better understand and manage the interdependence of critical infrastructure
systems to promote sustainability across all systems, while not undermining
economic and reliability considerations. This proposed work aims to address this
need through the theory, modeling and computation of large-scale, interdependent
complex systems by way of distributed, highly scalable computing. The results
will be widely disseminated through publications and seminars. Further, the
project team will leverage established institutional outreach programs to the
general public, especially to high-school students and teachers, such as through
the Engineering Projects In Community Service program and Purdue?s Energy
Academy.

The grand vision of this project is to promote sustainability across
interdependent systems, as well as to achieve economic efficiency and to
maintain reliability through decentralized yet coordinated management of
individual systems by establishing a complete modeling, analytical, and
computational framework based upon the general class of augmented Lagrangian
methods originating from convex optimization. While the augmented Lagrangian
method is not a new algorithm, the current implementation of such algorithms has
not taken advantage of its distributed feature, which would be particularly
suitable to deal with large-scale, interlinked systems. One of the major goals
of this work is to establish the theoretical foundations of distributed
Lagrangian methods and to implement the algorithms on supercomputer clusters to
demonstrate the benefits of distributed computing. This research aims to pave
the way for cloud computing such that the algorithms can be used by decision-
makers even without access to supercomputers. Another contribution is that the
augmented Lagrangian method algorithms will be extended to incorporate
stochastic data, both in terms of theoretical issues such as algorithm
convergence as well as practical implementation. The computational methods will
be tested and validated through real-world models of interdependent power and
water systems.