* 1539114
* EAGER: Kinetic and biophysical approach to engineering targeted nanoparticles
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2017
* Jered Haun, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 06/30/2017
* USD 100,000.00

1539114(Haun)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The purpose of this research project is to
develop targeted strategies for the delivery of therapies. The research involves
exploration at the interface of binding targets such that the adhesion of
targeted therapies is effectually enabled. The research will provide immense
benefit through the development and advancement of strategies for treating
disease without impairment to healthy cells, tissues and organs. In addition,
this research will result in the decrease in the amount of drug therapies
required as specificity and targeting is increased. This research will also
propel the science of adhesion forward through the understanding of binding
properties for surfaces. Improving capabilities to target diseases would change
the way the diseases are detected and treated. It would enable early detection
and personalized medicine capabilities, as well as lower adverse side-
effects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project seeks to explore the
development of nanomaterials as carriers for targeted delivery platforms.
Developed nanomaterials will have high-loading capacities, will enable facile
attachment of targeting moieties, and will have favorable pharmacokinetics. The
research will involve the development of multo0valent nanoparticles. Adhesion
dynamics will be controlled in these nanoparticle delivery systems. The goal for
this work is to achieve the first experimental demonstration of
superselectivity. The hypothesis is that precisely tuning kinetic and
biophysical properties of the molecular binding interactions so that they are
highly dynamic will result in exquisite sensitivity to bond valency. In this
manner, adhesion to normal cells would only be transient in nature, but firm
binding would occur at higher target levels or after de novo expression of a co-
target. The hypothesis will be tested using vascular inflammation as a model via
the target ICAM-1. The PI postulates that the transient binding paradigm
proposed would enable a unique and exciting capability: active surveillance of
the vascular wall for sites of disease.