* 1539859
* INSPIRE: Classical Entanglement in Optical Science and Engineering
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2020
* Joseph Eberly, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Robert Forrey
* 07/31/2020
* USD 777,000.00

This INSPIRE project is jointly funded by MPS/PHY/Atomic, Molecular and Optical
Experimental Physics (Experimental), MPS/PHY/Molecular and Optical Physics
(Theoretical), and ENG/ECCS/Electronic, Photonic and Magnetic Devices with co-
funding from the MPS Office of Multidisciplinary Activities and the Office of
Integrative Activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project involves research on
beams of light, with high potential for significant advances in fields such as
telecommunication. The research to be done will include theoretical studies as
well as laboratory demonstrations. The projected results include dramatic
simplifications of communication techniques that can come from exploitation of
the principle of "entanglement", previously not associated with macroscopic
light beams. Entanglement refers to the situation in which widely separated
particles cannot be described independently of each other (or, mathematically,
when the whole is not equal to the sum of its parts).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
goal of the project is to demonstrate the utility of entanglement at the non-
quantum level. The simple existence of non-quantum entanglement is quickly
becoming accepted. Utility will come, for example, from acquiring the ability to
use classically entangled macroscopic light beams for communications protocols.
This will avoid the strict requirements associated with generation and
management and registration of individual photons. In practice, below-threshold
diode laser light will provide macroscopically entangled light beams with
exactly classical (thermal Gaussian) statistics, and power meters will provide
detection capability without individual photon detection. This combination has
already been demonstrated in the laboratory. Desirable classical features are
the ability to obtain entanglement beyond the two-party level with ordinary lab
devices, as well as the existence of stochastic randomness, available in every
partially polarized macroscopic light beam. A new theoretical description of
three-party additive entanglement inequalities, distinct from tangle-based
monogamy, has already emerged from ongoing preliminary work. Two-way beneficial
exchanges with the fields of quantum information and quantum optics appear
desirable and feasible, for example in implementing protocols for optical multi-
mode entanglement swapping at the macroscopic level.Experimental verification
will elucidate the potential benefits of this new theory in practical
applications.