* 1539586
* CyberSEES: Type2: Collaborative Research: SmartFarm - Research and Education for Sustainable Agriculture Practices
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2020
* Chandra Krintz, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 09/30/2020
* USD 907,996.00

Ecological sustainability depends critically on the ability of world food
production to manage increasingly limited natural resources (such as arable land
and water) with new techniques that both enhance environmental stewardship and
increase farm productivity. To make agriculture more productive and the
productivity gains sustainable, growers are increasingly turning to
environmental sensor measurement, data acquisition, and data analysis. To date,
however, these tools have failed to achieve widespread use by smallholder
agricultural concerns. Importantly, individual growers and ranchers are
underserved by many recent advances in the commercial and research sectors that
make data analytics consumable as simple "black box" end-user products. Current
decision support offerings for these constituencies are variously limited,
proprietary, complex, costly, require that growers relinquish control over their
data, or are not widely available. This project therefore investigates a
comprehensive research, educational, and outreach program called SmartFarm,
which couples new scientific research in computer science, agronomics, and
precision agriculture with novel outreach and educational pathways that enable
our youth and communities to transform and ensure agriculture sustainability.
The research will bring new computing technologies to growers that are easy to
use, facilitate data privacy and control, and enable farm-focused, data-driven
analysis and decision support that helps growers increase their yields
sustainably. In addition, the educational and outreach plans will introduce
technically adept youth, who are increasingly ecologically conscious, to the
challenges and rewards associated with computer science and precision
agricultural science so that they are adequately prepared and inspired to
participate in the global challenge of increasing sustainable food production.

To address the problem of sustainable food security and food safety, this
project investigates unifying cyberinfrastructure and agriculture analytics to
enable precision, agronomics-driven farming by individual growers unlike what is
available today. The proposed system, called SmartFarm, integrates disparate
environmental sensor technologies into a customized, open-source, cloud-based
data appliance with new analytics that provide growers with a secure, easy to
use, low-cost data analysis and decision support system. Using open-source
private cloud platforms, this data appliance can be hosted at a range of scales
including personal, private clouds on-farm, large-scale public clouds, or in
some combination of the two. The research program will facilitate new knowledge
in: (i) multi-analytic agricultural applications for farm control, dynamic
decision support, and emergency response; (ii) self-managing, extensible private
cloud systems; (iii) robust sensing and data acquisition techniques, application
programming interfaces, and processing engines tailored to the needs of farmers
and ranchers; and (iv) private and hybrid cloud software architectures for
precision farming that are code and data compatible with public cloud industry
standards. The outreach and education efforts will expose students to cross-
disciplinary research and educational activities that train them as new
agronomists in new technologists in precision agricultural.