* 1539979
* Planning Grant: Collaborative Research: I/UCRC for Building Reliable Advances and Innovation in Neurotechnology (BRAIN)
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2016
* Marco Santello, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Dmitri Perkins
* 08/31/2016
* USD 14,486.00

This project will bring together teams from Arizona State University and
University of Houston in collaboration with industry partners to establish a
research center, called BRAIN (Building Reliable Advances and Innovation in
Neurotechnology) that will overcome several innovation challenges in
neurotechnology: 1) The pace of innovation exceeds the rate of evaluation for
acceptable performance; 2) Standards and regulatory science for rigorous
validation of safety, efficacy, and long-term reliability are missing; 3) Lack
of open access to technologies and synergistic collaborations impede transfer of
novel technologies to the market; and 4) Current technologies are costly,
limiting their utility in enhancing treatment and overcoming physical
disabilities. In addition, the BRAIN Center, through the efforts of the
Education/Outreach coordinator, will work to rectify under-representation in the
science, technology, engineering, and math (STEM) fields by broadening new
participation and retaining current participants in STEM through 1) newly
initiated K-12 outreach programs that expose aspiring STEM participants to
innovative neurotechnologies, 2) undergraduate internship program within the
Center that targets specific student organizations (e.g., Society of Mexican-
American Engineers and Scientists, Society of Women Engineers), and 3) focusing
on problems in the neurological space that affect underrepresented groups
disproportionately. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Center's vision is a synergistic,
interdisciplinary approach to the development and validation of affordable
patient-centered technologies, and use of those technologies in understanding
neural systems. BRAIN will leverage expertise in neural, cognitive and
rehabilitation engineering, robotics, clinical testing, and reverse-
translational research at Arizona State University (ASU) and the University of
Houston (UH) to (a) enhance the rate of development and empirical validation of
new technologies through partnerships with industry leaders and other strategic
partners; (b) develop standards and test technologies in human and non-human
models using a multi-scale approach ranging from single neurons to organismal
systems; (c) characterize novel and innovative technologies such as biosensors
and quantitative analysis tools for systems and behaviors; (d) evaluate the
impact of these technologies on quality of life; and (e) reduce the cost burden
of neural technologies on hospitals and families.