* 1539108
* Meeting: Plants Between a Rock and a Hard Place: The Interface between Plant Abiotic and Biotic Stress Responses
* BIO,IOS
* 06/15/2015,05/31/2016
* David Mendoza-Cozatl, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 05/31/2016
* USD 10,000.00

Worldwide, humans rely on plants for food, fiber, and fuel, and all nations face
the daunting task of growing food for nine billion people by 2050 while at the
same time reducing the carbon, fertilizer and water footprint of agriculture. In
addition, the consensus prediction is that global climate change will
destabilize the conditions for plant growth with higher CO2 levels and severe
fluctuations in temperature and precipitation. These adverse conditions will
likely favor the spread of plant pathogens into new geographic areas,
compounding the problems for agriculture. Such a scenario increases the need to
develop crops resistant to abiotic stress, pathogens and pests at a speed that
cannot be met by breeding alone. The combination of abiotic and biotic stresses
not only threatens agriculture, but also plants in natural environments that
fulfill important ecosystem services. Addressing these major challenges will
require a continued commitment to interdisciplinary and concerted research
efforts to understand the mechanisms and genetic potential of plants responding
to a combination of stresses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The 2015 Interdisciplinary
Plant Group (IPG) Symposium, to be held from May 27 to 29, 2015 at the
University of Missouri, has the theme Plants between a rock and a hard place:
the interface between abiotic and biotic stress responses to promote the study
of plant responses to multiple stresses under more complex environmental
conditions. It will bring together 21 of the world's leading experts in plant
stress biology to share their research over a two-and-a-half day period with the
aim of providing a platform that promotes cross-disciplinary interactions,
networking, and a lively exchange of ideas among the communities of scientists
working on different plant stresses. An equally important goal of this project
is to foster a supportive conference that includes students and post-doctoral
researchers with the aim of improving the transfer of valuable insights into
diverse topics in plant stress biology from one generation of scientists to the
next. Poster talks, speed posters, and poster sessions will broaden
participation by these early-career scientists. The project includes a concerted
effort to enable attendance of the symposium by up to three undergraduate
students from minority-serving institutions who will be recruited in conjunction
with the University of Missouri summer undergraduate research internship
program, along with undergraduate students and their faculty mentors from
Midwest institutions that serve predominantly undergraduate students.