* 1539427
* The role of mental templates in distractor suppression: Brain and behavior
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2019
* Joy Geng, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Fritz
* 07/31/2019
* USD 544,504.00

We all experience distraction, but the ability to limit it appropriately is
essential for the successful accomplishment of daily tasks, academic goals, and
professional advancement. This is particularly true in the digital age we live
in where we are constantly bombarded with sensory stimuli and information
content. However, despite its fundamental importance for human behavior, we know
relatively little about the underlying brain and cognitive mechanisms of
distractor suppression. In the proposed work, we will investigate the core brain
networks and mental representations that control distractor suppression and
furthermore examine why some individuals are more efficient at it than others.
The proposed work will help develop evidence-based approaches for dealing with
distractor suppression in a variety of situations including psychiatric
disorders (e.g., ADHD, schizophrenia), declines during healthy aging, or when
sustained attentiveness is important but difficult to maintain (e.g., driving).

The proposed work is designed to identify how healthy humans suppress
distractions using a number of behavior and brain-based methods including eye-
tracking, fMRI, and EEG. The specific aims of the project are: (1) to examine
how the mental template (of task-relevant information) that is held in working
memory determines the speed of distractor rejection, and to understand how
individual differences in the quality of the mental template affects the ability
to reject distractors; (2) to identify the neural representation of the mental
template and use it to predict the speed of distractor rejection (i.e., the time
necessary to suppress processing of distractors that have captured attention);
and (3) to understand how the mental template sets attentional priority and the
temporal dynamics between distractor suppression and target selection.
Distraction may be inevitable in our dynamic and often unpredictable world and
therefore our ability to suppress it efficiently confers tangible advantages for
our ability to pursue and complete our goals. This proposal tackles the problem
of understanding the mechanisms of distractor suppression by identifying the
behavioral metrics that define its speed and the brain representations that
underlie it. The proposed work will advance knowledge by filling the gap in
understanding of how we reject distractors and why we differ from one another in
the ability to do so.