* 1539872
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Title IX in American Universities
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2017
* Julia Adams, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Toby Parcel
* 07/31/2017
* USD 11,998.00

Over 100 colleges and universities are currently under investigation by the U.S.
Department of Education for violating Title IX on the allegation that they have
mishandled sexual harassment and assault. Yet until recently, sexual harassment
and assault were largely absent from Title IX compliance programs, which instead
focused on gender equity in athletics. This is a striking change with major
implications for schools, especially universities. Why did the implementation of
Title IX shift from an emphasis on sports to sexual harassment? By assessing
this question, this project will illuminate the changing university as well as
the complex relationship among social, political, and legal structures. We
develop a three-step explanation: first, we demonstrate how the law has been
applied over time and in distinctive organizational settings; next, we assess
how social movements, the professions, and local organizational factors
contributed to the change in Title IX's implementation in universities; finally,
we examine the political dynamics of legal implementation as they unfold among
and within multiple organizations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We conduct a
comparative historical analysis of three different kinds of data: 1) a unique
database that I have constructed of all postsecondary-level Title IX complaints
filed with the Office of Civil Rights from 1994 to 2014; 2) all lawsuits filed
under Title IX against postsecondary institutions from 1972 to 2014 with Notes
of Decision; and 3) case studies that examine the law's contested application in
four universities. This research will make theoretical and empirical
contributions to sociological knowledge of law, organizations, gender, and
social policy.