* 1540102
* Building Capacity for Miami University Robert Noyce Scholars
* EDU,DUE
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2016
* Jennifer Blue, Miami University
* Standard Grant
* Keith Sverdrup
* 06/30/2016
* USD 74,956.00

With funding from the National Science Foundation's Robert Noyce Teacher
Scholarship Program, the Building Capacity for Miami University Robert Noyce
Scholars project will use capacity building funds to design an MU-Noyce Scholars
Program in order to increase the number of highly qualified high school teachers
in science and mathematics to serve in high-need schools and economically
disadvantaged communities. The project team will develop two scholarship
opportunities and stipend options for talented STEM undergraduates and STEM
career professionals to pursue secondary teacher certification (Grades 7-12) in
either science or mathematics at Miami. The first option will provide two years
of scholarship for high achieving STEM undergraduates during their junior and
senior years while they complete a dual baccalaureate degree in STEM content and
earn grade 7-12 certification to teach science or mathematics. The second option
will provide a one-year scholarship for outstanding STEM career professionals or
recent STEM graduates to complete the master's degree at MU leading to secondary
teacher certification. The capacity building funds will also be used to develop
a robust mentoring and professional development program for future MU-Noyce
scholars to support their transition into full-time teaching and to assist them
during the difficult early-induction period, during which research suggests the
highest rate of teacher attrition occurs.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The MU-Noyce
Scholars Program has the potential to transform STEM teacher education at Miami
and provide a model for STEM teacher education programs in other institutions
via culturally responsive teacher preparation. New STEM teachers will be
prepared to: (1) understand cultural characteristics and contributions of
different ethnic groups; (2) incorporate ethnic and racial diversity content,
resources, and materials in the curriculum; (3) believe in the intellectual
potential of ethnically and culturally diverse students and accept their
responsibility to facilitate its realization without ignoring, demeaning, or
neglecting their ethnic and cultural identities; (4) understand how the
communication styles of different ethnic groups reflect cultural values and
shape their learning behaviors, and modify classroom interactions to better
accommodate them; and (5) use a wide variety of instructional strategies that
are connected to different learning characteristics. Evaluation of the project
and dissemination of results will further the literature on the role and promise
of a community-based and culturally responsive approach to STEM teachers' pre-
service preparation, beginning teaching induction, and retention by specifically
addressing the role of this approach in the recruitment of talented STEM majors
into the science and math teaching profession.