* 1540085
* Workshop to Expand the Use of Emerging Technology to Understand the Ecology of Avian Herbivores in a Changing Climate
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2016
* Jennifer Forbey, Boise State University
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 06/30/2016
* USD 7,800.00

Changes in global climate, including those caused by humans, have dramatic
effects on wildlife. This small award will support a workshop that highlights
recent technological developments that can help researchers identify, evaluate,
and resolve many of these challenges. The workshop will engage basic scientists,
conservation and management agencies, and industry representatives from several
countries, all of whom share responsibility for preserving wildlife. A high
school teacher will participate in the workshop, using results to create lesson
plans to inspire the next generation of scientists to use technology to solve
global scientific problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed technology
workshop is part of the 13th International Grouse Symposium that is hosted by
the Icelandic Institute of Natural History. The workshop will include seminars
and hands-on demonstrations to collect, analyze, interpret, and share
preliminary data. The overall objective of the workshop is to show an
international audience how to take advantage of advances in rapid biochemical
assays, robotics and remote sensing to better understand, monitor and manage
wildlife in a changing climate. Sessions will highlight advances in spectral and
electronic detectors that can quantify stress responses in plants and wildlife,
show how robotic animals equipped with audio, chemical, and visual sensors can
be used to manipulate and detect interactions among individuals, and demonstrate
radio-tracking systems and unmanned aerial equipment that can monitor wildlife
behavior and habitat quality. Participants will identify specific hypotheses and
study systems that are best suited to take advantage of emerging technology.
Time will be devoted to discussions of best practices, logistics, timelines, and
funding options to facilitate future collaborations and outreach activities that
promote the use and value of emerging technology.