* 1540142
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Simulating Interactions Among Environment, Population Dynamics And Behavioral Response
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2017
* Amy Warren, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2017
* USD 12,450.00

Amy Warren, under the guidance of Dr. Lisa Sattenspiel, will investigate the
complex interactions between human populations and their environments to gain
greater insight into the effects of resource stress and human adaptive behaviors
on the structure of prehistoric human populations. A key adaptive strategy in
response to resource stress throughout human history has been population
movement at various scales. Prior research on population movements typically
focused on large-scale abandonments in response to sudden, dramatic climatic
shifts. This study instead focuses on changing climatic conditions, population
dynamics, and population movements over a long span of time. The results of this
research can be extrapolated to make generalized statements about human
adaptations to climate and resource stress and, because these issues remain
important considerations in the modern world, can potentially inform efforts to
understand and mitigate subsistence stress among contemporary small-scale
farming groups. In addition, sharing the methods, data, and results of this
project with other researchers permits further investigation of questions of
long-standing importance in archaeology. This project also incorporates
activities that allow interested members of the public and even young students
to perform their own experiments related to human-environment interactions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Detailed environmental, demographic, and ethnographic data
culled from years of archaeological and anthropological investigations in the
American Southwest will be used in conjunction with agent-based computer
simulation models to investigate these issues. The computer models developed in
this project allow for realistic experimentation with various factors that
contribute to prehistoric population dynamics. Fine-grained environmental data
and research on the agricultural productivity of specific soil types under
specific climatic conditions allows researchers to estimate annual agricultural
productivity in two neighboring areas in the Four Corners region of the American
Southwest, Long House Valley and Black Mesa during the study period (AD 800 to
AD 1350). Incorporating this data into the models provides a realistic landscape
on which the simulated populations can carry out essential activities. Using
empirically derived estimates for fertility and mortality, one can simulate
patterns of population growth and decline and collect data regarding possible
structures of the prehistoric populations. This provides a means to generate
prehistoric demographic data that cannot be produced using traditional
bioarchaeological approaches. Several theoretical models, developed through
ethnographic and archaeological research, provide basic information about the
magnitude and duration of various population movement strategies in response to
resource stress. Incorporating these theoretical models with the computer
simulations allows for in-depth exploration of the nature of population
movements between the two study areas and the effects of these movements on the
structure of populations in the study areas. Implementation of these models
permits not only a more nuanced understanding of some of the factors involved in
changing population dynamics in the region but also allows for consideration of
additional factors such as conflict and violence, disease, and sociopolitical
complexity and their effects on prehistoric human groups.