* 1540741
* SL - CN:  A Research-Practice Collaboration to Improve Math Learning in Young Children
* SBE,SMA
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2020
* Jennifer Kubota, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Soo-Siang Lim
* 08/31/2020
* USD 749,998.00

This Science of Learning Collaborative Network brings together a diverse group
of experts to examine how math knowledge and attitudes together affect early
math achievement, and to develop tools to promote math learning at home and in
school for children in kindergarten to grade three. The network focuses on early
math because achievement in this domain is a powerful predictor of future
academic success. Moreover, math is a cornerstone for careers in the fields of
Science, Technology, Engineering and Math (STEM) and our technological society
has a high need for a STEM workforce that can push the frontiers of innovation.
Success in mathematics requires learning content, but also has social and
emotional dimensions. Yet math instruction does not typically address the
emotional dimension, instead focusing exclusively on content. This is
particularly problematic because many parents and elementary school teachers
have both high levels of math anxiety and less-than-optimal knowledge of how to
promote math learning and interest in young children. The end result is a cycle
of inter-generational transmission of low math achievement and high math
anxiety. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To break this cycle, the network brings together:
(a) researchers who study the knowledge and attitudes that support math
achievement; (b) developers who translate research findings into effective
educational tools; (c) practitioners who implement educational tools in real-
world learning settings, and (d) experts in the dissemination of such tools. By
combining these different kinds of expertise, the network will increase
understanding of how young children learn math and develop attitudes about math.
Further, the network will use this knowledge to support children's math learning
at home and in school by developing a toolkit for parents and teachers to help
them more effectively provide math instruction to children from diverse
socioeconomic backgrounds. The network will evaluate whether the toolkit
improves children's math learning and math attitudes as well as teachers' and
parents' math attitudes, and will refine the toolkit based on feedback from
those who are using it. Finally, the network will widely share the toolkit via a
publicly available website.