* 1540045
* I/UCRC Phase II:  University of Idaho Membership in Center for Advanced Forestry Systems
* ENG,EEC
* 08/01/2015,01/31/2021
* Mark Coleman, Regents of the University of Idaho
* Continuing Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 01/31/2021
* USD 411,964.00

Forest trees provide a wide range of traditional and advanced renewable
materials including wood, paper, power, composites, polymers, and liquid fuels.
Demand for these products is increasing due to population growth, increasing
standards of living, and an increased recognition that forests will produce
these products indefinitely if managers maintain the quality of soil in which
trees are grown. Yet at as demand for renewable wood-based products increases,
the commercial forest land base is shrinking. Meeting increased demands for raw
wood products from a shrinking land base requires increased production capacity
through advanced forestry practices. There is an important opportunity in the
Inland Northwest (INW) where both the level of past investments and
environmental constraints have limited gains in silvicultural systems.
University of Idaho has joined nine other universities in the Center for
Advanced Forestry Systems (CAFS) with the objective of educating a diversity of
students to improve the productive capacity of our forests and meet societies
increasing demand for future green, renewable
products.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cooperative research links forest managers with
universities to address a wide range of genetic and cultural problems. INW
forest land managers are faced with numerous questions about constrains on
forest productivity and the productive capacity of our forests under intense
management regimes. The University of Idaho is uniquely situated in the region
to address those questions in a rigorous and efficient manner. Such
collaborative research programs solve problems that are most relevant to local
land managers. Continued advancement requires work at the molecular to the
ecosystems scales, and over an equally broad range of time scales considering
the longevity of forest stand development. CAFS allows regional cooperative
research programs to take advantage of progress made nationally to collectively
advance forestry systems nationwide. Research will focus on increasing the
carrying capacity of INW forests by studying the constraints to growth at high
density and developing improved varieties for commercial reforestation. Recent
advances in genomics may significantly shorten the tree breeding cycle allowing
forest managers to apply genetic improvements to commercial forests much more
quickly than previously possible. The exposure of industrial managers to a wider
set of ideas leads to more rapid adoption of advanced technologies, which
increases competitiveness of our forest products industries.