* 1540678
* The Clinical Experience for Pre-Service Science Educators: An Exploratory Study of Their Collegial Networks and Opportunity-to-Learn Trajectories
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2019
* Mark Windschitl, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 08/31/2019
* USD 799,003.00

Clinical experience is one of the features of teacher preparation assumed to
have a significant impact on novice educators. There is, however, only a thin
research base about what makes such internships effective. This study, funded by
the National Science Foundations' Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program,
through Track 4--Research on the Preparation, Recruitment, and Retention of K-12
STEM Teachers, will examine the clinical experiences of pre-service secondary
science teachers from three different preparation institutions. The research
study will: (1) investigate how teacher candidates use "advice and information
networks" during clinical preparation to develop knowledge about the work of
teaching and to inform decisions about planning, instruction, and assessment;
(2) investigate candidates' "opportunities to learn" over time in the classroom,
documenting which aspects of teaching novices are given the opportunity to try
out and with what frequency; (3) develop quantitative measures reflect the
quality of "advice and information network" experiences and the "opportunity to
learn" data sets. These will be used to predict novices' edTPA (Teacher
Performance Assessment) scores on planning, instruction, and assessment. This
study will reveal from whom pre-professionals seek help in the field, what they
learn over time, and how it influences their work with young learners. This
project will help inform the design of clinical experiences by identifying how
networks of support might be structured and how cooperating teachers might
provide productive feedback, as well as articulating a trajectory of experiences
that may improve teacher candidates' opportunities to learn over time.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The clinical experiences of sixty pre-service secondary
science teachers will be investigated in order to develop a more empirically-
grounded representation of the learning opportunities of pre-service educators
during their time in K-12 classrooms. The first component maps out how teacher
candidates use "advice and information networks" (cooperating teachers, field
supervisors, peers in the preparation program, other teachers in the clinical
placement, methods instructors, members of on-line communities, etc.) during
clinical preparation to develop knowledge about teaching and to inform decisions
about planning, instruction, and assessment. The second component examines
teacher candidates' "opportunities to learn" over time in the classroom. It will
document which aspects of teaching novices are given chances to try out and with
what frequency over time--these experiences may include observations of
accomplished teaching, interacting with students in varied ways, co-planning
with a cooperating teacher, and co-teaching. Data for each of the first two
components of the study will become part of a case history for each participant,
and will include interviews with the pre-service teachers, the contents of on-
line surveys by these novices, interviews with methods instructors and
interviews with field supervisors. Quantitative measures will be developed that
reflect the quality of "advice and information network" experiences and the
"opportunity to learn" data sets. These will be used to test whether these
composite measures are significant predictors of the quality of teacher
candidates' practices as derived from an instrument known as the edTPA. The
edTPA includes documentation of candidates' planning tools, lessons,
assessments, analysis of student work, and analytic reflections on a sequence of
instructional episodes they designed and taught. If researchers and teacher
educators can understand the patterns of help-seeking and opportunities to learn
by novices that contribute substantively to their knowledge and practice, then
it could be possible to engineer opportunities for them to interact regularly
with others who influence their development as professionals. Improved clinical
experiences will mean more competent beginning teachers who, even early in their
career, are better situated to support students in learning about and
participating in science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work is supported, in part,
by the EHR Core Research (ECR) program. The ECR program emphasizes fundamental
STEM education research that generates foundational knowledge in the field.
Investments are made in critical areas that are essential, broad and enduring:
STEM learning and STEM learning environments, broadening participation in STEM,
and STEM workforce development.