* 1540528
* Collaborative Proposal: GP EXTRA: Field based professional development for Environmental-STEM (ESTEM) undergraduates
* GEO,RISE
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2020
* Calla Schmidt, University of San Francisco
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 08/31/2020
* USD 196,747.00

Preparing a future workforce in the science, technology, engineering, and math
(STEM) disciplines is vital to the economic prosperity of our nation. In light
of an aging geoscience workforce that exhibits a lack of ethnic diversity when
compared with other STEM fields, the geoscience community must develop new
models of mentorship for pre-career and early career personnel to build and
sustain the skills, diversity, and size of the workforce. Existing STEM
retention and diversity programs have recognized access to field and
professional experiences as critical to helping students identify as scientists,
form networks, and gain important skills necessary for employment in a variety
of public and private sectors. The goal of this project is to engage a diverse
cohort of Environmental-STEM (ESTEM) track undergraduates at 4-year colleges and
universities (4YCUs) and community colleges (2YCs) in hands-on, career-
applicable experiences that will launch students into the geoscience
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project reimagines the traditional geology
field course as a professional development experience to address the emergence
of new "environmental" geoscience tracks at many 4YCUs. Faculty from the
University of San Francisco, Mount San Antonio College, and the College of the
Atlantic are working with environmental geoscience professionals from academia,
public agencies, consulting, and non-profit organizations to identify key
geoscience career skills and develop a "badge" system to recognize mastery of
these skills. A summer field course and post-field seminar provides
participating undergraduate students with opportunities to engage with
stakeholders, learn and practice skills in the pursuit of earning badges.
Further, this program is demonstrating the potential uses of a new technology
(digital badges) for student assessment. Badges create space for dialog between
students, faculty, and stakeholders and are adaptable and accessible by all
students, not just those able or apt to participate in a given program. Badges
also enable transparent documentation of skill mastery for students and
employers, providing a new way for students to understand and market the skills,
competencies, concepts, and learning outcomes (SCCLs) gained through
environmental geoscience courses. Assessments are being used to ensure alignment
of stakeholder-identified skills, badges, and field curriculum, and address the
efficacy of the program in student retention in the geoscience pipeline. With a
new model of field course that targets environmental geoscience students,
engages stakeholders in the field, and unites a diverse group of learners
through institutional collaboration, this program serves as a model for
geoscience professional development at the undergraduate level. Lessons learned
through this project are being made accessible to the wider community through
webinars, workshops, and a project website.