* 1540797
* Longitudinal Evaluation of Noyce Science Teachers to Determine Sources of Effective Teaching
* EHR,DUE
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2020
* Elizabeth Lewis, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 08/31/2020
* USD 799,890.00

There is a well-documented need for competent, confident, and committed science
teachers to serve in high-need school districts. This Phase 2 Noyce project will
produce thirty new certified secondary science teachers. It will leverage the
work of the Phase 1 Noyce project, and continue the collaboration between the
University of Nebraska-Lincoln and the Lincoln Public Schools, to address the
overarching question: What aspects of teacher recruitment and preparation lead
to effective teaching by beginning and intermediate science teachers? In
addition, the project will conduct a research study to compare two different
routes to teacher certification, a traditional four-year undergraduate program
that meets the state's minimum certification requirements and an extended Master
of Arts program (developed through the Phase 1 Noyce grant) that exceeds state
requirements and meets the national definition of "highly-qualified" for science
teachers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By advancing the field's knowledge of how
individual aspects of teaching interact with one another and the long-term
effect of science teacher education on effective secondary science teaching,
researchers and teacher educators can better understand how to recruit teacher
candidates and create more informed science teaching education programs, thus
contributing to the education of more highly qualified science teachers. The
project's objectives are to: (1) Analyze potential differences between two
routes to science teacher certification using pre-post systematic data collected
on pre-service teachers (specifically: demographic information, subject matter
knowledge, clinical experiences, emergent pedagogical knowledge and
instructional practices, and teaching beliefs and self-efficacy); (2) Analyze
two programs' long-term interactions with science teachers' beliefs, self-
efficacy, instructional practices, and overall effectiveness (specifically:
student learning, teacher retention, and dropout rates); (3) Test two models of
teacher preparation that connect attributes of teacher preparation and effective
science teaching; and (4) Disseminate key findings on science teacher
preparation and teacher effectiveness to teacher educators and science education
leaders and associations. Multiple and mixed methods will be used for the
longitudinal study and evaluation of the project activities. This work, funded
by the National Science Foundation's Division of Undergraduate Education's
Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program, will provide reliable information for
state and national policy makers related to teacher preparation and
certification, thus empowering teachers to nurture generations composed of
intelligent citizen consumers of scientific knowledge and practices and,
potentially, encourage more people to choose STEM-related careers.