* 1540926
* Probing the location, number, and function of surface-bound antibodies on plasmonic nanoparticle biosensors using super-resolution fluorescence imaging
* ENG,CBET
* 01/16/2015,05/31/2017
* Katherine Willets, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Chenzhong Li
* 05/31/2017
* USD 251,066.00

Proposal: 1402610 PI: Willets, Katherine Title: Probing the location, number,
and function of surface-bound antibodies on plasmonic nanoparticle biosensors
using super-resolution fluorescence imaging

Nanobiosensors have the potential to revolutionize both in vitro and in vivo
diagnostics because they allow for targeting and signaling of biomarkers of
disease in a single, nanoscale platform. Typically, nanobiosensors are based on
a nanoparticle core, such as a 20- 50 nm gold nanoparticle, which is then
functionalized with molecules, such as antibodies, that capture and report the
presence of specific biomarkers. In the ideal case, the bound antibodies should
cover the entire surface of each nanoparticle core while retaining their
function, in order to maximize the chance of capturing and reporting on
biomarkers of interest. A great deal of effort has gone into developing new
synthetic strategies for preparing antibody-functionalized metal nanoparticles.
However, the small size of both the antibodies and the nanoparticle core makes
it incredibly difficult to measure where individual antibodies are bound on the
nanoparticle surface and whether each retains its ability to capture its target.
The proposed work will use super-resolution single molecule fluorescence imaging
to measure the location, number, and function of antibodies bound to metal
nanoparticles, in order to determine how different preparation strategies impact
the particle-to-particle heterogeneity and function of this important class of
nanobiosensors. Successful completion of this project will result in development
of better, more sensitive and specific nanobiosensors.

Technical Description: In super-resolution single molecule fluorescence imaging,
fluorescent molecules are toggled between an emissive and non-emissive state via
careful control of their chemical environment and the intensity of the
excitation laser. By allowing only a single molecule to be emissive at a time,
its diffraction-limited emission can be fit to a model function, such as a
2-dimensional Gaussian, to locate the position of the emitter with resolution
better than 10 nm. In the proposed experiments, antibodies bound to the surface
of metal nanoparticles will be labeled with fluorescent molecules, and the
position of each fluorescent emitter (and thus each antibody) will be determined
using the super-resolution approach described above. Target antigens will also
be labeled with a different fluorescent dye. If surface-bound antibodies retain
their ability to capture their target antigen, co-localization between the
positions of the different fluorescent tags will be observed, signaling
retention of function. By working at the single molecule level, individual
antibodies bound to single nanoparticles will be probed one at a time, allowing
a complete mapping of the function retention and heterogeneity across the
nanobiosensor population.