* 1540195
* Belmont Forum Collaborative Research: Delivering Food Security on Limited Land
* GEO,RISE
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2020
* Paul West, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Uhle
* 07/31/2020
* USD 343,272.00

This award provides support to U.S. researchers participating in a project
competitively selected by a 14-country initiative on global change research
through the Belmont Forum and the European Joint Programming Initiative on
Agriculture, Food Security and Global Change (FACCE-JPI). The Belmont Forum is a
high level group of the world's major and emerging funders of global
environmental change research and international science councils. It aims to
accelerate delivery of the international environmental research most urgently
needed to remove critical barriers to sustainability by aligning and mobilizing
international resources. FACCE-JPI brings together 21 countries committed to
building an integrated European Research Area addressing the interconnected
challenges of sustainable agriculture, food security and impacts of
environmental change. Belmont Forum and FACCE-JPI countries participated in this
initiative under a funding framework developed by the G8 Heads of Research
Councils. This framework supports multilateral research projects that address
global challenges in ways that are beyond the capacity of national or bilateral
activities. Each partner country provides funding for their researchers within a
consortium to alleviate the need for funds to cross international borders. This
approach facilitates effective leveraging of national resources to support
excellent research on topics of global relevance best tackled through a
multinational approach, recognizing that global challenges need global
solutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Belmont Forum and FACCE-JPI have provided
support for research projects that seek to deliver knowledge needed for action
to mitigate and adapt to detrimental environmental change and extreme hazardous
events that relate to Food Security and Land Use Change. This award provides
support for the U.S. researchers to cooperate in consortia that consist of
partners from at least three of the participating countries and that bring
together natural scientists, social scientists and research users (e.g., policy
makers, regulators, NGOs, communities and industry).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project brings together researchers and stakeholders from six different
countries and seeks to examine the challenge of delivering food security now and
in the future. This project will employ a modeling approach which will include
economic and sociopolitical constraints on food production and trade between
countries. This projects seeks to provide guidelines for global and domestic
policies or societal changes to ensure food security and potential trade-offs
with land-related environmental problems.