* 1540674
* Collaborative Research:  GP-EXTRA:  Preparing GeoSTEM Teachers for the Arctic Region (GeoSTEM)
* GEO,RISE
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2022
* Ute Kaden, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 07/31/2022
* USD 505,912.00

From national security to environmental stewardship, a countless number of
personal and societal issues require citizens to make informed decisions based
on their understanding of science, technology, and culture of place. Such
increased understanding of global change requires GeoSTEM knowledge and broad
participation, inclusive of minority populations. With the new Next Generation
Science Standards (NGSS), more rigorous geoscience curricula requirements are
forthcoming and better qualified and more effective Earth Science teachers are
needed. This is especially essential for rural Alaska, where unemployment is
high and where indigenous student populations have traditionally been
underserved. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This three-year project implements mentored
teaching experiences in remote rural villages to increase the number of Earth
Science teachers in Alaska and targets the overall interest in geoscience
careers of undergraduate and pre-college students (K-12). The project's
interdisciplinary team from the University of Alaska School of Education (UAF-
SOE), the UAF College of Natural Science &amp; Mathematics (CNSM), the
University of Alaska Museum of the North (UAM), and the International Arctic
Research Center (IARC) in collaboration with Alaska's rural school districts
will create and evaluate a multilayered recruitment and training program to
increase the number of qualified and effective GeoSTEM teachers who understand
and embrace the powerful local contexts of Alaska's Arctic Native villages.
Participants will increase their understandings about: (a) the interdisciplinary
nature of GeoSTEM contents; (b) place-relevant and hands on geoscience teaching
practices; and (c) careers in geosciences and teaching. &lt;br/&gt;The project
objectives are:&lt;br/&gt;(1) Development of a multilayered, sustainable
recruitment program with focus on diversity participation in
geosciences.&lt;br/&gt;(2) Development and implementation of a university-based,
3 credit GeoSTEM course that count towards both, UAF undergraduate geoscience
and education degrees.&lt;br/&gt;(3) Implementation of mentored Earth/geoscience
teaching experiences for GeoSTEM participants in indigenous rural schools that
includes pre-college career education for geosciences. &lt;br/&gt;(4) Research
and evaluation of the effectiveness of the (a) multilayered recruitment
approach, (b) the university-based GeoSTEM course, and (c) the mentored
geoscience field teaching experiences in indigenous and remote villages.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While the focus of this project is on increasing the
number of Earth Science teachers, pre-college K-12 students will also benefit.
During the geoscience-teaching experiences in indigenous and remote Alaska
villages, participants will engage pre-college high school students in
geoscience projects, hands on data collection and geoscience career education.
This project serves initially 20 pre-service teachers and creates mentored field
experiences in 10 schools serving 95% Native students and impacting immediately
more than 400 indigenous students. This approach helps to create a pipeline into
geoscience careers for indigenous students. The proposed project supports Earth
science teacher recruitment, effectiveness, retention, and equity in access to
education for indigenous and rural students.