* 1540000
* I/UCRC Phase I (Site): Center for Integrative Materials Joining Science for Energy Applications (CIMJSEA) University of Tennessee, Knoxville, (UTK) Site
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Hahn Choo, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Continuing Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 08/31/2020
* USD 481,829.00

The University of Tennessee, Knoxville (UTK) site of the Center for Integrative
Materials Joining Science for Energy Applications (CIMJSEA) seeks to close the
gap between material development and weldability and to develop scientifically
based methodologies for assessing material weldability and joinability that span
from the nanometer to millimeter length scales over a wide variety of materials,
while educating and developing a new generation of materials joining engineers
and scientists. The program seeks to identify&#8232; critical joining-related
challenges to ensure alignment of research projects and to explore&#8232;the
development of materials specifically tailored for manufacturing. Research will
be relevant &#8232;to the future and existing manufacturing. The UTK site
specialties include materials development, crosscutting capabilities that
include multi-scale characterization&#8232;and modeling, as well as a new thrust
area in additive manufacturing. The latter has the potential to benefit society
in a multitude of ways including reducing scarce and dwindling raw materials.
Proficient new engineers will design by building layer-by-layer instead of by
subtraction, allowing for unlimited possibilities in design complexity. The
program will reach out to a large age span of students, from elementary school
onwards, by organizing and coaching younger students through LEGO league
competitions, establishing and maintaining open 3D printing laboratories on
campus, and by supporting Senior Capstone Design activities. Technical efforts
of the UTK site will foster innovations in welding, materials joining
and&#8232;additive manufacturing technologies through interdisciplinary
research, bringing together design, robotics and automation, process control,
materials science, advanced characterization and high-performance computational
modeling. The research at the UTK site includes large-scale additive
manufacturing and joining polymer matrix composites&#8232;to metals. In
combination with existing joining technologies the efforts of the UTK site will
create an environment where the development of hybrid material systems is
accelerated and will be focused&#8232;on the scale-up of proven laboratory
developments relevant to automotive, aerospace, and energy applications. The
research will promote scientific discoveries related to the thermo-mechanical-
chemical properties of interfaces between these constituent materials and
advanced in situ and ex situ characterization techniques will be applied to
understand issues such as cyclic thermal and&#8232;stress loading, residual
stress development, and microstructural evolution. The end result will be a
steady flow of fundamental research at the crossroads of joining and additive
manufacturing.