* 1540970
* International Workshop on Bio-Design Automation (IWBDA)
* CSE,CCF
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2016
* Douglas Densmore, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 04/30/2016
* USD 12,000.00

The International Workshop on Bio-Design Automation (IWBDA) brings together
researchers from electronic design automation (the practice of using computer
software to build complex electronics) and synthetic biology (the forward design
of novel biological systems using engineering principles). The goal of IWBDA is
to make biology more easily, robustly, reliably, and predictably engineered and
therefore, tackle challenges in biology and medicine, leading to advances in
disease diagnosis, treatment and prevention.

Existing synthetic biology conferences and meetings do not explicitly focus on
bridging the gap between the work of experimentalists and computational
researchers. Bridging this divide is essential for the field of synthetic
biology to fulfill its promise. Furthermore, other venues do not actively
include the Electronic Design Automation (EDA) community, which can bring a wide
range of experiences, expertise, and perspectives to the design of novel
biological systems. IWBDA includes keynote and invited talks, tutorials, poster
sessions, panel discussions, as well as dedicated time for informal discussions.

NSF support ensures a technical and diverse set of undergraduate, graduate, and
post doctoral students can attend the conference to present research, learn more
about the field, and expand their networking opportunities.

The intellectual merit of this workshop is a key strength. This workshop will
provide a venue for between twelve and fifteen technical talks, four invited
lectures, ten to twenty posters, and include an industry/academic panel session.
Topics will be diverse and include areas such as: Parts and Standardization,
Biological Circuit Simulators, Biological Circuit Design, CAD Tools for
Synthetic Biology and Gene Network Reconstruction. No other such workshop exists
in Synthetic Biology/EDA.

The broader impacts of IWBDA are numerous. A wide variety of researchers (120+)
from EDA and synthetic biology will be brought together in a unique context
which does not exist elsewhere. IWBDA will capture and make public the slides,
posters, and abstracts from the session. In addition, a user survey will be
created to learn more about how workshops like this can better serve the
community. Finally, there will be numerous undergraduate, graduate and post
graduate student researchers in attendance. IWBDA encourages and supports woman
and underrepresented minority student participation and has a diverse technical
program and executive committees.