* 1540591
* ISU's Noyce Scholarships for STEM Teachers of Under-Represented Groups
* EDU,DUE
* 02/01/2016,09/30/2021
* Anthony Lorsbach, Board of Trustees of Illinois State University
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Green
* 09/30/2021
* USD 1,444,790.00

With funding from the National Science Foundation's Robert Noyce Teacher
Scholarship program, ISU's Noyce Scholarships for STEM Teachers of Under-
Represented Groups is recruiting undergraduate STEM majors in agriculture,
biology, chemistry, earth and space science, mathematics, physics, technology
&amp; engineering and preparing them to become grades 6-12 Science or Math
teachers. The project will fund 40 Scholars over 5 years, with $10,000
scholarships in their junior and senior year as Noyce Scholars along with the
opportunity to earn a $3000 research internship during their junior year (as a
paid intern in one of the university's research laboratories) and a $1560
teaching internship during the summer (co-teaching a STEM summer camp to 6-8th
graders from the Valley View School District). Illinois State University (ILU)
is partnering with Joliet Junior College (JJC) and Valley View School District
of the Chicago Unified School District to both recruit sophomore STEM majors
from the junior college and ISU to become NOYCE Scholars (earning both a degree
as a STEM major and a secondary teaching credential) and to interest junior high
students in STEM teaching as a career. The primary objectives of this project
are to: increase the number of students from under-represented groups seeking a
STEM major and a secondary credential, increase the transfer rate of students
from JJC to ISU to seek a STEM secondary credential, develop Noyce Scholars'
conceptual knowledge of STEM in order to effectively implement the Next
Generation Science Standards, develop Scholars' skills in teaching a diverse
student body, develop Scholars' understanding of the nature of science, develop
Scholars' self-efficacy toward STEM teaching, and increase middle school
students' interest in attending college and pursuing a STEM career.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ninety-four percent (94%) of the 50 graduates from a
previous ISU Noyce program (centered on urban high needs schools in the city of
Chicago) are still teaching in these high-needs urban schools. The current
project will enable ISU to use the lessons learned from that urban based project
to expand their efforts to serve a suburban high-needs district and to benefit a
student population whose importance is just beginning to be realized, students
from groups currently underrepresented in the STEM teaching field who might not
have otherwise considered attending ISU and/or seeking a secondary teaching
credential to teach a STEM discipline. Furthermore, it will support two new
partnerships: one between ISU and a diverse, high-need school district that
previously had few interactions with ISU and another between ISU and Joliet
Junior College, which should increase the transfer rate from one of Illinois's
largest community colleges to ISU. Assessment activities will feature a quasi-
experimental design. Experimental groups will comprise ISU Noyce Scholars and
summer camp participants while comparison group will comprise ISU non-Noyce
scholars and non-summer camp participants, respectively. ISU non-Noyce Scholars
will be recruited from their teacher education programs in STEM disciplines. The
summer camp comparison group will be recruited from middle school students who
did not attend the camp. A mixed-method (quantitative and qualitative data
collection) approach will be used to provide a comprehensive analysis of the
effectiveness of the project, and provide an in-depth interpretation of the
overall results.