* 1540245
* ATIP Workshop on Chinese HPC Research Toward New Platforms and Real Applications
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2015,09/30/2016
* David Kahaner, Asian Technology Information Program
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 09/30/2016
* USD 94,635.00

The Asian Technology Information Program (ATIP) proposes to hold a Workshop at
SC'15 in Austin, TX, that will provide a balanced picture of key Chinese HPC
R&D. Over the past 5 to 10 years, China has emerged as a significant HPC player.
Although a few US experts are following Chinese research, for others there is no
coherent way to fully understand what is occurring. This is specifically true
for younger US researchers who are not familiar with where to access the best
Chinese research. Broader impacts will include potential US-China collaborative
efforts in computational research. More importantly, it enables US researchers
to keep abreast of developments in China and to incorporate the best ideas in
their research in the US. It will also enable funding agencies in the US to keep
abreast of the priorities of Chinese funding agencies in HPC. The Workshop will
include presentations, posters, and discussions by Chinese researchers from
universities, government institutes, and industry in sessions addressing
systems, centers, and government plans, progress in components, system software,
and applications, and human resource and eco-system development. This balanced
program will enable the US research community to gain a more holistic
understanding of the current situation and better evaluate potential
opportunities for collaboration. As part of this proposal, ATIP will support at
least eight young US researchers identified as having a high potential for
research interests that overlap with their Chinese counterparts and who would
normally be unable to attend SC. Members of the Chinese research community have
agreed to support attendance by similar students in China who are anxious to
share their ideas and engage in collaborative work. The key aspect of the
proposed Workshop will be the unique opportunity for members of the US and
international HPC research community to interact and have direct discussions
with the top Chinese scientists and leading graduate students in both China and
the US.