* 1540518
* Studies in the Climate Dynamics of Moist Processes
* GEO,AGS
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2020
* J. David Neelin, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 06/30/2020
* USD 1,043,639.00

The moist processes which determine whether and how much it rains are central
topics in climate dynamics, and a better understanding of how they operate could
have substantial practical value. Such processes generally operate on the small
spatial scales and fast time scales found within clouds, yet they occur in
response to large-scale slowly varying atmospheric conditions. The dependence of
the fast, small-scale precipitation process on ambient conditions offers hope
that their behavior can be understood, at least in a statistical or average
sense, as a function of slower variations of temperature, moisture, and other
factors occurring over the regions in which the moist processes occur. This
project strives to develop a theoretical understanding of the statistics of such
moist processes, primarily in the case of convective precipitation in warm
tropical environments. Specific issues to be considered include precipitation
onset and its relationship to total column water vapor (CWV), non-normal
behavior of precipitation probability, the frequency of occurrence of
precipitation events of a given magnitude (as defined by total accumulated
precipitation at a specific location), and the dependence of precipitation
properties on parameters like the rate of entrainment of dry air into clouds.

Motivation for the work comes from the PI's previous work showing that the
behavior of tropical convective precipitation can be simply encapsulated through
rescaling techniques, for example by identifying a temperature-dependent value
of CWV beyond which rain rate increases dramatically with increasing CWV. When
precipitation is considered as a function of CWV, it becomes apparent that the
increase in rain rate with CWV follows the same curve over a wide range of
temperatures, only with a temperature-dependent offset, so that the temperature
dependence can be factored out by considering rain rate as a function of the
ratio of CWV to its critical value. The PI argues that this sort of rescaling
can be quite helpful for developing fundamental insights into the behavior of
moist processes and their dependence on ambient conditions.

The work in the proposal is organized into four themes: 1) fast-process
diagnostics for moist processes, especially for precipitation onset and
termination processes; 2) theory and hierarchical modeling for precipitation
processes interacting with the large-scale flow in the dynamic neighborhood of
convective quasi-equilibrium; 3) contributions to assessing moist process
sensitivity to climate variability and change; and 4) development of
observational constraints on moist processes to reduce structural uncertainty in
model simulations. The work includes a combination of diagnostic analysis of
observations and climate model output (from the Community Earth System Model,
CESM), parameter sensitivity experiments in CESM, and the development and use of
simple stochastic models. In one stochastic model the frequency of occurrence of
rainfall events of a given magnitude is computed as a function of moisture
convergence into the atmospheric column, so that changes in the probability of
extreme events can be determined as a function of large-scale climate
variability and change.

The work has broader impacts due to the importance of understanding how the
statistics of precipitation, including the likelihood of extreme precipitation
events and droughts, varies due to changes in ambient conditions such as those
that are associated with El Nino events and secular climate change. In addition,
the work seeks to develop understanding of the dependence of moist processes on
ambient conditions that can be used to develop better models for weather
predictions and climate projections.