* 1540008
* I/UCRC Phase I:  Collaborative Research: NSF I/UCRC Center for Fiber-Wireless Integration and Networking (FiWIN) for Heterogeneous Mobile Communications
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2015,02/28/2018
* Christopher Davis, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Mohan Kumar
* 02/28/2018
* USD 179,982.00

Communication, information dissemination and data distribution form the backbone
of the modern industrialized era. It is central to commerce, societal
connectedness and societal wellbeing. Legacy communication and information
networks are rapidly innovating and expanding to accommodate the projected
growth of global data services over the next decades. Global mobile service
providers project a 1000-fold expansion in wireless traffic by the year 2020,
brought about by the growth of new users, the densification of users in
expanding urban areas and service affordability. Exponential growth of
communication volume is anticipated as the "Internet of Industrial Things," or
the network of cyber sensor detection and monitoring systems grows and is
accessed through the converged optical and wireless network infrastructure.
These sensor systems may monitor aspects of human working and living environment
while others may monitor natural resources or balance the power distribution
network. All rely upon potentially critical data where needed through the
optical and wireless information network infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To
answer the anticipated technical challenges, coordinated consortium activities
are occurring across the world to develop the next generation, ubiquitous 5G
communication system. Georgia Tech together with the University of Maryland
(UMD) has formed the I/UCRC for Fiber-Wireless Integration and Networking for
Next Generation Mobile Data Communications (FiWIN) to help meeting the urgent
needs of the telecommunication industry. FiWIN aims to do so by bringing
innovative technology concepts, design, architecture and software to the table
based on the synergy between member universities and corporate members while
preparing a skilled workforce though the development of university curricula in
fiber-wireless integrated network, and stimulating interest in science and
technology among the broader community. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;FiWIN will bring
to bear UMD's extensive innovation in free-space, directional-beam,
communications and GT's long term experience in wavelength division multiplexed
passive optical networks, small cell fiber wireless access architecture for
frequency reuse, coordinated multi-point (CoMP) wireless joint transmission, RoF
backhaul/fronthaul, channel impediment mitigation and bandwidth efficient
multiplexing and modulation, to innovate optical wireless network architecture
design, security, network resilience, and performance, at lower power
consumption. The Center will seek to add expertise in network virtualization,
resource sharing, network monitoring and coordinated distribution of services to
achieve its ultimate goal of providing innovative solutions for the next
generation 5G mobile data networks though an integrated network of RF, sub-THz,
free space optical and optical fiber access technology.