* 1540532
* Support for Comparative Geodynamics and Tectonics of Venus, Earth, and Rocky Exoplanets Workshop
* GEO,EAR
* 05/15/2015,04/30/2016
* Laurent Montesi, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* David Fountain
* 04/30/2016
* USD 10,832.00

This project provides funding for travel support for early career U.S.
researchers and graduate students to attend a workshop on "Comparative
Geodynamics and Tectonics of Venus, Earth, and Rocky Exoplanets" to be held in
Pasadena, California, in early May of 2015. NASA missions to Earth-like planets,
such as Venus, indicate that the geodynamic processes operative on these planets
differ substantially from the plate tectonic processes that operate on Earth.
Importantly, the tectonic processes on Venus may provide clues as to how
tectonics operated on the early Earth more than 2.5 billion years ago. The
evidence for the nature of early Earth tectonics is scant, having been either
obliterated or substantially modified by younger events. This workshop will
bring together scientists studying Earth, Venus, and rocky exoplanets to explore
the role of key factors that control tectonic and geodynamic processes and to
compare planetary evolutionary paths within the solar system. The proposed
workshop has potential to benefit society or advance desired societal outcomes
through: (1) full participation of women in STEM; (2) development of a diverse,
globally competitive STEM workforce through involvement of graduate students,
post-doctoral fellows, and early career researchers; and (3) increased
partnerships between academia and NASA/Jet Propulsion Lab
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Among the grand challenges of Earth science
research, few have implications as broad as understanding the origin of plate
tectonics. Several models developed over the last few decades aim to simulate
the development of plate boundaries, localization of large-scale deformation, as
well as the link between internal circulation of the mantle and the presence of
plates. Achieving the next level of understanding may require determining the
conditions under which plate tectonics does not develop. The study of Venus, a
planet similar in many respects to Earth, provides a point of reference for
alternative global tectonics modes. It may be possible to find similarities
between Venus and the geological record of the Archean eon on Earth. The
"Comparative Geodynamics and Tectonics of Venus, Earth, and Rocky Exoplanets"
workshop aims at building an interdisciplinary scientific community that joins
Early Earth studies and planetary sciences. These communities are often
separate, but have much to learn from each other. The workshop will be used as
springboard to build new interdisciplinary collaborations and develop idea for
developing an infrastructure to bridge these communities. The workshop
paticipants will discuss: (1) salient geological evidence, especially tectonics,
of Archean Earth and of Venus to draw comparisons; (2) global geodynamic
processes that control the composition and thermal evolution of planets,
including Early Earth; and (3) advances in planetary observations, geological
observations, and modeling.