* 1540570
* Collaborative Research: Joint Task Force on Undergraduate Physics Programs
* EDU,DUE
* 06/15/2015,05/31/2017
* Theodore Hodapp, American Physical Society
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 05/31/2017
* USD 47,150.00

This significant and important project will convene a group of prominent
physicists from academia and industry to construct a report detailing what
should be taught in undergraduate physics programs. The goal is to ensure that
the next generation of undergraduate physics majors are well prepared for
diverse careers in physics. When the report is finished it will be disseminated
to all physics departments nationally. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The American
Association of Physics Teachers (AAPT) and the American Physical Society (APS)
will convene the Joint Task Force on Undergraduate Physics Programs (J-TUPP) and
produce and disseminate the report. These organizations have asked J-TUPP to
prepare a report that will engage and inform physicists in answering the
question: What skills and knowledge should the next generation of undergraduate
physics degree holders possess to be well prepared for a diverse set of careers.
The report will provide guidance for physicists considering revising the
undergraduate curriculum to improve the education of a diverse student
population. The report will include recommendations on content, pedagogy,
professional skills, and student engagement and will emphasize the collection of
documentable student outcomes. The results of J-TUPP's deliberations will add
significantly to the knowledge base of critical core concepts and core physics
practices that inform how undergraduate physics programs can best prepare
students with wide-ranging career interests. The effort will focus on aspects of
physics programs preparing students for immediate employment after receiving
their bachelor's degrees. It directly addresses several critical STEM workforce
issues including the development of a diverse, globally competitive STEM
workforce and increased partnerships between undergraduate physics programs and
industry. Particular attention will be paid to the structural features of
undergraduate physics programs that promote the recruitment and retention of
students from groups historically underrepresented in physics. This project is
jointly funded by the Division of Undergraduate Education in the Directorate for
Education and Human Resources and the Division of Physics in the Directorate for
Mathematical &amp; Physical Sciences.