* 1540783
* Understanding Essential Dynamics and Predictability of Madden-Julian Oscillation (MJO)
* GEO,AGS
* 12/15/2015,11/30/2020
* Bin Wang, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Varavut Limpasuvan
* 11/30/2020
* USD 500,000.00

The overall goal of the research is to advance understanding of fundamental
mechanisms governing the propagation and development of Madden-Julian
Oscillation (MJO) and to improve the ability of dynamical models to simulate and
predict intraseasonal variability. Fundamental causes for slow eastward
propagation and initiation/intensification of the MJO will be investigated
through multi-model diagnostic analysis, and numerical experiments using coupled
climate models. Processes through which the MJO teleconnection may feedback to
its own eastward propagation will also be examined.

The first hypothesis that will be tested focuses on mechanisms determining
eastward propagation of the MJO. The coupled Kelvin-Rossby wave structure and
the phase difference between the MJO convection and the low pressure anomaly
suggest that slow eastward propagation of MJO may be essentially driven by
convective interaction with dynamical processes associated with low-frequency
equatorial waves. Thus, the coupling low frequency waves and the large scale
convective complex (envelope) by frictional moisture convergence may serve as a
basic driver for the MJO moving eastward. The local change of moisture, moisture
advection, mean state moist static energy (thus SST) distribution, surface
entropy flux exchange, upscale eddy transport of momentum, heat and moisture,
environmental vertical shear and advection, the extratropical eddy activity
flux, and atmosphere-ocean mixed layer interaction can all further modify
propagation speed to various degrees.

The second hypothesis deals with mechanisms responsible for intensification and
maintenance of the MJO. The convective interaction with wave dynamics alone does
not generate instability. However, the additional frictional moisture
convergence interacting with the latent heat released in shallow and congestus
clouds can generate planetary scale instability for MJO intensification through
conversion of mean state available moist static energy to MJO available
potential and kinetic energy. The moisture advection, the surface evaporation-
wind feedback, the interaction between MJO and upscale eddy transport of heat,
moisture and momentum, the energy propagation from outside of the tropics may
also important for initiation and amplification of the MJO.