* 1540945
* EarthCube IA:  Collaborative Proposal: Interdisciplinary Earth Data Alliance as a Model for Integrating Earthcube Technology Resources and Engaging the Broad Community
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Amarnath Gupta, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 08/31/2018
* USD 286,000.00

A fundamental requirement for EarthCube is access to a comprehensive spectrum of
well-curated, reliably re-usable, and seamlessly interoperable scientific data,
but this does not exist today with many Geoscience domains still lacking
sustainable data services. This project is a collaboration between an
established data facility in the solid Earth sciences, IEDA (Interdisciplinary
Earth Data Alliance), three scientifically related data communities in the solid
Earth sciences that lack data facilities (deep seafloor processes, mineral
physics, polar cryosphere), a research data collection (MetPetDB), a group of
computer scientists that specialize in distributed information systems and
interoperability, and a social scientist to re-structure the IEDA data facility,
both organizationally and architecturally, to create the pilot of a multi-
institutional and multi-disciplinary alliance of data providers. The goal is to
create a model for other data facilities to partner with so far ?underserved?
data communities to broaden integration of Geoscience domains into EarthCube,
and advance both interdisciplinary and discipline-specific data science, while
realizing economies of scale by sharing common data services.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using IEDA as a testbed, the project will adopt elements
of three EarthCube technologies that have been or are being developed by
EarthCube Building Block projects: CINERGI (Community INventory of EarthCube
Resources for Geoscience Interoperability), GeoWS (Geoscience Web Services), and
GeoLink (Semantic Web technology), to build the architecture of the alliance,
thereby testing, validating, and potentially improving these technologies. The
technical work will focus on creating a flexible and scalable framework that
will allow a growing number of partner systems to plug into shared capabilities
such as applications for integrated data discovery and data submission and
contribute their resources. Architectural changes at IEDA will go hand-in-hand
with the transition of IEDA?s organizational structure toward the envisioned
multi-institutional alliance.