* 1540159
* WORKSHOP: Doctoral Colloquium at IEEE VIS 2015
* CSE,IIS
* 05/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Georgeta-Elisab Marai, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 05/31/2016
* USD 20,880.00

This is funding to support a Doctoral Colloquium (workshop) of about 18
dissertation stage doctoral students, in a variety of visualization subfields,
for a day of discussions and interactions with 6-12 distinguished research
faculty, to be held in conjunction with the IEEE VIS 2015 meeting, which is
comprised of the IEEE Scientific Visualization Conference (SciVis), the IEEE
Information Visualization Conference (InfoVis), the IEEE Visual Analytics
Science and Technology Conference (VAST), and the International Symposium on
Visualization for Cyber Security, and which will take place during the week of
October 25-30, in Chicago, Illinois. Visualization, or the use of interactive
graphics to support data analysis and understanding, has become an integral part
and critical component of many application areas. IEEE VIS is the premier forum
for advances in scientific and information visualization; this weeklong event
convenes an international community of researchers and practitioners from
academia, government, and industry to explore their shared interests in tools,
techniques, and technology, and is now attended by over 1,000 visualization
professionals from around the world. The papers presented at the various
component events are rigorously refereed and widely cited. More information is
available online at http://www.ieeevis.org. The Doctoral Colloquium at IEEE VIS,
a research-focused meeting which has taken place annually since 2006, has been
highly successful in providing a forum for introducing and grooming young
scholars in the field. Many of today's leading visualization researchers have
participated in earlier doctoral colloquia as students. The event brings
together the best of the next generation of visualization researchers and allows
them to create a social network both among themselves and with senior
researchers, which plays a major role in their enculturation into the
profession. Since the students and faculty are a diverse group on several
dimensions (nationality, gender, ethnicity, scientific discipline, institution,
and research specialization), the students' horizons are broadened at a critical
stage in their professional development. The organizers strongly commit to
achieving diversity among the student participants; to this end, no more than 2
students will be accepted from any one institution, and 2 students from the same
institution will only be accepted if at least one of them is a woman. The PI has
further affirmed that NSF funds will be used chiefly to support participation by
students enrolled in graduate programs in the United
States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In 2015 the workshop will convene on Saturday,
October 24 (the day before the main conference), with follow-up events
throughout the week during the VIS technical program. A primary objective is to
allow students to discuss their research directions in a supportive atmosphere
with a panel of distinguished leaders and with their peers, who will provide
helpful feedback and fresh perspectives. To this end, the 18 students will be
split into three groups of 6 students; two faculty panelists and one DC co-chair
will be assigned to each group in individual meeting rooms to hold their
presentations. Each student will be allotted approximately 30-40 minutes of time
during the group sessions, to include a formal presentation about his/her
doctoral research followed by in-depth discussions and feedback. All students
will be assigned a specific mentor among the expert panelists, who will be
responsible for reading the student's submission materials in particular depth
and providing detailed feedback; additional feedback will be given by other
members of the faculty panel, as well as by fellow student participants.
Discussion is encouraged. The feedback is geared to helping student participants
understand and articulate how their work is positioned relative to other
visualization research, whether their topics are adequately focused for thesis
research projects, whether their methods are correctly chosen and applied,
whether their results are being appropriately analyzed and presented, etc. The
goal is to give a second opinion on each student's doctoral research beyond the
guidance provided by the student's own dissertation advisor. There will be a
common catered working lunch on site for all participants (students and
panelists alike) where students get an additional opportunity to meet and
network with the expert panelists on a more individual level. Finally, at the
end of the day, there will be a roundtable discussion where all participants
meet and discuss higher-level topics beyond technical research. Student research
will be disseminated via posters during the VIS technical program, and via
publication in the VIS Extended Abstracts. The organizers will file a final
report (with feedback from participants) which will be archived by the VIS
Executive Committee and provided to the organizers of future doctoral colloquia.