* 1540690
* Winthrop Initiative for STEM Educators
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2021
* Beth Costner, Winthrop University
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Green
* 08/31/2021
* USD 1,049,977.00

There is a well-documented need for competent, confident, and committed STEM
teachers to serve in high-need school districts. Through this Phase 2 Noyce
project, the Winthrop Initiative for STEM Educators, WISE, will provide
scholarship funds to produce thirty-two new teachers at the middle and high
school level who will be licensed to teach mathematics, biology, chemistry,
and/or general science in the State of South Carolina. Each of these new
teachers will have a solid foundation in the content area through a bachelor's
degree in the chosen STEM field. The project will provide support through
several undergraduate and graduate initial licensure pathways. WISE will also
enhance the undergraduate experience for approximately forty-eight high-
achieving STEM majors by providing an annual summer internship program (designed
to encourage students to consider STEM education as a career) that will include
authentic research in the area of study and service learning in high-need
schools. York Technical College, a 2-year institution, will partner with
Winthrop University in the recruitment, mentoring, and support of Noyce
scholars. This Phase 2 project, funded by the National Science Foundation's
(NSF) Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program will also conduct a longitudinal
study to examine several aspects of their pre-service teacher education work.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;WISE provides students who pursue majors in a STEM field
three pathways for becoming a teacher. The first option is designed for
undergraduate mathematics and biology majors who decide early to pursue teacher
preparation. Scholarship support will be provided for the final two years of a
STEM major's undergraduate program allowing for certification in mathematics,
biology, and chemistry, with options to extend licensure for middle grades and
general science. The second option is for post-baccalaureate STEM majors who
take coursework to complete a Master of Arts in Teaching (MAT) program leading
to initial teacher certification. Both a fast track (3-term option) and a more
flexible program that typically requires four semesters of coursework are
offered. The third option is designed to combine aspects of the undergraduate
and graduate program. It allows students to start working in schools as an
undergraduate and complete certification at the graduate level in year five.
This new model provides flexibility for research, electives, and a balanced
approach that allows for fieldwork incorporated over time. During the course of
this project the investigating team will continue longitudinal data collection
in order to identify effective models related to recruitment and retention of
qualified STEM educators. Areas to be examined include: recruitment efforts;
transition experiences for 2-year college transfer students; summer research
experiences; persistence; influence of content specialists on dispositions and
skills, and the infrastructure to support new STEM teachers in high-need
schools. Ultimately, not only will WISE contribute thirty-two well-qualified
STEM teachers to the professional workforce, but WISE has the potential to
contribute research-supported best practices for the recruitment, development,
and retention of highly qualified STEM teachers for high-need schools.