* 1540223
* The Ethics of Communicating Scientific Uncertainty: Understanding How Scientists, Environmental Lawyers, and Reporters Treat Uncertainty Workshops; Fall 2015 and Spring 2016
* GEO,AGS
* 08/15/2015,08/31/2017
* Kathryn Mengerink, Environmental Law Institute
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 08/31/2017
* USD 188,037.00

This award supports two multi-disciplinary workshops in Washington, DC, at which
scientists, lawyers, and media professionals will explore the relationship
between scientific uncertainty and ethical and professional norms in
communicating and teaching complex Science, Technology, Engineering, and
Mathematics (STEM) concepts effectively and ethically. The workshops will build
on a previous pilot workshop funded by the NSF and run by the Environmental Law
Institute (ELI) that brought scientists, lawyers, and journalists together.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of the workshops are three-fold: 1) to
facilitate more effective cross-discipline communications by deepening
participants' understanding of the approaches their peers take to address
scientific uncertainty, and the ethical and normative reasons underlying these
approaches; 2) to promote more transparent and constructive debate on major
scientific issues by deepening public understanding of the ethical and
disciplinary constraints on scientific, legal, and media professionals charged
with communicating scientific uncertainty; and 3) to bring the challenges in
understanding and ethically communicating scientific uncertainty and potential
solutions to the forefront through technical and non-technical presentations,
peer-reviewed publication, and outputs for lay
audiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The motivation behind convening the workshops is
the notion that public decisions are heavily informed by the data, information,
and analysis developed and communicated by scientists, lawyers, and members of
the media. Yet each of these professions thinks about scientific uncertainty
differently shaped in large part by their own internal ethical standards and
professional norms.