* 1540920
* SL-CN: Engaging Learning Network (ELN)
* SBE,SMA
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2019
* Barbara Shinn-Cunningham, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Soo-Siang Lim
* 08/31/2019
* USD 749,999.00

One of the key features of the brain is how quickly and naturally it learns from
experience -- not only factual information, but also abstract relationships and
associations. Fire and flame burn; a sound like "mama" typically conjures up
concepts of mother, comfort, and love. While recent advance in neuroscience have
helped to uncover the basic brain processes that support everyday learning, this
knowledge has not yet realized its potential to help people facing various
clinical challenges. The goal of this project is to bring together
neuroscientists who understand the neuroscience of learning, rehabilitation
specialists who understand what kinds of problems individuals face, and computer
scientists who can help create engaging training regiments that make it painless
and even fun to undertake the often repetitious training required to support
learning. The assembled team will support exchanges of pre- and post-doctoral
trainees across different laboratories to jump-start collaborations, seed
projects that support interdisciplinary research into engaging training
paradigms, a web portal to disseminate results, and an annual scientific
conference that brings together the diverse expertise necessary to create fun
and interesting neural training programs. Immersive, active training programs
can have beneficial effects on the brain, and can be harnessed to study the
process of learning in motivated, engaged participants. Yet realizing this
potential requires bringing together traditionally distinct research
communities. Collaboration is needed among neuroscientists (node 1) studying the
science of learning; rehabilitation researchers (node 2) working with
individuals who benefit from brain training; and computer scientists (node 3)
who know how to build computer software that is fun to use. The Engaging
Learning Network (ELN) will develop a collaborative web encompassing these three
nodes of expertise. ELN will extend and apply the neuroscience of learning
through training programs that enchant a diversity of users while enhancing
their sensory, motor, and/or cognitive function. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
network comprises 24 investigators from 15 institutions: 10 neuroscientists, 9
rehabilitation researchers, and 5 computer scientists. Collaborations will be
built through a scientific meeting, seed projects, graduate student exchanges,
and a web portal. The annual scientific meeting will engage members of all ELN
laboratories as well as others from outside the network to promote multi-
disciplinary research on the art of designing captivating training programs that
enable us to study neural plasticity using programs that enhance human function.
Results will be disseminated through scientific meetings and the web. Once
vetted through peer review, many participants will make sensori-motor training
applications commercially available; these synergistic efforts will enhance the
real-world impact of the network activities and leverage the basic science
supported by the project.