* 1540747
* GP-IMPACT: Building a Comprehensive Geoscience Learning Experience
* GEO,RISE
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2021
* Leilani Arthurs, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 08/31/2021
* USD 400,075.00

Science, technology, engineering, and math (STEM) disciplines play an
increasingly important role in the economic prosperity and civic dialog of the
United States. The geosciences make fundamental contributions that underpin a
number of societally-relevant issues, including energy and natural resource
development, sustainability, and mitigation of natural hazards. This project is
addressing an anticipated shortfall in the number of geoscientists in the STEM
workforce, as well as increasing STEM literacy in the populace through improving
geoscience teacher training in Nebraska. Given the diverse populations available
in this EPSCoR-eligible state, the project is especially focused on engaging,
recruiting, and retaining students from a variety of ethnic and cultural
backgrounds, in order to broaden participation of traditionally underrepresented
students in STEM education and career paths. Collaboration with smaller colleges
in the region that do not have teacher-education programs in geoscience
education is building capacity among the STEM teaching community in the
state.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The University of Nebraska-Lincoln, in collaboration
with Concordia University, Midland University, Peru State College, Creighton
University, and the Lincoln Public Schools, among other institutions, is
undertaking a suite of activities aimed at improving geoscience student
recruitment, retention, and career readiness, including undergraduate students
who are pursuing careers as geoscience teachers. An immmersive 16-day inquiry-
based geology field course for pre-service teachers from colleges that do not
offer Earth Science endorsements provides authentic scientific experience and
training. A summer bridge program for students between high school and freshman
year, which includes both a shorter field-based activity and on-campus
activities, exposes students at critical transition points in their education
pathway to career opportunities in the geosciences. Targeted recruitment at
public schools that have highly diverse student enrollments is supporting
efforts to increase diversity in the geosciences and related STEM disciplines.
Incoming freshman are recruited into the Geoscience Learning Community, which
provides community support, mentoring, and networking opportunities. Students in
the learning community are recruited and supported as "Learning Assistants" who
help instruct introductory geoscience classes and engage as experts with other
students; this activity has been adapted from a successful model established at
the University of Colorado, Boulder. Support for students to engage in research
and internship projects and professional development is geared towared preparing
students for a range of STEM careers, including teaching. The project is also
developing a toolkit of effective inquiry-based and discovery-learning teaching
practices.