* 1540302
* Symposium: Computation-Enabled Materials Discovery; College Park, Maryland; May 20, 2015
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2015,09/30/2015
* Peter Chung, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Joanne Culbertson
* 09/30/2015
* USD 7,405.00

This symposium will serve as a forum to examine in a retrospective manner the
challenges facing science and engineering software and codes (SESCs) from
inception, to deployment, to adoption. The focus of this one-day symposium is on
topics related to computational aspects of material science. The overall
objective is to identify common threads via shared experiences and success
stories through a case-study approach and thereby offer new perspectives and
insights about the genesis of contemporary scientific infrastructure. The longer
term goals are to develop new educational and research programs in computational
sciences, engineering, mathematics, and natural sciences that are more informed
about expected challenges and more deliberate about contributing to new vibrant
communities of computational scientific infrastructure creation.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Speakers will be featured from SESC development efforts that today
have emerged into de facto standard tools for materials discovery and
innovation. The primary modeling scales relevant to materials science will be
represented: quantum, molecular dynamics, mesoscale, materials information, and
continuum. They will serve as case studies ranging in years of development,
level of physical description of the materials theory, degree of community
adoption, and the sector that predominantly sees to the curation and
maintenance. If a model for best-practices exists for creating, deploying, and
maintaining SESCs, the intent of this symposium is to identify this model and
fundamentally enable larger dialogues on Cyberinfrastructure, ICME, MGI, and the
like. General attendees and observers can expect to learn the developmental, and
often circuitous, histories of SESCs seen today as emergent or successful.