* 1540742
* Conference: 2015 TERMIS World Congress, September 8-11, 2015, Boston, Massachusetts
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2016
* David Kaplan, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Michele Grimm
* 06/30/2016
* USD 29,300.00

PI: Kaplan, David L. Proposal Number: 1540742

This proposal seeks support for Travel Awards to Young Investigators, Graduate
Students and Undergraduate Students to attend the 2015 Tissue Engineering and
Regenerative Medicine International Society - World Congress (TERMIS-WC) Annual
Meeting is to be held on September 8-11, 2015, in Boston, Massachusetts. A total
of 58 participants will be supported through funds that will be used to
partially cover registration fees and transportation expenses. The 2015 TERMIS-
WC Meeting is co-chaired by Dr. David Kaplan at Tufts University and Dr. Kacey
Marra at the University of Pittsburgh. The co-chairs are both established
researchers in the areas of tissue engineering and biomaterials, and they are
committed to supporting undergraduate students, graduate students, and post-
doctoral fellows.

Tissue engineering and regenerative medicine is an emerging interdisciplinary
field with the potential to revolutionize clinical treatments and therapies for
a variety of diseases. The TERMIS-WC Meeting is a key meeting of the Tissue
Engineering and Regenerative Medicine International Society, and it is estimated
to bring together approximately 2000 international researchers, scientists,
clinicians, trainees, and students from both academia and industry to present
and discuss key developments in the field. The meeting therefore integrates and
disseminates cutting edge research in tissue engineering and regenerative
medicine. Keynote speakers are leaders in the field and technical and poster
sessions include presentations on the latest advances. A strong role in the
meeting planning and execution will be played by the TERMIS Student and Young
Investigator Section (SYIS). The conference will provide ample opportunities for
students, investigators and clinicians to learn the latest advances in the
tissue engineering and regenerative medicine fields and incorporate them in
their educational, research and development, and clinical activities. Special
emphasis will be given to the participation of students, young investigators,
investigators from underrepresented groups, and women investigators. Activities
are planned that target these groups and aim to enhance their training,
mentorship, career development, and job search. The findings from the workshop
will be disseminated through the workshop website and the journal Tissue
Engineering (the official journal of TERMIS) website. This proposal is co-funded
by the Biomedical Engineering Program and by the Biotechnology and Biochemical
Engineering Program, both in the Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental and
Transport Systems Division.