* 1540244
* Comparing Cultures of Responsible Innovation across Bioengineering Communities
* SBE,SES
* 12/01/2015,11/30/2018
* Fred Gould, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* John Parker
* 11/30/2018
* USD 349,924.00

This action funds a three year standard grant in the cross-directorate program
of Cultivating Cultures for Ethical STEM. Issues surrounding genetic
engineering, biotechnology, and synthetic biology are contentious, especially
when applied to food, the environment, and industrial applications for which
direct human consent and medical benefits are not present. How researchers,
developers, and policy-makers communicate about and reflect upon their work is
of utmost importance to the fields of bioengineering. This research fills an
important niche by encouraging those involved in biotechnology innovation
systems to reflect on the ethical dimensions of their work and what it means to
innovate responsibly. At the same time, this research contributes to important
comparative research on conceptions of responsible innovation across four types
of institutions. Increased understanding about how participants within and
across various professional contexts conceive of and frame the ethical
dimensions of their work can assist with future cross-sector dialogue, and
potentially conflict resolution.

The research employs a novel approach for comparative analyses of meanings of
responsible innovation and ethics in bioengineering, while cultivating socially-
responsible cultures of R&D among graduate students, faculty, and outside
practitioners in genetic engineering and synthetic biology (bioengineering). It
innovates in four key respects: 1) it focuses on bioengineering, specifically in
areas in which engineering ethics programs have not routinely been applied,
genetic engineering and synthetic biology; 2) it evaluates an example pedagogy
of engaged scholarship, student facilitation of focus groups, for learning and
cultivating ethical cultures; 3) it uses framings of responsible innovation and
appreciative inquiry as key parts of the dialogue about ethical cultures in
bioengineering; and 4) it compares meanings of responsible innovation across
four sectors of bioengineering: government, academe, industry, and non-profit
organizations. Twelve focus groups (three from each sector), pre- and post-
surveys, and a values-mapping tool are being used for data collection. Example
hypotheses tested include: 1) that participants within types of organizational
communities conceptualize responsible innovation for bioengineering in similar
ways sharing several secondary values as well as core values (tight coalitions);
2) participants across types of organizations differ in conceptions of
responsible innovation, but share some policy core and secondary values (loose
coalitions); and 3) interest in responsible innovation and ethics, on average,
increase in both external-participants and internal-facilitators after the focus
groups (versus pre-focus groups). The project promises to contribute to theory
and methodology in Science and Technology Studies, science and technology
policy, and ethics education, as well as serve as an example of the practice of
"engaged scholarship," by which the activities of academe meet the needs of
external communities and vice versa.