* 1540003
* I/UCRC Phase I (Site): Center for Pharmaceutical Development U. of Delaware Site
* ENG,EEC
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2020
* Christopher Roberts, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 09/30/2020
* USD 0.00

The biopharmaceutical industry represents one of the most technically demanding,
high impact industries in the United States and worldwide, and is a driver of
scientific innovation and economic prosperity. One of the fastest growing, and
most promising type of new drug candidates, are those based on proteins as the
active ingredient. However, there are a number of long-standing, industry-wide
challenges that occur during the development and manufacturing of such
?pharmaceutical proteins?. The proposed I/UCRC Site at the University of
Delaware (UD) will bring world-class expertise to the existing Center for
Pharmaceutical Development (CPD), in technical areas that are central to
innovation for the development of pharmaceutical proteins (so-called
biopharmaceuticals). Examples include: more efficient purification processes,
better product stability and reduced risk of side effects or unwanted
immunogenic responses in patients, and improved control of manufacturing
processes. The proposed, expanded CPD will be the most far-reaching industry-
university consortium to date that is focused on pharmaceutical product
development, rather than the more traditional focus on ?upstream? research and
drug-discovery activities. The project areas it will address have the potential
to greatly improve the efficiency and economics of drug development science and
engineering, as well as the fundamental understanding and education of engineers
and scientists in the industry. This can benefit the U.S. broadly in terms of
domestic job creation, as well as improved time to market, cost to patients, and
reduced risk for investors, based on the development and testing of new
therapeutic proteins (sole focus of the UD Site) and innovator pharmaceutical
products more generally (focus of CPD overall). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The major
technical areas for the biopharmaceutical industry that are the focus on the UD
site for the CPD include: (i) commercial and pilot-scale bioreactors to produce
recombinant protein for use as a drug; (ii) extensive purification to produce
essentially pure therapeutic protein in aqueous solution; (iii) formulation of
the purified protein to assure multi-year stability, robust manufacturing, and
effective delivery to patients; (iv) analytical technologies and instrumentation
to support extremely tight specifications at each of stages (i) to (iii). The
faculty in the proposed UD Site for the CPD are world-recognized leaders in
areas (i) to (iv), and will provide new strengths to the current CPD that
complement the existing expertise in solid-state pharmaceutical stability and
delivery, and development of industrial enzymes and related biotechnology
products.