* 1540672
* Colorado College Noyce Scholarship Program
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2015,09/30/2021
* Michael Taber, Colorado College
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Green
* 09/30/2021
* USD 1,190,012.00

With funding from the National Science Foundation's Robert Noyce Teacher
Scholarship program, the Colorado College Noyce Scholarship Program is
recruiting Noyce STEM Teaching Scholars in the sciences and mathematics. The
project is funding 29 scholarships over 5 years: 9 of these are graduating from
the 9th semester Teacher Preparation Program (Noyce Scholars) and 20 are
graduating from the 5th Year Master of Arts in Teaching Program (Noyce MAT
Scholars). In this project, Colorado College is collaborating with Colorado
Springs School District 11 and Harrison School District 2. The goal of the
project is to develop high-quality, culturally-conscious science and mathematics
teachers. To achieve that goal, the project is creating a community of
undergraduate Noyce STEM Interns who develop a sense of self-efficacy for
teaching diverse learners and consider teaching science or mathematics as a
career. To further support the goal, the curriculum is infused with the practice
of culturally relevant pedagogy to prepare the teachers-in-training for the
high-need schools in which they will work. The project also includes a newly-
designed teacher induction program, with an integrated mentoring program, to
help teachers thrive in the environment of high-need schools.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI team has identified four barriers to recruitment,
preparation, and retention of high-quality teachers and has developed strategies
to address them. The first barrier is exposure of STEM educators to culturally
diverse teaching experiences. To address this barrier, the PI team is providing
20 STEM freshmen and sophomores in summer internships that focus both on
culturally relevant pedagogy (CRP) and research methods and analysis. The
strategy to address the lack of appropriate preparation for CRP is to integrate
the principles of CRP into the teacher education curriculum. To overcome the
barrier of staffing and retaining qualified STEM teachers in high-need schools,
the project is combining the financial incentive of the scholarships with a
rigorous clinical experience that links educational theory on multicultural
education with pedagogical practice and long-term teacher professional
development. To overcome the barrier of retaining thriving STEM teachers in
high-need schools, the project is developing a two-year induction program that
includes mentoring and intentional engagement to prevent teacher burnout. The
project is being evaluated using demographic data, grades and graduation rates,
lesson plan analysis, and, through surveys, student perceptions. The data
collected will inform teacher preparation program nationwide in best practices
to recruit, prepare and retain culturally relevant teachers for under-resourced
schools.