* 1540314
* Standard: Collaborative Research: Cultivating Cultures of Ethical STEM in Collaborations between Climate Change Decision-Support Organizations and Indigenous Peoples
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Julie Libarkin, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 08/31/2020
* USD 449,926.00

The National Climate Assessment of the U.S. Global Change Research Program shows
that the health, prosperity and welfare of members of U.S. federally-recognized
Tribes are already or will be affected by climate change impacts that range from
sea-level rise to shifting precipitation patterns to increased frequencies of
extreme weather events. STEM fields in the area of climate science provide a
number of tools that Tribal decision-makers can use to understand historic
climate change trends, model future scenarios for strategic planning, and
determine what indicators in the environment should be monitored now for keeping
on top of changes. The U.S. President's State, Local and Tribal Leaders Task
Force on Climate Preparedness and Resilience recommended that the U.S. federal
government "Provide actionable data and information on climate change impacts
and related tools and assistance to support decision-making at all levels." Over
75 organizations in the U.S. - mostly federally-funded - aim to improve the
climate change preparedness of decision-makers, and include organizations such
as the Climate Science Centers of the U.S. Geological Survey and the Regional
Integrated Sciences + Assessments (RISA) Centers of the National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration. Yet, typically relationships between scientific
organizations and Tribes can be strained by crucial ethical issues. If not
worked out between the parties, the presence of these ethical issues can derail
potential collaboration in ways that ultimately prevent Tribes from having fair
opportunities to benefit from scientific resources. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project seeks to understand the range of practices that climate science
organizations employ to prepare their staff for ethical issues that will occur
when engaging with Tribes and to evaluate the perceptions of the effectiveness
of these practices from organizational and Tribal perspectives. The project will
support better collaboration between governmental and nongovernmental
organizations in the U.S. and Tribes. The project will improve the government-
to-government relationship and the U.S. federal trust responsibility for Tribes,
increase the ability of Tribes to work with non-federal nonprofit groups, and
create knowledge that will build awareness of how Tribal self-determination and
sovereignty can be advanced through collaboration with decision-support
organizations. The research will be carried out as a collaboration between
Michigan State University and the College of Menominee Nation Sustainable
Development Institute. Specifically, the research is using a survey instrument
to identify the range of activities that scientific organizations have
undertaken that would fall under cultivating cultures of ethical STEM, find out
what has been learned by these organizations and the Tribes they partner with,
and rank the organizational and Tribal perceptions of the effectiveness of the
various activities. On the basis of these findings, and in collaboration with
these organizations and Tribes, the project will create a set of recommendations
and case studies for moving forward and design evaluation criteria for assessing
the long-term impact of old and new practices. This project will be evaluating
whether particular non-conventional forms of ethical culture in decision-support
organizations have actually led to better STEM support in collaborations with
Tribes. The research is expected to generate knowledge about what the range of
non-conventional activities are that support cultures of ethical STEM; the
research will also make headway in comparing the desired outcomes with the
outcomes perceived by the Tribes to have improved or detracted from
collaboration. These findings will help to fill a major gap in literatures
pertaining to cultures of ethical STEM because there is little information
comparing non-conventional activities geared at improving interactions between
STEM-based decision-support organizations and Tribes.