* 1540656
* BSF:2014170: SINR-Governed Wireless Networks: Geometric Analysis and Algorithms
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2015,09/30/2021
* Boris Aronov, New York University
* Standard Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 09/30/2021
* USD 40,000.00

Among many different models used to describe wireless networks, the PIs will
focus on the one commonly called the SINR (Signal-to-Noise-and-Interference
Ratio) model. It attempts to model the reception or non-reception of a wireless
transmitter signal in the presence of interference from other transmitters and
ambient noise. Much recent work has been devoted to analyzing the SINR model and
using it to predict the behavior of real-life wireless networks. One simple
aspect of this model is the construction of a SINR reception map, which
associates with every transmitter the region where it can be received and also
contains a region where no signal can be received due to interference of
multiple transmitters. The exact map is difficult to compute due to the
complexity of the so-called SINR inequality that determines whether or not a
signal is received. Previous work has been done on approximating the reception
map. The methods for this computation suffer from slow construction times (so-
called preprocessing times) and from the fact that, for transmitters of unequal
power, the preprocessing time depends not only on the number of transmitters and
the accuracy of the approximation, but on other parameters of the problem that
can not be expressed in terms of these two. The PIs will develop methods to
overcome these by speeding up the preprocessing times.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More
specifically, the PIs will develop batch preprocessing for SINR-diagram point
location queries. They will then use these tools to speed up existing algorithms
for SINR-governed wireless networks. The PIs will study fundamental problems
arising in SINR-governed wireless networks, combining algebraic tools with
techniques of computational geometry and combinatorial optimization. The PIs
will investigate a diverse suite of problems, including how to cope with
directional antennas, problems arising when successive interference cancellation
is enabled, combinatorial problems concerning SINR diagrams, and combinatorial
optimization problems such as scheduling under a restricted, more practical
version of the SINR model. The PIs will also investigate further applications of
the underutilized combination of computer algebra and computational geometry
tools in a more general context.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the
geometric properties of SINR-governed networks and being able to analyze such
networks and predict their behavior is extremely important. Moreover, efficient
solutions to the problems of this family, as well as to problems that PIs intend
to study from a more practical point of view, will benefit the motivating
application domain of wireless communication. These solutions are essential in
the planning stages of such networks (e.g., determining where to locate the
devices), for examining existing networks, and for utilizing them efficiently.
In this respect, the proposed project has the potential for substantial
socioeconomic impact, as the popularity of such networks is rapidly
increasing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project incorporates an educational
mission, through training of graduate students and reciprocal visits among
students and participants from the two institutions.