* 1540647
* Undergraduate Design Competition at the Summer Biomechanics, Bioengineering and Biotransport Conference, June 17-20, 2015 in Snowbird, UT
* ENG,CBET
* 04/15/2015,03/31/2016
* T. Reid Bush, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Alex Leonessa
* 03/31/2016
* USD 18,500.00

PI: Bush, Tamara Institution: Michigan State University Title: Undergraduate
Design Competition at the Summer Biomechanics, Bioengineering and Biotransport
Conference, June 17-20, 2015 in Snowbird, UT

The Undergraduate Design Competition in Rehabilitative and Assistive Devices
will be held at the 2015 Summer Biomechanics, Biotransport and Bioengineering
Conference (SB3C 2015) in Utah on June 17-20. In this competition, undergraduate
student teams (usually at a junior/senior level) from across the nation submit
an initial abstract with their prototype idea and design for a device that
addresses a need in rehabilitation or assistive devices. A cohort of faculty who
have design experience review and score the abstract submissions. Based on these
scores, the top six teams (approximately 30 students and their mentors) are
invited to attend the conference and present their device, design, and business
case at a special podium session. The team presentations are scored by a set of
judges, including faculty and industrial representatives. The undergraduate
design competition will impact many undergraduate students and their faculty
mentors across the country. This competition provides a national venue (with
many international attendees) for teams to showcase their innovations in the
areas of rehabilitation and assistive devices. Undergraduate students attending
the conference will participate in a research-driven event with technical
sessions, workshops and presentations by faculty, clinicians and industrial
representatives who have expertise in device design, rehabilitation,
disabilities, and numerous other areas. Attendance at the conference provides
valuable networking opportunities for the students, including contacts for
graduate school and employment. The inclusion of the competition at the
conference also exposes attendees to innovative solutions for needs of
individuals with disabilities, or those undergoing rehabilitation. The inclusion
of the undergraduate design competition at SB3C goes beyond the standard senior
design projects, offering the opportunity for students to attend an
international conference within the US, give a podium presentation, and exchange
ideas with internationally recognized researchers.

The Undergraduate Design Competition in Rehabilitative and Assistive Devices
will be held at the 2015 Summer Biomechanics, Biotransport and Bioengineering
Conference (SB3C). The opportunity for students to participate in this
competition offers many benefits. SB3C will promote state-of-the-art research,
collaboration, and scientific discourse in the broad field of bioengineering
with focus on Biomechanics and Biotransport. Undergraduate students attending
the conference, through their involvement in the competition, will learn about
bio-solid mechanics, bio-fluid mechanics, device design, rehabilitation,
cellular and molecular mechanics, functional tissue engineering, bio-heat and
mass transfer, and bioengineering education. Numerous podium sessions, poster
sessions, workshops and plenary talks are designed to engage and excite the
attendees including the session for the undergraduate design competition.
Further, the students will have opportunities to showcase their innovative
devices in the areas of rehabilitation and assistive devices with conference
attendees, and discuss the potential of these devices with other faculty and
innovators.