* 1540746
* SUNY Cortland Noyce Scholarship Program Phase II
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2021
* Mary Gfeller, SUNY College at Cortland
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 08/31/2021
* USD 799,855.00

Through this proposed scholarship program funded by the Robert Noyce Teacher
Scholarship Program, SUNY Cortland will create 38 scholarships for secondary
school teacher candidates in mathematics, science and technology fields. These
teachers will serve in central New York and the five major city areas of New
York State. Partners in the project include departments of Biology, Chemistry,
Geology and Physics, the School of Education, SUNY Cortland's Urban Recruitment
of Educators (CURE), the SUNY Urban Teacher Education Center, and Central New
York (CNY) public school districts including Cincinnatus, Cortland, Dryden,
Homer, Marathon, and South Seneca. Having highly trained STEM teachers who truly
understand both their content and pedagogy will engage students in such ways as
to increase the numbers of both future STEM professionals and the next
generation of STEM teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work has three
major foci: (1) to support 38 new Noyce Scholars with scholarships and value-
added immersion experiences with project partners; (2) to develop a freshmen-
learning community at SUNY Cortland named 'STEM2ED COR' that provides
orientation sections for the recruitment of future STEM educators early on in
their careers as freshmen and sophomores; and 3) to design a longitudinal study
that aims to identify which aspects of the immersion model designed for the SUNY
Cortland Noyce Scholarship Program have the most positive impact in attracting,
preparing and supporting participants for work in high-need schools. This
immersion model system of specialized classwork, field experience, student
teaching in a high-need school district (HNSD), and integrated professional
development will produce exceptionally-trained and qualified teachers ready to
be successful in a HNSD. Additionally Noyce Scholarship recipients will attend
on-campus workshops, seminars, and book chats with New York State Master
Teachers with a focus on successful teaching in high-need schools and working
with students who live in poverty. A longitudinal research study will examine
scholar recruitment and certification, teaching efficacy and effectiveness, and
retention among Cortland Noyce scholars.