* 1540301
* Exploring, Documenting, and Improving Humanitarian Service Learning through Engineers Without Borders USA
* ENG,EEC
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2020
* Elizabeth Buchanan, University of Wisconsin-Stout
* Standard Grant
* Edward Berger
* 08/31/2020
* USD 454,065.00

This project explores how engineering and technology students experience service
learning during their undergraduate programs. One example of service learning is
Engineers Without Borders (EWB) USA, which seeks to find practical solutions to
community concerns, such as clean water or sustainable sewage systems. Many
universities and colleges offer such experiences to their students and believe
they are contributing a valuable service to developing communities. However,
service learning projects are often compromised because students graduate,
and/or faculty leaders move to other institutions, and community ties are lost.
The project seeks to find best practices for university/college-based service
learning for all stakeholders in these enterprises. This project is a
collaboration between Engineers Without Borders USA and University of Wisconsin-
Stout researchers, teachers, and students. The project will unfold over four
years and includes both engineering and social science students in the work.
Student attitudes, beliefs, and goals about community involvement are explored
in a cross-institutional way: In addition to studying the UW-Stout EWB chapter,
the project looks at data collected by Engineers Without Borders USA, and
examines trends and practices throughout chapter projects.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A wider understanding of how to balance the needs of
students and communities could be broadly applied to service learning projects
outside of the STEM fields. More specifically, community development, economic
development, and applied anthropology projects might benefit from this research.
Finally, third party stake holders such as employers of STEM students are able
to employ students who are better prepared to operate in the global workplace
due to their participation in well-formed service learning opportunities. In
summary, This work contributes to the development of an economically competitive
STEM workforce by providing a guiding structure for effective and ethical
service learning initiatives for STEM education. The overall project outcomes
are disseminated publicly through a project website, traditional and lay
publications and presentations, and the development and delivery of workshops.
Further, project outcomes that specifically target the operation of EWB-USA
projects are incorporated into the guidelines that are followed by EWB-USA's
membership, which includes more than 14,000 individuals.