* 1540916
* SL-CN: Cortical Architectures for Robust Adaptive Perception and Action
* SBE,SMA
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2019
* Shihab Shamma, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Soo-Siang Lim
* 08/31/2019
* USD 797,779.00

The motivation for this biologically-inspired approach is to design systems that
perceive and act in cluttered and noisy scenes that they have never experienced.
This stands in contrast with the state of the art in computational engineering
systems that need to be re-trained each time they confront an unanticipated
environment. The main reason is that current approaches to perception address
specific problems in isolation and do not consider that the primary role of
perception is to support systems with bodies in action. As a result, they are
constrained to the situations for which they were trained and cannot react to
changing tasks and scenes. By focusing on cognition primitives rather than
specific applications, the work is expected to greatly advance the state of the
art of machine perception and lead to the development of systems that can
robustly and on-line adapt to new environments, react to novel situations and
learn new contexts. To do so, novel theoretical formulations of perception and
action and high-speed, low-power, hardware implementations with on-line learning
capabilities will be studied while assimilating new insights from the
neurosciences. Consequently, this work will network neuroscience, cognitive
science, applied mathematics, computer science and engineering so as to lower
one of the few remaining barriers that keeps interactive robots in the realm of
science fiction. Beyond the scholarly contribution, the work is expected to
provide know-how for the design of systems with adaptive perception in a modular
fashion with reusable components. Such systems have applications in
computational vision and auditory perception problems and can advance the
industry of cognitive biologically-inspired robotics and assistive
devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal sets forward novel ideas in the
design of intelligent perceptual systems and the development of synthetic
intelligence. Just about any task which an intelligent system solves involves
the interplay of four basic processes that are devoted to: (a) context, (b)
attention, (c) segmentation and (d) categorization. The members of the proposed
network will study these canonical cognitive primitives by combining neural
modeling with neural and behavioral experiments, theoretical and computational
modeling and implementation in robotics. The findings of theoretical insights
will then be adapted to satisfy the demands of realistic behavior, and to
develop technological solutions for applications of robust and invariant
perception and action. The proposed collaborative network will consist of a
small science and engineering research team to directly address the questions in
robust adaptive perception and action. It will then direct personnel, and inject
results and pedagogical content to a Summer Workshop that aims to include a
global network of researchers.