* 1540730
* GP-Impact: Freshman Year to Geoscience Career
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2021
* Allan Ludman, CUNY Queens College
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 08/31/2021
* USD 371,056.00

The "Freshman Year To Geoscience Career" project addresses the important
national goal of recruiting, retaining, and preparing the next generation
workforce in the science, technology, engineering, and math (STEM) disciplines,
with specific focus on increasing diversity in the geosciences. Today, nearly
45% of all college students begin their undergraduate education at a community
college; for underrepresented minority (URM) college students, the community
college starting point is even larger (54%). These students are often
underrepresented in the geosciences, underprepared academically, and burdened by
unique obstacles due to socioeconomic status and family responsibilities. Few
are aware of geoscience as a possible career. If these students transfer
successfully into a bachelor's degree program, they are often delayed in
completion of their degrees because of inadequate math preparation and missing
prerequisites, as well as the common necessity of working 20-40 hours/week to
support themselves and their families. Many drop out of the pipeline, either
because they are unable to complete the rigorous degree requirements or because
they feel isolated and a sense of "not belonging." Even if they complete their
degrees, many of these students are first in their families to go to college and
have little idea of how and when to plan for what follows graduation. To address
these obstacles, this project is creating a seamless, supportive path from the
time a student chooses a college major to when s/he enters graduate school or
employment as a geoscientist. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This multi-campus
partnership between Queens College, a 4-year college in the City University of
New York (CUNY) system, and LaGuardia and Queensborough Community Colleges
guarantees help for students from unusually diverse ethnic and economic
backgrounds, regardless of where they first enter the education pipeline.
Innovative strategies in this effort address transitions at four key points at
which students make or confirm the decision to pursue a career in Geology or
Environmental Science, or to drop out of the STEM pipeline: 1) Starting a
geoscience career path at a community college; 2) Transfer from a 2-year to
4-year college; 3) Completing a rigorous geoscience major; and 4) Transition to
graduate school or geoscience employment. Through customized workshops and
outreach at the community colleges, students are building the skills needed for
a science career and being provided with information about career options and
salaries in the geosciences. Coordinated multi-campus recruiting and advising by
peers and faculty from all three campuses are helping students make strategic
coursework choices that better articulate with the degree requirements at the
4-year institution. A unique geoscience learning community spanning all three
campuses is helping to make the transition from 2-year to 4-year seamless. New
majors have an opportunity to mingle with advanced students and faculty from the
Queens College campuses before and throughout the academic year at academic
(colloquia, field trips) and social events. By the time they transfer from their
community college, students know the Queens faculty and the best path to degree
completion. Modest stipends are being provided that make possible a geoscience
service-learning culture for superior students, saving travel to and from off-
campus jobs unrelated to their career goals. Stipend recipients serve as
teaching aides and tutors in introductory courses, helping others understand
basic concepts while deepening their own understanding. Some tutees will become
the next generation of geoscience majors and tutors. Because calculus is known
nationally as one of the major obstacles to completing a geoscience degree, free
tutoring is being provided by Time 2000, a Queens College initiative that trains
students to become high school math teachers. To better prepare students for
their lives after graduation, the project is offering a series of workshops,
starting in the freshman year, that help individuals choose job or graduate
school; write resumes, personal statements, and application letters; and learn
interview skills.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The principal intellectual merit of this
project is to test two innovative models for improving student engagement,
academic performance, and retention: 1) a unique discipline-specific learning
community spanning three urban campuses - two Associates (community college) and
one Bachelor's-Master's college, and 2) a service-learning approach to engaging
students that removes or lessens the need of financially challenged geoscience
majors to work off-campus at jobs unrelated to their professional goals.
Although the "Freshman Year to Geoscience Career" project is designed
specifically to increase the number and diversity of geoscience students at the
participating CUNY system campuses, the problems it addresses are endemic and
the solutions it offers can serve as a model across all academic institutions
and disciplines.