* 1540998
* EarthCube IA: Collaborative Proposal: EarthCube Integration & Test Environment
* GEO,ICER
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2017
* Chaowei Yang, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 08/31/2017
* USD 144,364.00

EarthCube is supporting the creation of interoperable tools and services for
Earth science research, but no environment currently exists for integration and
testing of these components. The EarthCube Integration and Test Environment
(ECITE), an outgrowth of activities of the EarthCube Testbed Working Group. The
ECITE approach focuses on integrating existing effective technologies and
resources as well as capabilities being built by the EarthCube community to
provide a federated and interoperable test environment. ECITE?s nationwide
cyberinfrastructure for the geosciences will also advance the understanding of
regional cyberinfrastructure and collaborative geosciences across geographic
locations and disciplines by contributing relevant scheduling tools and a
working integration and testing environment. A hallmark of the ECITE effort will
be engagement of scientists and technologists from multiple disciplines and
geographic regions across the geosciences community to develop requirements,
prototype, design, build, and test an integration test-bed that will support
cross-disciplinary research. The multi-disciplinary ECITE team is led by Sara
Graves of the University of Huntsville in Alabama (UAH) and includes
participants from all areas of the United States. ECITE activities will enable
EarthCube to further support other members and contribute leadership to the
broader scientific community. The ECITE federated Integration and Test (I&T)
environment has the potential to scale and extend to an NSF wide integration and
test capability that can serve as a model and example for other agencies. The
proposed ECITE functionality is vital to ensure that the broader goals of the
EarthCube are achieved.

The ECITE team will actively engage EarthCube and the wider geosciences
community in definition of requirements, design, and testing of the system.
ECITE will consist of a seamless federated system of scalable and location
independent distributed computational resources (nodes) across the US. The
hybrid federated system will provide a robust set of distributed resources to
include both public and private cloud capabilities. The nodes will provide
compute and storage resources requiring minimal system administration.ECITE is
an important step in ensuring that EarthCube components will be able to work
together to provide a successful framework that can continue to evolve to meet
the needs of the geosciences community. This research addresses timely issues of
integration, test and evaluation methodologies and best practices with a strong
interoperability theme to advance disciplinary research through the integration
of diverse and heterogeneous data, algorithms, systems and sciences. The results
and findings will provide guidance for EarthCube evolution and future
integration efforts. The ECITE team aims to make the Integration and Test (I&T)
environment easy to use and readily available to the EarthCube community. Access
to the resulting platform will enable and encourage the EarthCube community to
develop prototypes, try out new technologies, and to share ideas, concepts and
experiments