* 1540724
* Collaborative Research: GP-EXTRA: Geoscience Engagement and Outreach (GEO) - High-Impact Integrated Academic and Professional Experiences
* GEO,RISE
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2019
* Jasmeet Judge, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 08/31/2019
* USD 156,667.00

Few students enter undergraduate programs understanding what the geosciences are
or that they are part of a science, technology, engineering, and mathematics
(STEM) curriculum. Yet, high paying, high demand jobs in the geosciences and the
need for diversity in these fields means these students may miss an opportunity
to put their interests in science to work. This is especially true of students
beginning their undergraduate education at two year institutions, which are play
an ever increasing role in the landscape of higher education. Nearly 54% of
minority students in STEM begin their undergraduate education at a community
college, making efforts to engage and support such students and better prepare
them to transfer to and succeed at 4-year institutions is so important. The
Geoscience Engagement and Outreach (GEO) project promotes progress in science
for students through the recruitment, mentoring and support of a cohort of two-
year college students from underrepresented populations. Activities include
faculty mentored research in a sub-set of geoscience subdisciplines, as well as
skill building for careers to produce graduates prepared for the expectations of
future employers. Documenting the potential of cross-institutional, integrated
research and education experiences being developed through this project for
retaining diverse students in the geosciences contributes to the literature on
STEM recruitment and retention. The project also is expected to increase the
number and caliber of faculty available to mentor undergraduates and foster
continued education in the geosciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The GEO project is
addressing barriers to engagement, recruitment, and retention of diverse
students in the geosciences pipeline through an innovative three-institution
collaboration that combines and leverages the strengths of Santa Fe College, a
two year teaching institution; the University of Florida, a four year research
institution; and the Orlando Science Center, a nonprofit informal education and
outreach venue. The GEO project offers students authentic geoscience research
experiences explicitly integrated with practical applications and scaffolded to
classroom work. Project goals include: (1) fostering retention of the
participating GEO students at Santa Fe College and transfer into Bachelor's
degree programs in the geosciences, (2) strengthening collaborations among Santa
Fe College teaching faculty, University of Florida researchers, and Orlando
Science Center informal science educators, and (3) increasing student interest
in geoscience careers through public outreach development of resources for in-
service teachers. GEO's three phases of seminar-style teaching, research
mentoring with outreach project development and delivery, and a culminating
capstone experience scaffold the program elements into an emerging geoscience
Associates degree at Santa Fe College. The project is designed to support three
annual cohorts of 6 students each, with integration of peer- and supervisor-
mentoring and collaborations among the three institutions. The project is
targeted toward recruitment of underrepresented populations and their retention
in geoscience fields. University of Florida faculty are mentoring student
research in the geoscience sub-disciplines of meteorology, soil hydrology, and
geoscience and STEM education. The Orlando Science Center is supervising a paid
6-week summer internship that emphasizes communications and outreach skills
development. GEO students are designing and conducting outreach with diverse
public audiences, teachers and high school volunteers through OSC's Otronicon.
Continuation of research and outreach activities during the Fall semester
culminates in the completion of a two year degree by GEO cohort students and
their transfer to a four year geosciences program, prepared to continue and
thrive alongside their four year institution peers. Project evaluation is
measuring student content gain, using the Geoscience Concept Inventory; in
addition, increases in a student's science identity and potential interest in
pursuing geoscience careers are being assessed.