* 1540789
* A Study on Promoting Reflective and Equitable Practice Through Science Teacher Induction
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2019
* Joshua Ellis, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 09/30/2019
* USD 800,000.00

Induction of new teachers is one of the aspects of teacher education that is
presumed to be an effective strategy for promoting teacher effectiveness. Yet,
there is still a need for empirical data that can provide information as to
characteristics that make induction effective. This is particularly true related
to reform-based teaching characterized by the inquiry approach, as well as
effective strategies for providing success in science for students often
underrepresented in the sciences. This study, funded by the National Science
Foundations' Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program, through Track 4--Research
on the Preparation, Recruitment, and Retention of K-12 STEM Teachers, will
investigate science teacher induction in terms of reflective and equitable
practice. In doing so, it will study induction program supports for beginning
secondary science teachers and undergraduate Learning Assistants designed to (i)
promote reform-based science teaching, (ii) develop teachers' reflective
practices and (iii) foster their equitable, culturally responsive science
teaching. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will create a scientist-teacher
partnership induction program in which mutual learning is emphasized between
undergraduate Learning Assistants and beginning secondary science teachers. Led
by the University of Minnesota-Twin Cities faculty from the Colleges of
Education and Human Development, Biological Sciences, and Science and
Engineering, the project intends to increase beginning science teachers'
reflective, reform-based, and culturally responsive science teaching beliefs and
practices, as well as, increase undergraduate Learning Assistants' reform-based
science teaching practices and interest in K-12 science teaching. A dual
emphasis on developing both science teachers and Learning Assistants will
support improved undergraduate science teaching while also providing a coherent
learning trajectory into K-12 teaching. Design-based research will serve as the
framework for the proposed work. An iterative process will be used for the
ongoing design, testing, and refinement of the scientist-teacher partnership
induction program. The project will examine: 1) the changes in beginning science
teachers' reflective practices as well as their beliefs about and practices of
reform-based and culturally responsive science teaching; 2) the ways in which
science teachers approach the planning for and implementation of culturally
responsive science teaching; 3) the changes in Learning Assistants' beliefs
about, self-efficacy for, and practices of reform-based science teaching; 4) the
influence of induction program elements on the professional growth of teachers'
reflective practices, reform-based, and culturally responsive science teaching
beliefs and practices; and 5) the influence of induction program elements on
Learning Assistants' reform-based practices and their interest in K-12 science
teaching. Through this research, the project will extend existing theories on
preparing reform-based educators, culturally responsive science teachers and
reflective practitioners through induction programs as well as construct a set
of empirically-based design principles for scientist-teacher partnership
induction programs with these aims.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work is supported,
in part, by the EHR Core Research (ECR) program. The ECR program emphasizes
fundamental STEM education research that generates foundational knowledge in the
field. Investments are made in critical areas that are essential, broad and
enduring: STEM learning and STEM learning environments, broadening participation
in STEM, and STEM workforce development.