* 1540298
* Standard: The Ethics of Extraction: Integrating Corporate Social Responsibility into Engineering Education
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2015,09/30/2021
* Jessica Smith, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Wenda K. Bauchspies
* 09/30/2021
* USD 449,551.00

The mining, oil and gas industries pose some of the most vexing ethical
challenges currently under debate in academic, policy, and public circles.
Engineers form the core of these industries, and it is their work that directly
shapes the environmental and social impacts with which the wider public must
grapple. These engineers work at the intersection of corporate interests, the
welfare of communities, environmental sustainability, and professional autonomy,
yet very little is known about how they come to understand and navigate the
ethical challenges they face in their professional practice. The project
advances the existing research on corporate social responsibility (CSR) by
investigating the relationship between CSR and engineering, and it will also
advance engineering ethics by illuminating the unique strengths and limitations
of the concept of CSR in relation to the literature on social responsibility
more generally. The research has the potential to enhance the social and
environmental performance of controversial industries by cultivating engineers
who are better prepared to critically engage the opportunities and limitations
of the current framework of CSR. Moreover, showing students the possibilities
for integrating a robust sense of ethics into the mining and petroleum
industries may also increase the participation of underrepresented minorities in
engineering fields that are historically among the most dominated by white male
students, given that women and racial minorities are more likely to pursue
engineering careers with explicit opportunities to contribute to the public
good.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will use ethnographic interviews and
participant-observation to discover from engineers practicing in the extractive
industries: 1) if and how the dominant framework of CSR shapes their work and 2)
what role particular undergraduate educational experiences played in preparing
them to navigate the social and environmental challenges of their professional
practice. The research team will then use these data to inform and transform the
educational experiences for undergraduates at three universities with strong
ties to the mining and petroleum industries (Colorado School of Mines, Virginia
Tech, and Missouri University of Science and Technology). These educational
innovations will be disseminated more broadly through faculty workshops at
engineering education conferences and online platforms such as the National
Academy of Engineering Online Ethics Center (http://www.onlineethics.org) and
Integrated Network for Social Sustainability (https://clas-
pages.uncc.edu/inss/).