* 1540219
* Support for Student Participation in the International Conference on Electron, Ion, and Photon Beam Technology and Nanofabrication; San Diego, California; May 26-29, 2015
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2016
* Jeffrey Hastings, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 04/30/2016
* USD 15,000.00

This award is for the partial support of the International Conference on
Electron, Ion and Photon Beam Technology and Nanofabrication (EIPBN) to be held
in May 26-29, 2015 in San Diego, California. This major international meeting
will provide a single forum for discussion of the latest developments in
directed energy-enabled synthesis, fabrication, imaging and characterization of
small-scale structures and multi-layered devices. Regular meetings of the key
researchers, developers and users in this field are necessary for the exchange
of ideas, information, and state-of-the-art technologies in order to enable and
accelerate advances and breakthroughs the fields of nanotechnology and
nanomanufacturing. This international conference is a key mechanism for linking
basic science with engineering towards the development of nano-enabled products,
which are of significant importance to the US economy. This conference offers a
forum for the open exchange of new and previously unpublished scientific ideas.
The conference includes presentations, free exchange of ideas, and extended
discussions and interactions among international participants. This forum has
been instrumental in the generation and incubation of breakthrough and
transformative ideas in many scientific areas including
nanotechnology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will partially support the
participation of graduate students. Appropriate plans are in place to advertise
the availability of support for students to attend the conference and
participate in discussions and workshops. Student selection plans are also in
place. Students will be selected for support based on needs and interests. The
funds will support the attendance at the conference of a total of 30 students.