* 1540879
* EAGER: Generating Motional Quantum States of an Optically Trapped Diamond Nanocrystal Containing Nitrogen Vacancy Centers
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2015,04/30/2018
* Gurudev Dutt, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Cronin
* 04/30/2018
* USD 180,156.00

The motions of objects in everyday life appear to follow simple rules (Newton's
laws). For example, a hockey puck gliding across ice tends to keep moving in a
straight line at constant speed unless a force acts on it. It is implicit in
Newton's laws that you can always measure everything about the puck's motion,
such as its position and its speed, without affecting the motion. It seems that
the same should be true of any object, whether it is huge like the planet earth
or tiny like an atom. However, this is not how nature works; very small objects,
such as an atom or an electron, seem to obey a different set of rules, called
quantum mechanics. Quantum mechanics predicts that strange things can happen,
for example, an atom can have properties of being in two places at the same
time, until its position is actually measured. As strange as those rules are,
they make the electronics in computers and cell phones work, so we know they are
accurate. Why don't hockey pucks have this strange quantum behavior? Interaction
with other objects tends to hide the effects of quantum mechanics for objects
much larger than atoms. The research team supported by this project will
levitate a tiny diamond crystal in a chamber with almost no air remaining to
minimize its interaction with other objects and stretch the size limits over
which quantum mechanics does apply. The results of these experiments will
improve our understanding of quantum mechanics, which is the foundation on which
almost all our modern technology is based. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This program
ultimately seeks to produce "cat states" in a mechanical system, where an object
is in a quantum superposition of two different positions. This is a challenge
which has puzzled physicists since the famous thought experiments of
Schrodinger, 80 years ago. Researchers supported by this program will
demonstrate that a trapped diamond nanocrystal containing nitrogen-vacancy (NV)
defect centers is a nearly ideal platform for creating such motional quantum
states. In particular, they will work towards demonstrating four critical
capabilities of this system. First, the diamond nanocrystal must be trapped in
vacuum with an ultra-high quality factor (Q). Second, it must be possible to
manipulate and read out the spin state of the NV centers. Third, the NV center
spin states must couple to the state of the mechanical motion. Last, the
mechanical motion must be cooled to near the ground state to initialize the
system to a known configuration. The experiments begin by loading a diamond
nanocrystal into the trap. Next, the spin state of NV centers in the trapped
nanodiamond will be read optically and manipulated with a microwave drive.
Finally, the mechanical motion is coupled to the NV center spins through
externally-imposed magnetic field gradients. The combination of the ultra high Q
of the mechanical motion and quantum control of the NV centers makes trapped,
NV-containing nanodiamonds a unique system for generating motional quantum
states. The development of this system could be of great value in exploring the
fundamental limits of quantum mechanics and the properties of novel motional
quantum states.