* 1540372
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Effect of intrauterine environment on newborn telomere length
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2015,01/31/2018
* Peter Rej, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 01/31/2018
* USD 18,809.00

This project will study telomere length in newborns and their mothers, to
understand how maternal stress affects infant biology. Telomeres are structures
within cells that protect and stabilize the ends of chromosomes and change in
length over the life course in response to the environment. The most frequently
reported interaction is telomere shortening caused by psychological and
psychosocial stress. Shortened telomeres in turn have been associated with
numerous diseases including diabetes, heart disease and multiple types of
cancer. Some of the most exciting results to emerge recently about the
intergenerational effects of maternal stress show evidence that babies exposed
in utero tend to exhibit shorter telomere length (TL) at birth. This is
particularly salient, as a mother's health during pregnancy has been shown to
directly affect the health outcomes of her children not only at birth, but
through to adulthood. As chronic stress and stress-mediated diseases are
becoming increasingly prevalent in our country, the idea that trauma and stress
exposure during pregnancy can create changes in a child's health outcomes,
potentially through shorter telomeres at birth, has immediate public health
relevance. The project will also support student training and international
collaborations.

In this study the investigators will measure the TL of 100 new mothers and
babies from the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC), a region where
war has raged for 17 years, and violence is often utilized as a systematic
military tactic to intimidate the civilian population. These conditions make
eastern DRC among the most stressful and traumatic environments for women to
live in worldwide. By incorporating novel measures of war stress gathered via
comprehensive ethnographic interviews, the hypothesis that extreme traumatic
stress experienced during fetal development is associated with shortened newborn
TL will be tested. Alternatively, the discovery of an association between stress
and longer telomeres could suggest a pre-adaptation for life in a highly
stressful environment. Finally, there is evidence that telomere attrition can be
slowed by certain lifestyle changes; follow-ups will be scheduled with the
children in the study to allow for TL to be measured longitudinally.