* 1540786
* North Carolina A&amp;Teach STEM Scholars
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2021
* Anthony Graham, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Standard Grant
* Sandra Richardson
* 09/30/2021
* USD 1,191,780.00

With funding from the National Science Foundation's Robert Noyce Teacher
Scholarship program, the North Carolina A&amp;Teach STEM Scholars project is
recruiting undergraduate majors in mathematics and science (physics, chemistry,
biology) and preparing them to become mathematics, physics, chemistry, and
biology teachers in grades 9-12. The project is funding 25 scholarships over 5
years. In this project North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State
University is collaborating with Guilford County Schools and is committed to
work in areas with students who traditionally have underperformed in mathematics
and science. The goals of the project are to emphasize inquiry-based teaching
methods and culturally relevant pedagogical practices in the sciences and
mathematics, and to retain novice teachers via collaborative induction support.
The North Carolina A&amp;Teach STEM project has three components: 1) a teacher
preparation program that emphasizes inquiry-based and culturally relevant
pedagogy with a summer application component with African refugee K-12 public
school students, 2) a four-week summer internship with Guilford Education
Alliance's STEM Externship project where students will work closely with middle
and high school science and math teachers in a STEM-related business or
organization, and 3) an induction program with individualized mentoring,
instructional observations with explicit feedback, and release time to
participate in the STEM Equity Education Institute, which will emphasize the
links between inquiry in science and mathematics and inquiry-based teaching
methods, and the On Common Ground Summer Conference, which will provide
opportunities to work with university faculty and in-service STEM teachers in
implementing culturally relevant pedagogy in science and mathematics as well as
managing classrooms grounded in inquiry-based instruction. Noyce Scholars will
develop a portfolio during their senior year that captures the depth and breadth
of their content knowledge, content pedagogical skills, leadership ability
within the school and community, and ability to personalize learning based on
K-12 student needs. After attaining certification, Noyce Scholars will be placed
in selected schools within Guilford County Schools, where they will be paired
with experienced mentor teachers and will participate in ongoing professional
development workshops throughout the year.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The expected
outcomes of the North Carolina A&amp;Teach STEM Scholars project are (1) to
produce qualified teachers who possess substantive content knowledge, (2) to
develop teachers who will use pedagogical approaches that are proven to
positively impact the student performance and standardized test scores of
culturally and linguistically diverse students, and (3) to increase the
retention rate of qualified science and mathematics teachers in Guilford County
Schools. The strategies and activities developed by this project serve as a
framework for recruitment at other institutions. In turn, this knowledge is
leading to a significant increase in the number of highly qualified mathematics,
and science teachers nationwide.