* 1540954
* Ice Nucleation in Cirrus Clouds: Anthropogenic Climate Forcing and Uncertainties
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2015,02/28/2021
* Cheng Zhou, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 02/28/2021
* USD 675,710.00

This research focuses on the use of a global chemistry/climate model to improve
the modeling of ice formation in cirrus clouds. This research will better inform
climate modelers about the causes of differences in model predictions of the
effects of small particles (aerosol) in cirrus clouds. It will also provide a
representation of aerosol and ice formation that is based on physical and
chemical processes and broadly consistent with the field observations used to
evaluate the model.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers hypothesize that a
substantial fraction of ice formation in cirrus clouds is associated with
secondary organic aerosols (SOA) and/or solid ammonium sulfate (NH4)2SO4 and
that changes in these aerosols over time result in a significant climate
forcing. The hypothesis will be tested using the Community Atmosphere Model
(CAM5) climate model coupled to the IMPACT aerosol model. The IMPACT model ties
the formation of SOA to the photochemical oxidation of volatile organic
compounds (VOCs) based on a recently extended oxidation scheme. The researchers
are in the process of extending the SOA formation framework to allow it to
consider how the formation mechanism alters the size distribution of both
primary organics and other aerosol species associated with SOA. In this
research, they will explore several ways of parameterizing SOA nucleation. They
will compare the changes in SOA formation and forcing in cirrus clouds using
varying amounts of dust, sulfate, glassy organic aerosols (depending on the
glass transition temperature of each SOA), and solid (NH4)2SO4.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The model simulations will be compared with observations
from recent measurement campaigns to identify which treatments of SOA formation,
ice cloud nucleation, and updraft velocities are best able to reproduce the
observations. This research will better inform the climate community of the
causes of differences in model predictions of aerosol effects in cirrus clouds.
The results of this research will aid in quantifying climate forcing by aerosols
and help to inform policy makers of the possible role of aerosols in either
heating or cooling climate through their action in nucleating ice crystals.