* 1540421
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Generation and Evaluation of Body Mass Prediction Equations Using Articular Surface Areas of the Primate Tarsus
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2017
* Douglas Boyer, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 08/31/2017
* USD 16,393.00

One of the most fundamental descriptors of a species is its body mass, which is
strongly related to life history, diet, mode of locomotion, and many other
ecological factors. Despite its centrality to a species' ecology, body mass
remains difficult to reconstruct reliably from elements that preserve well in
the fossil record, specifically teeth and bones. This project will assess the
reliability of body mass prediction from dental and skeletal microCT scan
measurements using a large sample of specimens with known body masses. The
relationships between these measurements and body mass will be examined and
compared to previously published results. This project also provides
opportunities for collaboration with fellow graduate students, and training of
and collaboration with undergraduates. Training will consist of microCT
scanning, digital preparation, measurement protocols, and statistical analyses.
MicroCT data collected for this project will be made publicly available using a
free online repository, permitting wide access to previously unavailable
material. Specimens digitized for this study could readily serve as valuable
teaching tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to explore the
relationship between body mass and the joint articular surfaces of the tarsus
with a focus on a wide range of primate taxa. Tarsal elements will be microCT-
or laser-scanned so that joint articular surface areas can be digitally
measured. The primary objective is to improve the theoretical foundation for
body mass prediction by addressing whether an improved functional understanding
of predictor variables (articular surface areas) permits the generation of more
reliable body mass prediction equations (BMPEs). This objective will be
accomplished by 1) assessing the scaling relationships of different joint
articular surface areas relative to body mass in extant taxa, 2) generating
novel body mass prediction equations from joint articular surface areas for
comparison to previously published BMPEs, and 3) generating novel BMPEs from
specimens with associated and longitudinal body mass data for comparison to
BMPEs generated from specimens lacking associated body mass data. These analyses
will inform two subsequent portions of the study, 1) body mass prediction for a
large sample of fossil primates, and 2) a detailed examination of body mass
evolution during important stages of primate diversification.