* 1540596
* GP-IMPACT - Pathways into Geosciences at the University of Arizona
* GEO,RISE
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2019
* Noah Fay, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 07/31/2019
* USD 288,404.00

The University of Arizona (UA) is developing a new program to increase the
recruitment, retention and professional opportunities of geoscience majors
transferring from two-year colleges (2YC). Transfer students in this science,
technology, engineering and math (STEM) field tend to have longer times-to-
graduation, lower metrics of academic performance, and more limited job
prospects than non-transfer students. Two-year colleges have a higher proportion
of underrepresented minority (URM) students than most four-year institutions.
The UA GeoPathways project builds on and contributes to the evidence base for
effective student engagement, learning and retention in STEM, particularly among
traditionally underrepresented minority students. The program consists of active
recruiting by UA undergraduates at Pima Community College (PCC), focused
mentoring, professional development, and paid internship with Arizona-based,
geoscience companies, agencies or non-governmental organizations. This program
supports STEM education, increasing diversity in this STEM field, engaging
students with community businesses and organizations, and advancing the field by
improving the academic and practical preparation of its
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The UA GeoPathways program is establishing a
community-based program of support for geoscience majors transferring from PCC
and other 2YCs in Arizona. The UA Department of Geosciences currently enrolls
208 B.S. majors; about 40 are transfers from PCC and other 2YCs. Each year,
between 10 and 20 2YC students transfer in to major in Geosciences at UA. PCC
has a greater proportion of under-represented minorities, veterans, and older
students than UA. This project leverages existing instructional relationships
between the two institutions, in that the first two years of courses for the
geosciences major are well-articulated between Arizona 2YCs and UA.
Additionally, two PCC faculty have taught geoscience courses at UA. Despite
course alignment and shared faculty, transfer students are often under-prepared
in coursework, unsure of UA degree requirements, uncertain about job prospects,
and concerned about financial support. Transfer students are also less likely to
have occupational mobility after receiving their undergraduate degree because of
their family commitments. These challenges are being addressed by establishing a
recruiting, mentoring and internship program for transfer students. UA students
are reaching out to prospective transfer students by leading field trips and by
participating in PCC classroom activities. New transfer students are
participating in two new workshops on professional skills in their first year at
UA: "Success Strategies in STEM" and "Research Readiness." These workshops and
their coursework are preparing students for paid internships with local
businesses in the mining industry, hydrologic and environmental consulting,
federal, state and local agencies and with environmental NGOs. Participating
GeoPathways hosts are matched with student interns after their first year at UA.
The 320-hour internships are being implemented either as 8 weeks fulltime during
the summer or for part-time over a longer period, depending on the needs of the
host and the intern. Between 8 and 10 interns are being selected each year of
the project. Members of the first-year's cohort serve as peer mentors during
later years of the program, and make presentations at PCC or other 2YCs on their
internship experiences. The new UA strategic plan, "Never Settle", calls for the
engagement of every undergraduate student with professional or community service
during their degree program. This UA-wide effort will help sustain the program
beyond its initial NSF support.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project effectiveness of
the integrated approach involving mentoring, workshops and internships in
support of 2-year to 4-year college transitions is being evaluated in order to
document its potential as a model for similar partnerships among 2YCs, research
universities, and potential employers in the local community. It is hypothesized
that the UA GeoPathways experience will enhance the recruitment, retention,
academic performance and graduation rates of students transferring from PCC and
other Arizona 2YCs. The project will better serve prospective geoscientists from
groups that are under-represented in four-year academic programs and the
workforce: economically disadvantaged students, under-represented minorities,
older students and military veterans. Providing hands-on experience for transfer
students will assist them in selecting coursework for specialization and may
prepare them for entering graduate school. UA GeoPathways will strengthen ties
between UA Geosciences and local employers, creating more opportunities for all
students.