* 1540262
* CAREER: Thermo-Active Geotechnical Systems with Reinforced, Unsaturated Soils
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2015,06/30/2016
* John McCartney, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 06/30/2016
* USD 46,507.00

The research objective of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project
is to understand the conditions under which spurious heat from buildings and
industry can be used to improve the performance of geotechnical systems
involving geosynthetic-reinforced soils. Specifically, thermally induced water
flow is being investigated as a means of maintaining compacted soil backfills in
unsaturated conditions, in which case greater effective stresses will result in
enhanced strength and stiffness. A novel approach for imposing temperatures
within geotechnical system is also being investigated, in which heat exchanger
tubing is installed along with geosynthetic reinforcements during construction.
Element-scale tests are being used to weigh the benefits gained by maintaining
soils in unsaturated conditions against potentially negative impacts of elevated
temperatures on reinforced soils. These negative impacts include pore water
pressure generation due to thermal volume change, thermal changes in the yield
surface shape, thermal changes in the soil-water retention curve, and creep
deformation of geosynthetic reinforcements. The observations from the element-
scale tests are being synthesized into constitutive relationships which can be
used to characterize the thermo-hydro-mechanical behavior of unsaturated soil-
geosynthetic composites. Further, the flow and deformation behavior of
centrifuge-scale thermo-active geotechnical systems under different boundary
conditions are being used for system-level validation of these constitutive
relationships. The goals of an integrated educational program are to train
student researchers to effectively disseminate research results to audiences
with varying levels of technical expertise, and to improve students' personal
engagement in the success of their education. These goals will be reached by
first developing a communication workshop for student researchers which
incorporates lectures on effective communication skills, guided presentation
planning using written case statements, and presentation practice with film
feedback analysis. Student researchers will then make presentations to high
school freshmen from Denver East High School, diverse student organizations
housed within the CU BOLD center, industry stakeholders, and geotechnical
engineering firms. The education program's success will be assessed by comparing
audience feedback with students' written case statements.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The improved understanding of temperature effects on
unsaturated soils has potential to enable the use of backfill soils currently
unusable in reinforced soil systems, leading to material and transport cost
savings. At the same time, the heat exchange process can be used to improve the
energy efficiency of building cooling systems, or to dissipate spurious heat
from industrial processes without the generation of water vapor (dry cooling).
Implementation of the lessons learned from this study into practice may form a
new market sector in the fields of geotechnical and geosynthetics engineering,
resulting in new economic opportunities. As part of this effort, the
constitutive model for soil-geosynthetic composites will provide practitioners
with tools for performance-based life-cycle cost assessments of their designs in
this area, enhancing the sustainability and marketability of this technology.
Further, students participating in the integrated communication training program
will gain practical strategies to effectively communicate with audiences with
varying levels of technical expertise, which will help them start successful
careers as leaders in this new market sector. Their presentations will
facilitate dissemination of research results to practicing engineers,
stakeholders, and the public. Further, presentations to diverse student groups
at CU and high school classes will help recruit underrepresented students into
STEM fields.