* 1540432
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Gut Microbiomes of Hunter-Gatherers: Roles of Diet and Helminths
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2017
* Sarah Tishkoff, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 07/31/2017
* USD 32,000.00

The human gut contains microorganisms (gut microbiome) that have complex
interactions with one another and their human hosts. Recent research on
microbiome diversity and composition has shown that the gut microbiome (GM) has
a large influence on nutrition, metabolism, and immune response. These studies
have focused primarily on urban populations from industrialized countries that
have increased access to health resources and diets enriched in highly-processed
food. However, less is known about the GM in non-industrialized settings. The
shift from hunting and gathering to agriculturalist and pastoralist practices
occurred relatively recent in human history (within the last 10,000 years), and
modern hunter-gatherers may possess novel GM composition. This project will
study the GM of African populations who have adapted to a range of environments
and foods as they spread through the continent, to understand how GMs have co-
evolved with their human hosts and with human parasites. The research will
expand what is known about normal human variation in GMs, and how differences in
the microbiome (including in the industrialized world) may influence health. The
project will support teaching and training opportunities for students, local
community outreach, education and capacity building at the study sites, and
international collaborations.

This research will assess fundamental questions about human adaptation and
biology by characterizing GMs and soil-transmitted helminth (STH) and
schistosomiasis (collectively referred to as helminths) parasite infections
across ethnically and geographically diverse African populations with a range of
subsistence practices. Fecal samples, ethnographic data, and nutrition surveys
will be collected from African pastoralists, agriculturalists, and hunter-
gatherers. Quantitative PCR (qPCR) will be used to test fecal DNA for several
common species of helminths, including the giant roundworm Ascaris lumbricoides
and fluke Schistosoma mansoni. Next-generation sequencing of 16S ribosomal
bacterial and archaeal DNA (16S rDNA) and internal transcribed spacer (ITS1)
region of fungal DNA will characterize GMs, and association testing will be done
on GM composition and diversity with diet, subsistence, geography, presence,
absence, and abundance of helminths, and genetic ancestry. The research expands
knowledge of the spectrum of normal human variation in GM and the impact of
helminth infection on GM composition. This project is also of broader
significance for global public health since helminth infection is a major
disease burden in Africa. This project can increase our biomedical understanding
of the distribution of helminths and their relationships with GM composition as
potentially correlated factors in the pathogenesis of disease.