* 1540966
* EarthCube IA: Oceans of Data: Bringing EarthCube to the Science User
* GEO,ICER
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Karen Stocks, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 08/31/2019
* USD 436,815.00

The ability to find, access, and visualize data is critical to many kinds of
oceanographic research, as well as to teaching oceanography. Yet ocean data is
held in multiple data facilities, in different formats, and is accessible
through different pathways. This creates practical problems with integrating and
working across different data sets. The SeaView project is building connections
between the rich data resources in five major oceanographic data facilities -
R2R, BCO-DMO, CCHDO, OBIS and OOI* - and an ocean data visualization and
exploration tool, the Ocean Data View (ODV), having over 40,000 registered
users. To do so, it is leveraging from NSF investments into two previous
EarthCube projects: CINERGI, as the registry where users will find and access
data they wish to use, and GeoLink, which is providing interconnections between
existing data resources, allowing users to explore a knowledge base of related
information. SeaView leverages existing resources to provide improved tools and
data access in support of fundamental research in two areas of ocean sciences:
deep water hydrography and marine community-environment interactions. Both feed
directly into research identified by the 2015 Decadal Survey of Ocean Sciences
as of the highest priority. It will also engage scientists from currently
underrepresented communities in EarthCube.

The specific oceanographic communities targeted are deep water hydrographers and
marine ecologists, particularly those studying species interactions with the
environment. Near the start of the project, a set of three focus groups and a
Science Drivers workshop composed of end-user scientists from these communities
will prioritize the specific datasets and develop science scenarios (use cases).
They will meet again mid-stream for hands-on testing of the tool and feedback.
The CINERGI registry will be used to expose ODV-supported formats from these
repositories to ODV. The EarthCube GeoLink knowledge base will provide links to
additional content (investigators, publications, etc.) for cruise-related
datasets loaded in ODV.