* 1540938
* EarthCube IA: Collaborative Proposal: Advancing biogeoscience community standards and cyberinfrastructure via Critical Zone domain engagement in synthesis science
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2017
* Aaron Packman, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 08/31/2017
* USD 99,836.00

The Critical Zone (CZ) is the Earth's permeable near-surface layer from the
atmosphere at the vegetation's canopy to the lower boundary of actively
circulating groundwaters. There has been a recent movement in the US Critical
Zone Observatory (CZO) program to promote cross-CZO collaborations, with a major
emphasis on biogeochemistry and related microbial ecology research. The project
enable the CZ community to use software via training workshops, and better use
CZ biogeochemistry and microbial ecology data. These objectives will be
accomplished through a set of virtual and in-person workshops where CZ
scientists have the opportunity to learn how to use the new cyberinfrastructure
products, and use them to synthesize important biogeosciences and microbial
ecology data from across numerous CZ sites. This effort will concurrently
support the development of community-led standards for data collection and
sharing. Direct involvement of software development teams as IA project
personnel and collaborators will facilitate the training of members of the CZ
community to use newly developed software. CZ scientists will then use these
tools in a set of real-life use cases, in the form of synthesis of existing CZO
data and analysis of collaboratively designed cross-CZO biogeochemical and
metagenomic sample collection and analysis and ancillary measurements. This
effort will not only train CZ scientists to use newly emerging EC CI tools, but
also solicit community input on software improvements and identify remaining
gaps and needs for further EarthCube CI development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project lays the groundwork for the whole-earth analysis and simulation
capability envisioned through EarthCube, by bringing critical zone scientists
together with hands-on training to test available cyberinfrastructure tools with
comprehensive multiparameter datasets spanning a wide range of scales. The
project will further improve access to the products of critical zone research by
promoting the sharing, standardization, synthesis and analysis of biogeochemical
and metagenomic data via EarthCube cyberinfrastructure, enabling a broader array
of geosciences communities to shape future EarthCube activities and outcomes.
This effort will support synthesis of broad swaths of data currently being
collected at critical zone sites in the US and worldwide, as well as identify
and fill key data gaps. The project will answer key biogeochemistry and
microbial ecology questions, such as 1) measuring and modeling the fate of
phosphorus during soil formation, and the relative role of bedrock vs. dust
inputs to ecosystem phosphorus across diverse systems, and 2) evaluating
nutrient availability and its impacts on microbial communities, growth rates and
functions, across diverse systems. This project will also facilitate integrative
scientific applications using critical zone data. The project will engender
broad scientific dissemination of key EarthCube and Critical Zone Observatory
products through targeted scientific outreach activities and engagement of
diverse types of scientists, including a unique interaction between the
computational science and geoscience communities. Key findings will be
communicated through collaborative research and synthesis papers and
presentations. This project will contribute extensive capacity-building in
early-career researchers through targeted workshop participation. Finally,
project findings and products will be used to inform future EarthCube
development through the activity of the PIs and collaborators in the EarthCube
Science Committee and Technology and Architecture Committee, as well as through
the broader engagement of critical zone scientists into earthcube activities.