* 1540802
* University of Vermont Robert Noyce Scholarship Program
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2021
* Regina Toolin, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Standard Grant
* John Haddock
* 09/30/2021
* USD 799,882.00

Results from state testing indicate a critical need for improved learning and
teaching in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) for all
students, particularly those in underserved populations. With funding from the
National Science Foundation's Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship program, the
University of Vermont Robert Noyce Scholarship Program will recruit STEM
professionals and prepare them to become secondary STEM teachers. The project
will fund 25 scholarships over 5 years. The teacher preparation program will be
delivered through a collaboration between highly effective and nationally
recognized STEM and education programs at the University of Vermont &amp; State
Agricultural College (UVM): the Master of Arts in Teaching (MAT) in Secondary
Education Program in the College of Education &amp; Social Services, the College
of Arts &amp; Sciences, and the College of Engineering &amp; Mathematical
Sciences, in partnership with regional high-need high schools Montpelier High
School, Mount Abraham High School, Vergennes High School, and Union-32 High
School. The project will capitalize on the UVM MAT cohort model, which includes
year-long school-based internships. Noyce Scholars will also participate in
monthly seminars and visit community-based centers. Prior Noyce Scholars will
present at an orientation to emphasize the importance of research and discovery
in mathematics and science and ways to model these practices in their own
teaching. UVM Noyce Scholars will also collaborate with engineering students to
create service learning projects for high school
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will promote full integration of the
Next Generation Science Standards and Common Core State Standards in Mathematics
with an emphasis on the application of scientific, mathematical, and engineering
thinking and practices. A longitudinal research study will investigate the
impact of the program on recipients as teachers and teacher leaders and their
retention in the teaching profession, as well as the impact of the project on
STEM and education faculty and programs at UVM. To this end, in addition to
conducting classroom observations, the project team will collect data using
instruments such as the Professional Attitudes and Dispositions Assessment
(PADA), the Standards Assessment Inventory (SAI2), the New England Common
Assessments (NECAP), and a pre-/post-survey of Opportunity to Learn (OTL) drawn
from an existing MSP survey. Through programmatic activities and the research
agenda, the project will develop, improve, and maintain a pipeline to recruit
and prepare STEM teachers for underserved schools.