* 1540721
* GP-EXTRA: Recruiting and Retaining Non-geoscience Minority STEM Majors for the Geoscience Workforce
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Janet Liou-Mark, CUNY New York City College of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 08/31/2018
* USD 496,786.00

Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM) have long been the
bedrock on which American ingenuity, innovation, advancement, and competitive
edge are built. Collectively, these disciplines have been the engine that has
powered American economic prosperity, strength, and global leadership for almost
all of the last century. Unfortunately, a plethora of recent, reputable studies
have highlighted and drawn national attention to the alarming erosion of the
STEM bedrock and to the steady decline in the power output and the efficiency of
the STEM engine. There is now national consensus that the nation is in the midst
of a STEM crisis, a crisis so dire that even national security is being
jeopardized. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Studies show that among the STEM disciplines,
the crisis is most acute within the geosciences. The geosciences primarily have
the following threefold problem: 1. Despite projections indicating that due to
anticipated geoscience demands the future geoscience workforce will grow at
above average rates and despite estimates that the turnover rate due to
retirements will be significant, there will be major workforce shortfalls due to
the woefully insufficient rate at which new geoscientists join the ranks of the
geoscience workforce. Shortfalls of about 135,000 geoscientists by 2022 have
been predicted; 2. The geoscience academic pipeline is not only leaking, but it
is also clogged. Only a small number of students at the tertiary level are
retained, pursue, and earn geoscience degrees. Moreover, most high school
programs do not require students to take geoscience courses as a criteria for
graduation. To compound the problem, unlike other STEM disciplines, the
geosciences do not have a clear, unambiguous, definite academic corridor/pathway
for growth and degree attainment that shepherds students from high school to
graduate school and onto the geoscience workforce, and 3. The geosciences lack
both ethnic and gender diversity - pools of potential geoscientists remain
untapped and underdeveloped yet available and accessible. It is quite evident
that among the geosciences' threefold problem outlined above, point #2
exacerbates point #1, while point #3 ameliorates point
#1.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite these ills, one of the major strengths of the
geosciences is their interdisciplinary nature. This key characteristic allows
students from a wide-range of STEM disciplines to have multiple entry points
through which they may engage with the geosciences and even become geoscience
majors. It is this unique asset of the geosciences that this project is built
upon as it seeks to redress the problems of the current and future state of the
geosciences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project supports the progress of science
by helping to prepare a future STEM workforce that reflects the diversity of the
nation. The New York City College of Technology (City Tech)of the City
University of New York (CUNY) system, plays an important role nationally in the
education of future scientists, engineers, technologists, and mathematicians.
City Tech is a federally designated Hispanic Serving Institution (HSI) of more
than 17,300 students, who have identified themselves as Black (31%), Hispanic
(35.6%) and Asian/Pacific Islander (20.6%), among other categories. This diverse
student population offers a talented pool of students to recruit into STEM
education and career pathways. Although City Tech does not currently have a
geoscience department (one is being planned) and, therefore, does not offer a
terminal geoscience degree, this minority-serving institution (with its limited
set of geoscience offerings) is aiding in the amelioration of the geoscience
workforce plight by creating and sustaining a two-year geoscience workforce
preparation and geoscience career mentoring program for non-geoscience minority
STEM students beginning at the critical juncture of their junior year. This
juncture is chosen because at this stage of their academic development, these
STEM students would have already acquired a comprehensive enough set of STEM
skills that are transferrable to geoscience workforce operations. This cohort of
rising STEM juniors is, therefore, a ready and available pool of geoscience
trainees with the potential to become part of the future geoscience workforce.
Guided within the two-year framework of a comprehensive geoscience workforce
model that equips them for and exposes them to transformative geoscience
courses, career opportunities, explorations, and engagements, these students'
prior STEM knowledge will be integrated and enhanced with the skills and
competencies (critical thinking and problem-solving skills, spatial and temporal
abilities, strong quantitative skills, and the ability to work in teams) that
are essential for the geoscience workforce. Since geoscience is
interdisciplinary in nature, is primarily a "discovery major" at the
undergraduate level, and has multiple entry points into the field, this proposed
geoscience workforce model is well-suited for City Tech students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The City Tech geoscience workforce program is designed
with the following two primary goals: 1) to create a geoscience workforce
pathway for non-geoscience minority STEM majors; and 2) to develop geoscience
career-aligned collaboration via geoscience industry mentoring. Each year, the
program will recruit twelve students to participate in its structured geoscience
workforce model that consists of geoscience - Exposure, Preparation,
Apprenticeship, and Experience (EPA-E). The students will not only be supported
with cohort-building activities, but they will also participate in two
geoscience internship programs that will equip them with geoscience knowledge
and workforce skills, summer internships at a federal, local, or private
geoscience facility, mentoring by geoscience practitioners, and networking
opportunities with geoscience companies and geoscience professional societies.
Interships are being offered in collaboration with the NYC Department of
Environmental Protection, the US Environmental Protection Agency (Region 2),
NOAA's Climate and Weather Prediction Center, Brookhaven National Laboratory,
the Cary Institute of Ecosystem Studies, and Partner Engineering and Science.
The expectation through this initiative is that many underrepresented minority
(URM) students who would otherwise not pursue a geoscience career may now choose
to follow a geoscience corridor that could not only lead to lucrative geoscience
careers, but could also help to diversify the geosciences and simultaneously
help to ameliorate the nation's grave geoscience workforce dilemma. This
initiative will also serve as a model of how institutions without terminal
geoscience degrees may yet positively impact both geoscience education and
geoscience employment.