* 1540713
* Preparing STEM Teachers to Successfully Navigate the Urban to Rural Gradient in Outstate Minnesota
* EDU,DUE
* 12/01/2015,03/31/2022
* Alison Wallace, Minnesota State University Moorhead
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Green
* 03/31/2022
* USD 1,269,340.00

With funding from the National Science Foundation's Robert Noyce Teacher
Scholarship program, the Minnesota State University Moorhead (MSUM) Noyce
Scholarship Program will recruit Noyce STEM Teaching Scholars in the sciences
and mathematics. The scholarships and stipends will be distributed among the
following student populations in the following ratio: 16 STEM majors to obtain a
mathematics or science license through the addition of a fifth year; 4 STEM
education majors to add a STEM major and a second licensure area; and 15
returning STEM graduates to add a mathematics or science license. The program
will provide an additional 35 new highly qualified mathematics and science
teachers in the region over the period of the grant. In this project, the
Minnesota State University Moorhead is partnering with 3 urban school districts
(Moorhead, Fargo, West Fargo), as well as with rural school districts (Lakes
Country Regional Cooperative). In addition, MSUM is collaborating with two
community colleges (Minnesota State Community and Technical College and White
Earth Tribal Community College). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While the project is
grounded in the best practices described in the education research literature,
it is also informed by the lessons learned by the PI team from a Robert Noyce
Capacity Building grant. The goal of the project is to increase the number of
new STEM teachers who are well-prepared to work with ethnically and economically
diverse students in high-need schools. Internship experiences in K-12
environments and undergraduate Learning Assistant opportunities will be
available to STEM majors. Noyce Scholars will be recruited from among these
student groups, as well as other populations including the community college
collaborators. To prepare new teachers for classrooms in which many of the
students will be English Language Learners, each Scholar will take take a STEM-
based Teaching English as a Second Language (TESL) course. Field experiences for
the students will be provided in K-12 environments with diverse student
populations. Mentoring support for the new teachers will include both face-to-
face and online components. This mentoring support will be the focus of the
research efforts of the project. Expanding on their work with the Minnesota
Teacher Research Network's protocols, an 8-year initiative to investigate the
practices and beliefs of new STEM teachers, the PI team will examine the
teaching practices of the graduated Scholars in diverse classroom settings. The
overall project will be evaluated using demographic data, grades and other
performance assessments, and standardized tests scores. Surveys will be used to
determine student perceptions. The data collected will inform teacher
preparation program nationwide in best practices to recruit, prepare and retain
culturally relevant teachers for under-resourced schools.