* 1540589
* GP-IMPACT: Broadening pathways to geosciences with an integrated program at The University of Michigan
* GEO,RISE
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2021
* Gregory Dick, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 08/31/2021
* USD 226,033.00

Several recent studies have showcased the national importance of the science,
technology, engineering, and math (STEM) disciplines for our nation's prosperity
and global competitiveness, as well as the urgency of both engaging and
preparing the future STEM workforce. Within the geosciences, it is projected
that there will be ~135,000 positions to fill in the next decade (AGI, 2014),
greatly exceeding the number of available students earning advanced degrees in
the geosciences. Resolving the severe shortage in the geosciences workforce is
projected to require increased participation in the geosciences by
underrepresented minorities (URM), which is currently well below that of other
STEM disciplines. Low URM participation in the geosciences is a particularly
acute problem at The University of Michigan (U-M), where the number of
undergraduate URM students majoring in the Department of Earth and Environmental
Sciences is approximately 5% of total majors. This is an important societal
issue both from the practical standpoint of the geosciences workforce as well as
ethical and sociological standpoints regarding the inherent value of diversity.
This project aims to increase the proportion of URM students majoring in
geosciences at U-M to a level that reflects the overall demographics of the
state of Michigan. This will achieve the desired societal outcomes by (1)
increasing the number of URM students trained in one of the nation's premiere
geosciences departments at a flagship public university, and (2) advancing and
disseminating knowledge on best practices for recruiting and retaining URM
students in the geosciences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is
to substantially increase the number and success rate of URM students majoring
in the geosciences at U-M. Although there are numerous activities already in
place at U-M for recruiting and retaining diverse students in STEM disciplines,
their focus is on engineering and biology, and only a few are applied to the
geosciences. Further, these activities are currently disjointed, so there is no
integrated mechanism for attracting and retaining URM students to pursue
geosciences at U-M. The proposed project will build on these current, proven
programs and create partnerships between organizations to support URM students
at two critical junctures: between high school and 4-year institution geoscience
degree programs, and between community college and 4-year institution geoscience
degree programs. Five objectives will be pursued: (1) inspire and recruit high
schools seniors to pursue geoscience at U-M; (2) establish infrastructure to
support students interested in geosciences through the critical juncture between
high school and college; (3) increase the number of URM students transferring
from community colleges to U-M to study geosciences; (4) develop student
interest in geosciences through research and field experiences; and (5) expose
students to career opportunities in the geosciences. These objectives will be
achieved through the development and implementation of new hands-on experiences
in the classroom, lab, and field; a summer program to bridge high school and
college for students interested in geosciences; social media and peer-mentoring
activities designed to establish supportive student cohorts; application to the
geosciences of established practices for recruiting students and facilitating
transfer from community college; and development of media and interactions with
professional geoscientists designed to highlight career
opportunities.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project will link the proposed
activities together with existing and developing programs at U-M, all of which
employ evidence-based methods. A novel aspect is that it will create a seamless
and continuous pipeline for URM geosciences students from high school through
the undergraduate years. Outcomes of this project will provide new perspectives
on the importance of such an integrated approach to increasing diversity in the
STEM fields. Quantitative comparisons of performance of students within the
newly developed program to those not involved in the program, and those involved
in other programs and in other STEM fields, will be conducted via an innovative
University-wide data mining process. We will also assess student attitudes
towards the various phases of the project with online surveys and face-to-face
interviews. This generated evidence will be used to evaluate prospects for
transfer of such integrated strategies to other disciplines, departments, and
institutions.