* 1540855
* Developing Elementary Mathematics Instructional Leaders (DEMIL)
* EHR,DUE
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2017
* Eva Thanheiser, Portland State University
* Standard Grant
* Sandra Richardson
* 08/31/2017
* USD 74,979.00

This Noyce Capacity Building project is a collaborative effort by faculty at
Portland State University and the Hillsboro School District to increase the
number of talented STEM teachers in high-needs public, elementary schools in the
region. The goal of the project will be to build capacity by improving the
capabilities of an initial cohort of seven master teachers to serve as
teacher/leaders in their schools and mentors for new teachers. Thus, the Master
Teaching Fellows will participate in coursework to learn about and plan lessons
based on pedagogies that have been shown to increase student engagement in
mathematical practices. They will then implement these lessons in the classroom
in collaboration with a learning community composed of their colleagues. The
project will establish a model for the professional development for mathematics
teachers along the professional continuum (expert to
novice).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is based on a theory of action, which
claims that course-based learning coupled with the classroom-based learning will
deprivatize instructional practice, availing the Master Teaching Fellows with a
greater opportunity to perform effective inquiry and analysis as they teach. The
investigators hypothesize that this professional development model will supply
the "connective tissue" that research has shown to be missing in teacher
education. This model also provides a common focus on increased student
engagement in mathematical practices defined by the Common Core State Standards
in Mathematics. Formative and summative evaluation will be used to monitor
progress toward the project goal and to inform potential revisions of the
professional model for future implementation including scaling up. Classroom
artifacts (Instructional Quality Assessment), learning community observations,
and focus group interviews will be collected and analyzed to provide insight
into whether or not student achievement in mathematics will be improved by
evidence-based instruction that focuses on their engagement in mathematical
reasoning, sense making, and discourse.