* 1540788
* Collaborative Research: Travel Support for Students to Attend the 2015 Industrial and Systems Engineering Research Conference (ISERC); Nashville, Tennessee; May 30 - June 2, 2015
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2016
* Jennifer Ryan, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Diwakar Gupta
* 04/30/2016
* USD 5,000.00

The objective of this grant is to support the attendance of U.S. graduate and
undergraduate students at the Industrial and Systems Engineering Research
Conference in Nashville, Tennessee, from May 30-June 2, 2015. The conference is
part of the IIE Annual Conference & Expo, which is the leading conference in the
field of industrial and systems engineering, and is sponsored by the Institute
of Industrial Engineers, which is the leading professional society for
industrial and systems engineers. This project seeks to stimulate broader
student attendance and participation in this conference. By attending the
conference, students have the opportunity to present their research, attend
tutorial sessions to learn advanced research methods, participate in panel
discussions and scholarship award functions, and interact with scholars and
students from other universities and around the world. Attendance at the
conference provides an opportunity for students to network with peers, mentors,
potential employers, and future collaborators. Thus, attendance at the
conference can enable the exploration of industrial engineering research
frontiers and may encourage participating students to consider academia as a
career path. The conference also provides students with the opportunity to
publish their work in high-quality conference proceedings. Furthermore, this
grant will support the broader participation of students from underrepresented
groups at the conference.

This collaborative grant will subsidize the travel expenses of approximately 40
students who plan to attend the conference. These travel grants will be awarded
through a competitive process and thus receipt of a travel grant will be viewed
as an honor by selected students. Applications will be evaluated by an
evaluation committee consisting of the conference program chairs, along with one
additional member nominated by the Council of Industrial Engineering Academic
Department Heads. Selected students will have the opportunity to attend the
conference and to participate in activities specifically designed for students.
For undergraduate students, the conference provides the IIE/Arena Student
Simulation Competition, as well as the Undergraduate Student Technical Paper
Competition. For graduate students, the conference provides a doctoral
colloquium, pre-conference workshops, networking receptions, best student paper
awards, and a best dissertation award. In addition, the Applied Solutions
Conference, which focuses on industrial engineering solutions to real-world
industrial problems, is being held concurrently with the Industrial and Systems
Engineering Research Conference. This joint conference provides an excellent
opportunity for students to network with potential employers, to explore
collaborations and to develop applications for their future research.