* 1540666
* SCOR Workshop: The Biology and Biogeochemistry of Planktonic Foraminifera
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2015,07/31/2016
* Howard Spero, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Candace Major
* 07/31/2016
* USD 29,880.00

Planktonic foraminifera are arguably the most important carriers of near surface
paleoceanographic information available to the geoscience community. The ability
to reconstruct past climate states and to predict the impact of the functioning
of foraminifera under changing oceanic conditions in the past and future depends
on a complete understanding of their ecology, biology, physiology and the
mechanisms by which they incorporate geochemical tracers into their calcite
shells. In the last quarter century, researchers have published experimental
results as well as observations on the biology/ecology of this group of
planktonic organisms but the publications are detailed in many different
journals that encompass fields as diverse as Marine Geology, Ecology and
Genetics. These publications highlight the advances made in our ability to grow
planktonic foraminifera in the laboratory. Conducting controlled geochemical
experiments on living micro-organisms has both calibrated existing
paleoceanographic proxies and produced new geochemical tools that can tease out
novel information from the fossil record.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
provides travel support for students and young researchers to participate in a
symposium and training workshop on the biology and biogeochemistry of planktonic
foraminifera. The proposed symposium/workshop will bring together international
specialists in the fields of planktonic foraminifera biology, ecology,
geochemistry and laboratory culturing to discuss new techniques and results and
train the next generation of young scientists how to grow and conduct
experiments on these planktonic protists. Funds also cover the costs of
laboratory rental for the duration of the workshop. This is a unique opportunity
for the U.S. graduate/postdoc community to get trained in the state of the art
techniques and tools that are being used/developed in different laboratories
around the world. Video-recorded symposium lectures and synthesis materials will
be made available to all participants and the community at large through an open
access web site and open source e-book. The symposium/workshop will also provide
a forum to disseminate the specialized techniques needed to conduct future
experiments on planktonic foraminifera. The symposium/workshop will be held in
conjunction with a Scientific Committee on Oceanic Research (SCOR) Working Group
(138) in the summer of 2015.