* 1540369
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Social Environment and Nutrition in Female Monkeys
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2016
* Jessica Rothman, CUNY Hunter College
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 08/31/2016
* USD 15,719.00

Social behavior influences an animal's ability to access foods that contain
adequate nutrition for growth and reproduction. During the course of primate
(including human) evolution, sociality was important for both preventing and
helping individuals reach their nutritional goals when faced with competition
from within their own species and other species. Consequently, the influence of
sociality on nutrition, and vice versa, has implications for characterizing the
evolution of human diet and for testing theories about primate socioecology. To
explore these issues, this project will study sociality and nutrition in female
redtail monkeys in Kibale National Park, Uganda. The broader impacts include
training minority and female students in primate ecology and conservation,
fostering international relationships and collaborations, and supporting public
and student outreach about primate diversity and conservation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This dissertation project will investigate the impact of
sociality on the nutrition of female redtail monkeys (Cercopithecus ascanius).
Females may face a tradeoff between (1) competition with other group members,
potentially in the context of dominance hierarchies, and with other monkey
species, and (2) their own nutritional goals. The investigators will examine the
nutrient intake and balancing of females in three groups of monkeys within
Kibale National Park. Macronutrient, energy and micronutrient intake, balance,
and patterns of nutrient prioritization across females will be analyzed using
the Geometric Framework (GF). The GF models how an animal balances multiple food
components in relation to one another. These nutritional data will then be
analyzed in the context of social behavior. This study will better characterize
primate behavior, as well as niche construction among sympatric monkey species.