* 1540631
* GP-EXTRA: TU GEO Careers (Towson University Geoscience Educational Opportunities for Careers)
* GEO,RISE
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2020
* Ronald Hermann, Towson University
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 08/31/2020
* USD 348,182.00

The predicted shortage of ~135,000 geoscientists in the US by the year 2022
means that it is essential to increase recruitment and retention of geoscience
majors as well as improve preparation for the workforce or graduate school. This
project is increasing undergraduate geoscience major recruitment through three
mechanisms: 1) through partnerships with regional high schools and community
colleges, and 2) through introductory geoscience classes by increased use of
hands-on, active learning practices, and 3) through improved publicity about
geoscience career opportunities, including teaching at the K-12 level. This
project is improving retention through 1) academic advising at a program level
to reduce barriers and foster learning communities, 2) developing peer networks,
and 3) building of connections between Towson University (TU) geoscience
students and the broader geosciences community. Cohorts of undergraduates
engaged in faculty-mentored research serve as a core around which the geoscience
programs at TU are being strengthened and grown. The cohort experience serves as
a major tool to recruit and then retain students to geoscience majors.
Undergraduate research experiences have been demonstrated to improve academic
outcomes, interest in graduate school, and the percentage of students working in
science, technology, engineering, and math (STEM)-related careers. An increase
in the number and diversity of students entering geoscience careers will help
meet workforce demands for the U.S. economy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
builds on existing best-practice methods for recruitment, student engagement,
and professional development to increase the number and diversity of students
entering geoscience careers. Faculty from TU and partnering 2-year community
colleges (2YCs) and high schools are working together to publicize geoscience
majors and career opportunities to increase recruiting into TU geoscience
majors. TU and 2YC faculty also are seeking to establish transfer pathways into
TU geoscience majors, since 42% of current incoming TU students enter as
transfer students. Evaluation of the results of these approaches is advancing
knowledge of methods to broaden pipelines for geoscience students transferring
from 2YCs to four-year institutions and serves to inform other institutions
working on these transitions. Qualitative research of student experiences offers
insights into which best-practice methods are most effective and why. This
project will contribute to the relatively thin literature on extracurricular
geoscience research experiences for students. By the end of the project, at
least 18 students will be affected directly through the research cohorts. In
addition, tens of students per academic year will be reached through the field
trips and &gt;500 students per year will be reached through recruiting efforts
and pedagogical reform of introductory geoscience courses. Smoothing pathways
from 2YCs to TU for transfer students will reduce the time students spend in
college and the financial costs they incur, including students pursuing
secondary teaching certification in Earth-Space Science. Underrepresented group
participation in TU geoscience programs will be increased through recruitment
from 2YCs with a higher percentage of minority students than TU and through the
selection process of the cohort program, where consideration will be given to
diversity and academic performance.