* 1540119
* I-Corps: Health-Beacons: Flexible Wearable Health and Activity Tracker for Smart Living
* TIP,TI
* 05/15/2015,10/31/2016
* Sajal Das, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 10/31/2016
* USD 50,000.00

This I-Corps project aims at designing Health-Beacons, which are flexible
wearable devices for health and activity tracking. Health-Beacons can provide
valuable insights into a user's daily activity and health patterns, thus
creating proactive awareness for improved wellness, health performance and
quality of living. The benefiting community includes elderly people and their
relatives, athletes, doctors and caregivers, among others. Commercial success of
Health-Beacons technology will significantly reduce federal expenditures on
Medicare, Medicaid and other health/wellness management programs for millions of
active people as well as the elderly generation in the United States. The
broader impacts of this project also include educational and outreach
activities, multi-disciplinary student training, and promoting innovation and
entrepreneurship culture among Missouri S&amp;T students.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The Health-Beacons system will integrate innovative bendable skin
conformable electronics, multi-modal sensing, and machine learning-based sensor
data analytics, in collaboration with wireless communications through Bluetooth
beacons. The key novelty lies in flexible electronics, intelligent sensor data
analytics techniques, and predictive modeling. Through contextual information
visualization and interaction, Health-Beacons will be made user-friendly to
allow interfacing with a multitude of technologies. The developed system will
provide users with a quantified smart living dashboard based on health and
activity tracking that can also be displayed on smartphones or smartwatches.
Considering that wearable technology for health and wellness management is still
in its infancy with early adopters, the Health-Beacons project will create a new
body of knowledge in wearable computing, sensor data analytics, and smart
healthcare.