* 1540447
* Standard: Learning NAGPRA: Cultivating Ethical Practice to Implement the Native American Graves Protection and Repatriation Act
* SBE,SES
* 01/01/2016,06/30/2021
* Brian Gilley, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Wenda K. Bauchspies
* 06/30/2021
* USD 349,876.00

The Native American Graves Protection and Repatriation Act (NAGPRA, 43 CFR 10)
constitutes human rights legislation enacted by Congress in 1990 to establish
the rights of federally recognized U.S. tribes to request repatriation of
ancestral human remains, funerary objects, sacred objects, and objects of
cultural patrimony. The law requires scientists in archaeology, anthropology and
museums to consult with tribes to assess cultural affiliations, prepare
documentation, and conduct repatriations. Scientists initially saw NAGPRA and
subsequent repatriation and reburial of collections as deleterious to research
goals, and some still do. Many continued their research as though nothing had
changed, despite the federal mandate. This project targets a gap between
indigenous and non-native stakeholders by looking at how repatriation ethics are
learned, comparing how professionals at Western scientific institutions learn
about NAGPRA with how professionals at indigenous institutions and tribal
colleges gain this understanding. Tribal colleges are engaged as intellectual
consultants in the project. We use ethnographic methods and communication
studies to research ethics in this age of repatriation, and a collegium format
to bring interdisciplinary multi-cultural stakeholders together to assess
learning, address the potential of professional codes of ethics to aid practice,
and evaluate the potential for curricula to move the repatriation-uncertain to
the realm of repatriation partner. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Museums, universities,
and cultural resource management companies all need personnel that understand
how NAGPRA works and how it can inform and guide ethical and respectful research
in archaeology and anthropology. Better understanding of indigenous perspectives
on repatriation may help scientists to overcome barriers to developing
scholarship with tribal partners. Resistance to NAGPRA and the consultation it
requires has slowed the development of applied research that might assist
indigenous groups in meeting tribal goals. NAGPRA compliance that acts as an
entree to collaboration has the potential to transform biological anthropology
and archaeology for the 21st century. Resources that have been tested and
aggregated into an open-access setting can be used internationally as indigenous
people across the globe increasingly seek control over not only ancestral
remains and material culture, but also heritage and representation. In addition,
the collegium structure may find use in other situations in which indigenous and
westernized scientific knowledge are combined. Promoting change in ethical
practices at institutions whose duty is to repatriate can change the nature of
relationships between scientists and descendants, and may contribute to future
innovative partnerships with descendant communities.