* 1540467
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award: The Role Of Ritual Integration In Augmenting State Level Solidarity
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2015,03/31/2017
* Tom Dillehay, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 03/31/2017
* USD 23,902.00

Carla Hernández Garavito, of Vanderbilt University, along with colleagues in
Peru, will undertake research on how familiar sociocultural practices between
local communities and expanding imperial political systems impacted the
development of mutually legible socio-political orders in the 15th-16th century
Inca Empire. The concept of legibility refers to a continuous political process,
in which states use familiar idioms between them and their subjects to exert
political and economic control over local populations. Legibility may serve the
state as a tool of political subjugation, but it also may reinforce shared
idioms in ways that were leveraged by local communities for their own interests.
As with modern societies, past ones were subject to processes of global
politics, yet the growing gap in the anthropological understanding of the inner
workings of ancient and modern empires has rendered local/global relationships
in the past into a simplified dichotomy of direct/indirect control. Through an
interdisciplinary archaeological and historical approach, this research will
investigate the critical period when the rules of imperial control were
negotiated and established. This project significantly contributes and expands
currently scholarship: 1. by using the concept of legibility to analyze the
specific means through which subject groups shape political and economic
processes of imperialism; 2. in characterizing a single imperial strategy as a
diachronic process, from its local inception to negotiation between imperial and
local practices; 3. by situating this research within global issues of state and
local interaction. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mrs. Hernández and her research team
will use archaeological excavation, mapping, archival research, and specialized
material analyses, to investigate the role of public ritual and places as
critical idioms of interaction between the Inka Empire and the local community
in the Huarochirí region in the Peruvian Andes. Over the course of a hundred
years, the Inka created the largest empire in the Americas, extending at its
height over 906,000 km2 of western South America and weaving together a
patchwork of ethnic diversity. Through targeted excavations in two sites
containing both local and Inka standard public spaces and through an
interdisciplinary methodology, this project will reveal a subtle means of
hegemonic interaction that helped to shape Inka imperialism and the diverse
material signatures of state imposition. This project will offer collaborative
education and training opportunities for U.S. and Peruvian archaeology and
history students, and will promote collaboration with local community members
and Peruvian academic institutions. This research is of direct relevance to
foster a critical understanding of how imperial policies created the conditions
for incorporating and maintaining mutually legible local/state practices and how
local forms helped to shape state politics.