* 1540059
* 2015 Biomedical Engineering Society (BMES)-National Science Foundation (NSF) Special Session, Tampa FL, October 7-11, 2015
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2016
* Richard Hart, Biomedical Engineering Society
* Standard Grant
* Michele Grimm
* 07/31/2016
* USD 20,000.00

PI: Hart, Richard T. Proposal Number: 1540059

This proposal seeks funding to support travel and offset registration fees for
students, postdoctoral fellows, early career faculty and professionals, and
speakers, inclusive of underrepresented groups and accessible to persons with
disabilities, to participate in a BMES-NSF Special Session planned for the 2015
Biomedical Engineering Society Annual Meeting. The 2015 BMES Annual Meeting will
be held in Tampa, Florida, October 7-11, 2015, and it will feature 19 parallel
technical Program Tracks focused on the overall theme of "Innovation at the
Interface." The BMES Annual Meeting serves as a primary vehicle for scientific
sharing and dissemination of the latest advances in biomedical engineering, as
well as a facilitator of important cross-fertilizations between the life
sciences and engineering technologies, which foster a multi-disciplinary
approach in the practice of Biomedical Engineering.

The BMES-NSF Special Session in particular builds on the success of a similar
session held for the first time during the 2013 BMES Annual Meeting in Seattle,
WA and for a second time during the 2014 BMES Annual Meeting in San Antonio, TX.
Both of these previous sessions increased awareness of NSF-funded research in
the area of Biomedical Engineering and allowed investigators to gain a better
understanding of NSF funding opportunities and of how to prepare successful
grant applications. The session also allowed for effective and in-depth
interactions among attendees, NSF awardees and NSF program officers who attended
the session. The objectives of the session planned for the 2015 Annual BMES
Meeting are to 1) showcase NSF funded research and researchers; 2) foster
collaboration and idea sharing through a networking reception; and 3)
familiarize participants with NSF and NSF funding mechanisms and provide insight
into strategies for preparing competitive grant proposals. The session will take
place on Friday, October 9, 2015. It is expected that this session will recur on
an annual basis to contribute to a comprehensive approach by BMES in partnership
with NSF in ensuring development of a diverse, well educated, and technically
competent biomedical engineering workforce.