* 1540072
* Collaborative Research: Preparing Engineering Faculty to Make Academic Change Happen
* ENG,EEC
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2018
* Julia Williams, Rose-Hulman Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Julie Martin
* 06/30/2018
* USD 125,023.00

Within the science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) education
community, there are repeated calls for changing the way we educate our
students. These calls for change extend beyond the classroom experience to the
curriculum, co-curricular experiences, and institutional levels. And yet,
despite the development of research-based teaching strategies, innovative co-
curricular projects, and many years of funding and development from a variety of
foundations and corporations, change in STEM education is not pervasive.

The lack of systemic change points to an important problem with the approach to
change that the STEM education community has pursued thus far. Change has been
targeted at the course and curriculum levels, focusing on teaching and learning
methods. These beneficial activities have not, however, fostered the necessary
knowledge, skills, and abilities (KSA) in motivation, communication,
collaboration, and persuasion that are the foundation for change on larger, more
institutional levels. These change strategies are well documented in the
literature of other disciplines, such as organizational psychology and behavior,
but have not been brought into the conversation within STEM education in a
rigorous, accessible way. The work proposed here seeks to address this specific
problem by answering the following question: Can we overcome limits that prevent
the diffusion of new ideas, can we overcome barriers to the adaption of
effective practices, by focusing on the change agents themselves in terms of
their skills and change expertise?

This project will study change agents who are engaged in making change on their
campuses through the NSF Revolutionizing Engineering Departments (RED) Program.
The co-PIs will provide RED recipients the opportunity to learn and develop the
KSAs that research suggests are essential for effective change management,
through a customized change curriculum that will be delivered during the annual
meeting of RED recipients and supported through monthly conference calls. The
co-PIs will also follow the work of these agents over a two-year period,
capturing their reflections on their efforts during focus group interviews. From
the qualitative data gathered during this EAGER Project, the co-PIs will develop
rich case studies that highlight the KSAs required to promote change in STEM;
these case studies will serve as models for faculty and administrators who wish
to make significant change on their campuses. The approach of this EAGER project
represents transformative research that does not fit well into other funding
opportunities, because change management KSAs are not well integrated in
engineering education presently. By demonstrating the importance of change
management KSAs to effective change projects in engineering education, this
project will provide faculty and administrators with a new model for change.
Consequently, this work addresses the EAGER focus on high risk-high payoff,
radically different approaches that develop new expertise and engage novel
disciplinary or interdisciplinary perspectives.