* 1540197
* Workshop:  Effectively Communicating Science; August 2015-2017
* GEO,AGS
* 05/15/2015,04/30/2018
* John Sonsteng, Mitchell Hamline School of Law
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 04/30/2018
* USD 581,806.00

This award supports three annual "Effectively Communicating Science" workshops
on the topic of weather modification and a pilot workshop on hydraulic fracking
to help coach scientists in communicating and teaching complex Science,
Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM) concepts effectively and
ethically.

The premise of the workshops is that scientists must not be advocates for one
side or the other, but must be able to convey the quality and accuracy of their
work. There is a significant societal impact in helping scientists better
communicate and teach their expertise. At present, there are over 1,000
scientists in atmospheric, geospace, and related fields who are teaching,
researching, publishing, and communicating with colleagues in the STEM community
and the public at large. These scientists, and their work, will become
increasingly important in future scientific and public discussions on complex
STEM concepts.

The principal investigator team will build on the success of previous workshops;
expand the number of participants who benefit from the workshops; further refine
the workshop materials and methodology; implement and evaluate new materials to
reach more participants in other STEM disciplines; and continue to provide
ongoing support and resources to participating scientists.

Each workshop will include a diverse group of 20-24 participants and an
experienced faculty. The workshops will include simulations where participants
communicate and teach complex STEM concepts to non-scientists in a range of
challenging settings. The workshops will demonstrate the merit of experiential
learning and provide hands-on practice opportunities for participants to
communicate and teach complex STEM concepts in a wide range of challenging
settings. Workshop faculty will provide individualized feedback and coaching
along the way.

During the workshops, participants will learn and practice the role of both
scientists and non-scientists in order to: 1) learn to effectively communicate
their expertise; 2) understand the culture and perspectives of non-scientists;
and 3) develop a deeper understanding and appreciation of the different
challenges in communicating and teaching complex STEM concepts to non-
scientists. Participants will also discuss ethical issues concerning
communicating and teaching STEM concepts to non-scientists.