* 1540346
* EAGER:   Building Strong and Tough Multiphase Ceramics via Interface Tailoring
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2015,01/31/2017
* William Fahrenholtz, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Alexis Lewis
* 01/31/2017
* USD 130,000.00

Strength and toughness are two important properties of structural materials, but
they are often times mutually exclusive, especially in ceramic materials.
Materials with high strength can carry higher loads before they fail, and
materials with high toughness can deform to a greater extent without breaking.
This EArly-concept Grants for Exploratory Research (EAGER) award supports
research focused on the formation of new types of ceramic materials by blending
two different phases to simultaneously achieve high strength and high toughness.
It is hypothesized that structural changes at the microscopic scale will occur
across the interfaces of these phases when the materials deform, which will
result in increased overall toughness in an already high strength material
system. Ceramic materials with high toughness have potential use for the
development of super-efficient power plants, high temperature gas sensors,
thermal protection systems for space vehicles and many other engineering
applications. As such, results from this will benefit the U.S. economy and
society. In addition, this award will support enhancement of teaching, training
and learning through mentoring of graduate and undergraduate
students.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research is to explore the
formation of new types of Zirconium (Zr) based multiphase ceramic materials by
selectively choosing phases with thermodynamically compatible crystal structures
but different lattice constants to form energy dissipating microstructures.
Three types of multiphase ceramics will be manufactured, namely ZrC-ZrB2
nanocomposites, ZrC-ZrB2 multilayer laminates and ZrB2-HfB2 solid solutions.
Both experimental characterization and atomistic computations will be conducted
to determine relative densities, grain sizes, and phases present in the
fabricated solid solutions, nanocomposites, and laminates. The strength,
fracture toughness, microhardness, and elastic properties of ceramics,
nanocomposites, and laminates will be measured experimentally and calculated
computationally. Following mechanical testing, fracture surfaces of the
specimens will be examined to identify the failure origins. Atomistic
computations will be performed to reveal atomic scale toughening mechanisms.