* 1540573
* GP-IMPACT: Strengthening Pathways into Geosciences through Linkages between Summer Bridge and Undergraduate Training Programs
* GEO,RISE
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2019
* Reza Khanbilvardi, University of Maryland Eastern Shore
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 08/31/2019
* USD 525,761.00

The goal of this project is to strengthen and leverage existing collaborative
programs to create a pipeline for recruiting and preparing high school and
undergraduate students, particularly those from underrepresented minority
groups, for transition to undergraduate and graduate programs in the
geosciences. According to the Bureau of Labor Statistics, employment related to
the geoscience workforce is expected to grow at a faster rate of change on
average than other fields over the next decade. Coupled with the looming wave of
retirements anticipated within the aging "baby boomer" population, a shortage of
~135,000 geoscientists is forecast within the next several years, particularly
within the federal and state agencies that oversee natural resources management
and the oil and gas industries. A major challenge to recruiting and preparing
students to become the next generation of geoscientists is the general lack of
awareness of education and career opportunities in the geosciences, especially
among underrepresented minority students and students in underserved
communities. Because the geosciences are not often a required part of the high
school or undergraduate curriculum, innovative approaches are needed to engage
students at critical junctures in their education pathway (e.g., between high
school and college). Engaging students in authentic research-based experiences
in science, technology, engineering, and math (STEM) disciplines has been shown
to be an effective approach to recruiting and retaining students in STEM and the
geosciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative project leverages resources
at four NOAA-sponsored geoscience Cooperative Science Centers (CSCs), located at
minority-serving institutions (University of Maryland Eastern Shore, Howard
University, Florida A&amp;M University, City College at City University of New
York), and the Woods Hole Consortium of Institutions. The project has five major
components: outreach to high schools regarding education and career
opportunities in the geosciences; a 6-week summer bridge program for select high
school graduates who have been admitted to one of the CSC institutions; a
10-week summer mentored research program in the second year for a sub-set of the
summer bridge program students; and, virtual interaction between the summer
bridge program participants and the research interns. Academic year support is
also provided to the participants through existing NOAA-supported programs at
the CSC institutions. Through the CSCs' outreach program, geoscience recruitment
materials are being disseminated to high school science teachers and counselors.
Nine high school seniors admitted to and preparing to enter college are
recruited into the program each year. During the 6-week summer bridge program,
these students receive education in the geosciences via lectures and hands-on
lab and field activities. Field trips foster cohesion among the cohort of
students, while providing an educationally enriching experience. Lectures and
tutorials in math are strengthening the interns' quantitative skills, and
enrollment in a freshman seminar course is facilitating their adjustments to
college life. Participants in the bridge program then have an opportunity to
participate in the 10-week summer Woods Hole Partnership Education Program (PEP)
during the following summer. The PEP program provides intensive mentored
research, a credit-bearing course and supplemental career and professional
development activities. Students are working in various research areas of the
geosciences in collaboration with the WHOI Consortium of Institutions. Five to 9
undergraduate students are selected each year from the four CSCs to participate
in PEP, where they participate in workshops to teach them how to design field
and lab research projects, collect and analyze data, and effectively present
their results orally, in poster form, and in writing. Through tracking and
monitoring, students participating in this project are supported at key
transitional educational junctures. This experience will accelerate their
preparation for graduate level work and result in a diverse and competent
workforce in STEM, particularly in the geosciences. By the end of the 3-year
grant, a total of 32 students will have participated in the program, and more
than 500 high school juniors and seniors nation-wide will have been reached with
geoscience career information through their teachers and counsellors.