* 1540505
* Biochemical and Molecular Engineering XIX Conference; Puerto Vallarta, Mexico; July 12-16, 2015
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2015,11/30/2015
* William Bentley, Engineering Conferences International, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Friedrich Srienc
* 11/30/2015
* USD 35,000.00

1540505&lt;br/&gt;Korpics, Kevin M.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal seeks
support from the National Science Foundation for the 19th International
Conference on Biochemical and Molecular Engineering (BME XIX) to be held in
Puerto Vallarta, Mexico, July 12-16, 2015. The theme of the BME XIX conference
is Engineering Next Generation Solutions, and it will be organized under the
auspices of the Engineering Conferences International (ECI), a not-for-profit
global engineering conferences program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The focus of the
conference will be on research at the cutting-edge of biotechnology including
synthetic biology, biomolecular design, the nano-bio interface, biofuels,
metabolic engineering, biomolecular networks, and stem cell differentiation in
combination with core areas of Biochemical Engineering. In addition, workshops
will address how the biochemical engineering community can develop technologies
that respond to global threats like Ebola, and how Biochemical Engineering
Education might change in the future in response to the needs of industry for a
workforce trained in specific areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The conference is co-
sponsered by the Biotechnology and Biochemical Engineering Program of the CBET
Division and by the Synthetic and Systems Biology Program of the Division of
Molecular and Cellular Biology.