* 1540067
* Antarctic Sea Ice Variability in the Southern Ocean-Climate System: A Workshop
* GEO,OPP
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2017
* Amanda Staudt, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Peter Milne
* 06/30/2017
* USD 50,000.00

An ad hoc NRC committee will conduct a workshop to bring together Antarctic sea
ice experts to review the current science for climate-ocean-sea ice interactions
in the Southern Ocean, with an outlook back 50 years and an emphasis on the
record extent of satellite sensed observations over the last 3 years. This
increase in the annual areal extent is at odds with best available climate model
projections that suggest the sea ice should be declining in response to
increasing greenhouse gases, stratospheric ozone depletion, and a warming global
ocean. It is also at variance with the marked Arctic sea ice decrease. It
remains unclear as to exactly why sea ice extent is not decreasing around
Antarctica, why it continues to increase in most but not all locations, whether
or not the observed increase lies within the large inter-annual variability of
the coupled atmosphere-ocean-sea ice-land ice system, and why climate models are
unable to reproduce current observations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop will
help inform future research agenda at US and international agencies, including
NSF, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, and the Office of Naval
Research. It will also contribute to the media and public discourse about
Antarctic sea ice, providing more clarity about what we do and do not know.
Finally, it will help forge new connections and collaborations among scientists
working on the topic, in particular early career scientists.