* 1540819
* Noyce Mathematics Fellows, TeachDETROIT
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2021
* Robert Bruner, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Ellis
* 09/30/2021
* USD 1,448,963.00

With funding from the National Science Foundation's Robert Noyce Teacher
Scholarship Program, this Wayne State University (WSU) Noyce Scholarship Track I
project will address the national need to produce a high quality teaching
workforce in elementary and middle school mathematics. The "Noyce Mathematics
Fellows, TeachDETROIT" project will prepare elementary and middle school
mathematics teachers for Detroit schools at a time that United States students
lag behind their international peers in mathematics achievement. This is a
critical challenge, since proficiency in mathematics is essential for entry to
college, access to employment, economic well-being, and participation in a
democratic society. This challenge is particularly important in the city of
Detroit, where student scores in mathematics on the National Assessment of
Educational Progress (NAEP) in 2009, 2011 and 2013 were among the lowest in the
country. The project will address this challenge by preparing elementary and
middle school mathematics teachers to work in Detroit schools. Wayne State
University, Henry Ford College, the Detroit Public Schools, and Wayne Westland
Community Schools will partner to recruit, train, and induct fifty-six (56) new
elementary and middle school mathematics teachers for Detroit schools.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Preparing successful teachers of mathematics is a non-
trivial endeavor, especially since teacher candidates need to be proficient in
mathematics. This can be particularly challenging because, for many teachers,
the mathematical subject matter is significantly different from the mathematics
they learned as students. Beyond subject matter knowledge, teachers must also
have pedagogical expertise for helping others to learn and understand
mathematical concepts. In addition, teachers must also: (1) have the
interpersonal skills and dispositions to work with students like and unlike
themselves; (2) be able to design and carry out sophisticated assessments of
student progress; (3) analyze data; and (4) adjust instruction accordingly. To
meet these demands, teachers need substantial training over time. This project
will create a model to prepare new teachers to be successful, especially in
high-poverty schools with children of color, and this model will constitute an
important and timely contribution to educational research. The project will
provide scholarships and stipends to highly qualified candidates to support
their participation in an innovative urban teacher residency program for the 15
months they are receiving preservice training. This program will blend
coursework and field experiences, with the participation of outstanding mentors,
in elementary and middle school classrooms. Because new teacher attrition rates
are high, a crucial piece of the "Noyce Mathematics Fellows, TeachDETROIT"
program includes continued mentoring for graduates during their first two years
as teachers of record. The Noyce Mathematics Fellows will utilize social media
and other forms of technology to keep graduates connected in ongoing
conversations about best practices in mathematics instruction.