* 1540824
* Giving back and looking forward: Enhancing and diversifying STEM teaching in Southwest Florida through recruitment and mentorship of homegrown talent.
* EHR,DUE
* 05/01/2016,09/30/2021
* Tanya Kunberger, Florida Gulf Coast University
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Green
* 09/30/2021
* USD 945,015.00

With funding from the National Science Foundation's Robert Noyce Teacher
Scholarship program, Noyce@FGCU is recruiting undergraduate STEM majors in
Biology, Chemistry, Math, and Engineering and preparing them to become grades
6-12 Science or Math teachers. The project will fund 19 Scholars over 5-years.
In this project, the Colleges of Education and Arts and Sciences of Florida Gulf
Coast University are collaborating with the districts of Lee, Hendry, Glades,
Charlotte, and Collier counties in southwest Florida. Primary objectives of
Noyce@FGCU include 1) Increase the number of STEM classroom teachers for grades
6-12, 2) Increase the success of Noyce@FGCU classroom teachers, and 3) Support
teacher certification of Noyce@FGCU scholars. Elements of the program include:
&lt;br/&gt;--A) A robust, two-tier recruitment strategy that recruits under-
represented urban and rural minority and first generation college students and
area high school students. Areas of recruitment include: a) a Learning Assistant
program, b) TRIO programming for STEM majors, c) under-served population
recruitment in high schools, d) service-learning opportunities in 6-12
classrooms, e) visits to introductory STEM classrooms, and f) advisement
seminars and brochures,&lt;br/&gt;--B) Pre-service enrichment in the form of
workshops, conferences, and summer STEM experiences bridging the junior to
senior year; &lt;br/&gt;--C) Pre-service mentoring, courses, and state test
preparation; &lt;br/&gt;--D) A first-year in-service COE FGCU coaching program;
and &lt;br/&gt;--E) Specific efforts to prepare the Scholars for teaching in
high needs schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Assessment activities will include
efforts to assess specific components of their project , success of recruitment
efforts in terms of: the strength of the partnerships they develop with
recruiting targets such as high needs schools within the area and key
departments and offices within the university; the numbers, diversity,
scholarship and devotion to service among the applicants they attract, the
Scholars reaction to enrichment activities and mentoring services offered; and
the quality of the Scholars efforts during their first years of teaching as
concerns the use of effective teaching practices and sensitivity to measures to
engage the diverse set of students they will work with. Mixed methods including
surveys, interviews and focus groups as well as observation of the Scholars in
action will be used as assessment/evaluation tools at both the formative and
summative stages of the project.