* 1540100
* 2015 Concussion Prevention and Diagnosis Workshop; Lowell, Massachusetts; June 2-3, 2015
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2017
* James Sherwood, University of Massachusetts Lowell
* Standard Grant
* Atul Kelkar
* 06/30/2017
* USD 15,100.00

Concussions are a significant health concern and there is growing research in
the field. Unfortunately, researchers who are in different disciplines and
working on concussion-related research are often unaware of the current state-
of-knowledge in the other disciplines. This workshop will aim to facilitate
discussions about the current state of the knowledge with respect to the
sources, prevention, diagnosis, and treatment of concussions and to provide an
opportunity for the establishment of new working teams that can make significant
advances. Outcomes of this workshop will include pathways for understanding the
relationship between the specific impact event and resulting degree of injury,
design of effective protective equipment from such injuries, and technology to
integrate health-monitoring devices into the equipment. The workshop will
facilitate cross-disciplinary research that is expected to significantly improve
the prevention and diagnosis of concussions, thus making sports safer for
athletes and combat safer for soldiers. The workshop will also help the
development a roadmap for future research and policy in concussion prevention
and diagnosis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The cross-disciplinary concussion prevention
and diagnosis workshop will bring together a diverse audience with a collective
wealth of knowledge in order to facilitate discussions about the current state
of the knowledge with respect to the sources, prevention, diagnosis, and
treatment of concussions; identify research gaps; determine future research
paths that will provide solutions to the concussion epidemic; generate a report
that will assist funding agencies in defining research initiatives; provide
opportunities for new working teams; and disseminate knowledge across
disciplines through panel sessions. The workshop will include cross-disciplinary
panel sessions and small-group discussion sessions. The four panel sessions will
interrogate the approaches used for four different population segments, youth
sports, females in high school and collegiate sports, professional sports, and
the military. Within each session, the goal will be to identify the cross-
disciplinary research gaps and determine the future research paths. The topics
will cross between dynamics, biomechanics, sensors, bioengineering, materials,
medicine, and imaging.