* 1540554
* WNMU Noyce Track 1 Capacity Building grant to strengthen STEM teacher preparation.
* EHR,DUE
* 12/01/2015,11/30/2017
* Jose Herrera, Western New Mexico University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Kim
* 11/30/2017
* USD 74,997.00

Western New Mexico University (WMNU) has received a Robert Noyce Teacher
Scholarship Program Capacity Building grant to 1) develop and strengthen the
teacher preparation network and pipeline from high school to college; 2)
strengthen collaboration between the School of Education (SOE) and the STEM
Departments at WNMU to more efficiently and effectively produce STEM teachers;
and, 3) recruit high school and undergraduate students to consider STEM and STEM
teaching careers through a focused effort to engage prospective STEM students in
active teaching experiences early in their career. Through these activities, the
PI team will build the critical capacity to effectively recruit high school and
university students into the STEM teacher preparation program. Such a robust
recruitment pathway will allow WMNU to have an impact on the national need to
increase the number of STEM teachers and, in particular, to increase the number
of Hispanic students who go into STEM teaching.

The WMNU PI team will develop an innovative workshop, the Mustang Science &
Education Academy (MSEA), which will focus on developing collaborative
relationships among the SOE, STEM departments and regional school districts.
MSEA will also provide the needed active learning experiences for our students
who express an interest in becoming STEM teachers. The project also is building
connections to industry partners and regional educational agencies. These
connections will help facilitate the recruitment, support, and induction of
future STEM teachers. The evaluation of the project will provide an
understanding of the effectiveness of the recruitment strategies that will
inform the recruitment practices of teacher preparation programs across the
country.