* 1540848
* UMSL Noyce Scholars: Building Excellence in STEM Talent (BEST)
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2021
* Charles Granger, University of Missouri-Saint Louis
* Standard Grant
* Mindy Capaldi
* 08/31/2021
* USD 1,193,804.00

With funding from the National Science Foundation's Robert Noyce Teacher
Scholarship program, the University of Missouri-Saint Louis (UMSL) Noyce
Scholars: Building Excellence in STEM Talent (BEST) Program is recruiting Noyce
STEM Teaching Scholars in the sciences and mathematics. The project is funding
21 scholarships (graduate tuition and stipend) over 5 years. The 21 newly
certified STEM teachers will have a masters' degree upon graduation. In this
project, UMSL is collaborating with St. Louis Public School district, Ferguson-
Florissant school district, and the Hazelwood school district, as well as a
local biotechnology business partner, Sigma-Aldrich. The goal of the project is
to increase the recruitment and retention of high-quality, culturally-conscious
science and mathematics teachers.

The project is founded on an existing collaboration between STEM professors and
the College of Education (COE), to prepare highly effective secondary teachers
with deep content preparation through the UTEACH program and pedagogical
preparation in the COE's clinical program, into the first two induction years.
The UMSL BEST program is informed by theories of cultural competence, responsive
design, problem-based education and professional learning theory. UMSL BEST is
improving the preparation and effectiveness of secondary STEM educators through
two additions to its existing certification and master's degree program. The
first is a STEM InnoLab in which teacher candidates, along with experienced
educators, teacher educators and community leaders, meet, design, and develop
new instructional designs tailored to the needs and interests of students. The
second addition is a partnership with the local biotech business partner Sigma-
Aldrich, which is tightening connections between the STEM high school curriculum
and career pathways, as well as with the Next Generation Science Standards and
the Common Core Math Standards. Research is being conducted on the effectiveness
of the Noyce specific components and the results are informing a sustainable
model for the preparation of future STEM teachers. The PI team is using mixed
methods data collecting techniques: in addition to the COE assessment system,
interviews, surveys, and meta-analysis of classroom observation data will be
used. The results will inform teacher preparation programs nationwide in best
practices to recruit, prepare, and retain culturally-conscious teachers for
high-needs schools.