* 1540285
* Network Biology
* CSE,CCF
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2016
* Richard Karp, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 04/30/2016
* USD 25,000.00

Computational molecular biology has developed dramatically over the last two
decades, and is by now an established discipline providing many insights into
the mechanisms of disease and the functioning of living cells. Network Biology
aims to understand the web of interactions among cellular components, which
affect all activities and disease. Only by understanding these interactions
(among genes, proteins, RNAs, complexes and other molecules) can a higher level
of understanding of organismal function, dynamics and development be achieved.
Further, cellular networks provide a holistic framework within which to
interpret other high-throughput heterogeneous measurements (e.g., expression
levels, mutations, chemical modifications, etc.) that are being collected across
organisms, individuals, cell types and conditions, and increasingly at the level
of individual cells.

It is expected that this workshop will enhance communication among biologists,
medical scientists, computer scientists and mathematicians interested in network
biology.

This workshop will bring together a diverse set of scientists focused on
inferring and analyzing cellular networks, using a wide range of techniques
including wet-lab experiments, graph algorithms, combinatorial optimization,
machine learning and statistics. This activity can be of great benefit both to
theoretical computer science, via the exposure to and infusion of new problems,
and to computational biologists, who will be exposed to state of the art
theoretical developments.