* 1540255
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Leaving home: genetic, endocrine, and behavioral correlates of dispersal in monogamous monkeys
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2015,08/31/2016
* Dorothy Cheney, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 08/31/2016
* USD 10,080.00

In some primate species, it is common for individuals to leave the group in
which they were born to join a different group (dispersal), but the evolutionary
reasons dispersal are not completely understood. Primates exhibit high levels of
inter- and intra-specific variation in dispersal, and there are costs associated
with unfamiliar locations and/or aggressive competitors. Many models attempting
to explain the evolution of dispersal have proposed a tight link among dispersal
patterns, mating systems, and life history traits. Developing a better
understanding of how social and mating systems influence and are influenced by
dispersal patterns is essential for understanding the evolution of social and
mating systems in primates, including humans. This project will study primate
dispersal in a socially monogamous monkey species using genetic and hormone data
collected non-invasively. This research is part of the Owl Monkey Project (OMP),
a long-term initiative to promote research, conservation, and education in the
Argentinean Chaco. Broader impacts include training of a female graduate student
and undergraduate students in a STEM field, and support of international
collaborations between the US and Argentina.

In this dissertation project, the co-PI will examine genetic, endocrine, and
behavioral correlates of dispersal in free-ranging, socially monogamous owl
monkeys of the Argentinean Chaco. The project will explore dispersal at the
level of the community by genetically sampling individuals, and at the level of
the social group by examining hormones and behavior in subadult males and
females. Specifically, it will utilize genotype data from ~250 owl monkeys,
behavioral data from 22 predispersing subadults, and steroid hormone data from
~1000 fecal samples to address current debates over the relationships between
mating system and dispersal by evaluating inbreeding and competition avoidance
hypotheses. These genetic, behavioral, and hormonal data will also be used to
evaluate the costs and benefits of delaying dispersal in groups where a variable
number of close kin may be present. Genetic data from this project also have
strong potential to elucidate how a bisexually dispersing species may utilize
differences in the average distance dispersed by each sex to avoid potential
costs of inbreeding. The unique multi-level approach and integrative nature of
this study of natal dispersal in a socially monogamous species has potential to
illuminate the origins of dispersal and mating patterns in pair-bonded primates,
including humans.