* 1540428
* BSF:2014389: Networked Markets
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Yaron Singer, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Nina Amla
* 08/31/2019
* USD 40,000.00

In recent years, online social networks have emerged as an important medium for
communication, and as a result can provide an effective platform for markets.
Due to the scale and complexity of social networking applications, markets in
these environments require a different theory than the theory which guides the
design of traditional internet markets. This project aims to study markets that
operate in networked environments. The goal of this research is to develop both
theory and empirical methods that are suitable for networked market design.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research has three major thrusts. The first goal is
to study incentives in network cascades. Information cascades spread information
in networks and incentivizing individuals to spread large cascades is a central
problem for network market design. The second objective is to study competition
in networked markets. In some cases, cascades are initiated by competing
agencies that seek to influence individuals to adopt the technology or idea they
promote. More generally, competition in networks spurs complex dynamics that are
challenging to analyze. This project analyzes equilibrium of such interactions,
as well as principles of market design in these complex environments. The third
thrust develops data mining techniques to study the economics of social
marketing platforms. The main challenge in such markets is that the social
networking services do not control the content being published, and users often
post advertisements without any indication. This makes analysis of social
marketing platforms a challenging data mining problem of detecting covert
advertisements. These methods for analysis and design of networked markets could
have a significant impact on internet economics.