* 1540276
* SHF: Small: Behavioral Software Contract Verification
* CSE,CCF
* 01/01/2015,08/31/2017
* Sam Tobin-Hochstadt, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 08/31/2017
* USD 342,229.00

It is important for many critical software components to be correct and
reliable, however verifying that software meets such requirements is difficult,
expensive, and error-prone. One approach is to use software contracts as a means
to specify and monitor the obligations and guarantees of software components.
When the agreements of such contracts are not met during the operation of a
program, the program stops and signals a violation and indicates the faulty
component. Software contracts have been very important for high-assurance
software, since they identify faulty program components, but they offer no
guarantees that a component will not fail. The goal of this research project is
to investigate approaches to ahead-of-time software verification that can prove
the absence of contract failures, thus giving a high level of confidence in the
correctness and reliability of critical software components. The research will
contribute a new understanding of the interplay between program verification,
software contracts, and modern programming languages. Additionally, it will
result in the development of tools for verifying software components with
contracts. It is expected that by verifying software contracts ahead-of-time,
the overhead of monitoring contract agreements during program operation can be
eliminated, which will encourage programmers to use contracts far more
extensively than they currently do. Such tools can dramatically reduce the
difficulty and cost of developing high-assurance
software.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are two paramount technical obstacles that
must be overcome to achieve the goals of this project: (1) the expressivity of
contracts, while crucial for the construction of reliable components, thwarts
static reasoning about programs and incurs significant run-time monitoring
costs, (2) the expressivity of higher-order programming languages, a mainstay of
modern industrial software construction, thwarts static reasoning about
contracts, despite the availability of mature automated tools and techniques.
This research project rectifies the situation by providing foundations for
modular and compositional automated reasoning about behavioral contracts in a
higher-order language. Specifically, the project will provide: (1) a
foundational theory in terms of a semantics for reasoning about components via
their contracts, which enables automated component-based contract verification;
(2) an interactive contract verification environment for exploring, testing, and
refining programs and contracts; and (3) an evaluation of our approach and tools
in the context of the Racket programming language implementation and standard
library, which contains extensive use of contracts.