* 1540798
* Conference: 2015 FASEB Summer Research Conference on Genetic Recombination and Chromosome Rearrangements to be held at Steamboat Springs, CO - July 19-24, 2015
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2016
* Tanya Paull, Federation of Amer Societies For Exper Biology
* Standard Grant
* Karen Cone
* 06/30/2016
* USD 5,000.00

The FASEB Summer Research Conference on Genetic Recombination and Chromosome
Rearrangements will be held at Steamboat Springs, Colorado on July 19-24, 2015.
This is the sixteenth in a series of bi-annual conferences devoted to promoting
cross-disciplinary discussion at the leading edge of research on DNA
recombination. The 2015 meeting features an increased emphasis on quantitative
approaches that bring new understanding to various areas comprising genetic
recombination; for example, high-throughput sequencing and copy number variation
analysis to study genome rearrangements globally within organisms and across
populations; mass spectrometry-based methods that globally assess protein and
DNA marks; single molecule approaches to recombination biochemistry.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this conference is to bring together
researchers from around the world who work in recombination and the related
field of genomic rearrangements, and to give young and starting investigators
the opportunity to present and discuss their work. The format of the meeting
involves talks from invited speakers who are leaders in the field, speakers
chosen from submitted abstracts, and poster sessions. For 2015, there are 47
invited speakers, 43% of whom are women (as are 5 of 8 session chairs) and 30%
of whom are new to the conference. The number of program slots to be filled from
submitted abstracts has been increased significantly (to 24%) with the goal of
increasing participation opportunities and visibility for underrepresented
groups and young scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The requested funds will be
used for fellowships to help defray travel and meeting costs for 8 junior
scientists. The organizers will prioritize support for underrepresented groups
and preferentially graduate students and post-doctoral fellows with NSF funds.