* 1540253
* Educator Capacity Building in PreK-12 Engineering Education
* ENG,EEC
* 09/15/2015,02/29/2020
* Greg Pearson, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Edward Berger
* 02/29/2020
* USD 934,190.00

This project addresses the US education system's capacity to respond to the
potential growth in demand for PreK-12 educator expertise related to
engineering. Although the situation is gradually changing at the PreK-12 level,
relative to the other STEM subjects, at the PreK-12 level, engineering is still
very much outside the mainstream. This is reflected in the scant availability of
pre-service engineering teacher preparation programs, the dearth of high-quality
student assessments in engineering, the lack of mechanisms for recognizing
educator skill in engineering education, and the absence of clear professional
pathways for PreK-12 engineering educators who demonstrate proficiency. The
project will consider how the current system might be adapted to better support
the development and employment of precollege engineering educators. The project
is timely given a number of recent developments, including the 2013 publication
of the Next Generation Science Standards, which call on science teachers to
connect science concepts and practices to those in engineering; the expected
fall 2015 release of results of the first-ever national assessment of Technology
and Engineering Literacy; the College Board's plan to develop an AP Advanced
Placement course in Eengineering course; and increasing interest in more
integrated forms of K-12 STEM education in both formal and informal (e.g., the
Maker Movement) environments. The Discovery Research K-12 program (DRK-12) seeks
to significantly enhance the learning and teaching of science, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and teachers, through
research and development of innovative resources, models and tools (RMTs).
Projects in the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in STEM education
and prior research and development efforts that provide theoretical and
empirical justification for proposed projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The 18-month
project will be overseen by a diverse committee of experts appointed by The
National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine. The committee will
conduct a variety of data-gathering activities, including an in-depth review of
the relevant literature; a landscape scan of existing pre- and in-service
programs for PreK-12 engineering educators; and two topical workshops. This
information will allow the committee to address the project's four objectives:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;- Determine what is known from the published literature
about the preparation of PreK-12 educators to teach about engineering,
identifying areas of promising practice as well as areas in need of further
research;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;- Catalog existing US pre-service and in-service
programs that support the preparation and professional development of PreK-12
engineering educators, describing the nature (e.g., curriculum) and history of
the programs and, if known, the number of educators reached and the evidence for
impact (e.g., on individual teaching practice and the growth of PreK-12
engineering education locally, regionally, or
nationally);&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;- Review existing formal (e.g., state
certification) and informal (e.g., "badging") mechanisms that are being or might
be used to recognize expertise and support career pathway options for PreK-12
teachers of engineering, noting practical and policy impediments and how they
might be addressed; and &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;- Explore the potential for the
post-secondary education community, including but not limited to four-year
engineering and engineering technology programs, to take a more active role in
the preparation of teachers of PreK-12 engineering. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At the
conclusion of the project, the committee will publish a report summarizing its
findings and making recommendations for how the current education system might
be adapted to better support the development and employment of precollege
engineering educators.