* 1540393
* Collaborative Research: EAGER--Improved Detection and Quantification of Wind Gusts
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Rebecca Barthelmie, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 08/31/2018
* USD 187,481.00

Extreme winds events can have substantial impacts on structures and
transportation. The main methods for observing winds are ground-based weather
stations and weather radar. Weather stations are highly accurate, but they are
widely spaced and miss many small-scale wind events. Weather radars are able to
view large areas at once, but are only looking at winds well above the surface
of the earth. A group of researchers is testing a novel method to use seismic
data to sense wind gusts. Wind is known to have a seismic signal, and in fact
solid earth scientists regard these measurements as noise. This research grant
will help to determine whether the noise seen in seismic data is actually useful
for determining the intensity and location of wind gusts. If the signal proves
to be useful, it could have a large impact on the atmospheric science community
because seismic arrays are relatively inexpensive and are always collecting
data. Improved wind data has potential implications for weather and climate
models, structural codes, and wind energy. An early career postdoctoral
researcher will also be supported by this award.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
researchers plan a study to determine the degree to which seismic arrays can be
used to quantify the occurrence, intensity and directional orientation of wind
gusts and intense sustained wind speeds. This research will make use of the
Transportable Array (TA) of the NSF EarthScope program and a number of
meteorological stations to perform the analysis. The following research
questions are posed: a) Under what conditions do high surface winds produce a
signal in the seismometers? b) At what frequencies does this occur? c) Is there
a consistent relationship between wind gust magnitude and seismic response? d)
Are the forms of b) and c) spatially consistent? e) How many false positives are
identified? f) Are gust signatures differentiable across range of background
sustained winds? g) To what degree are periods of high wind speeds not
associated with large magnitude gusts quantifiable using seismic data? h) Can
the two horizontal components recorded by the USArray seismometers be used to
give the "angle of attack"?