* 1540780
* The Hunter Noyce Science Scholar Program (HC-NSSP) Phase 2
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2022
* Shirley Raps, CUNY Hunter College
* Standard Grant
* John Haddock
* 08/31/2022
* USD 1,201,354.00

There is an established need for well-qualified teachers in high-need school
districts, which are often located in urban communities. New York City, in
particular, has a need for teachers of science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics (STEM) who are competent with a diverse and international student
population. Working to address this need with funding from the National Science
Foundation's Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship program, and in partnership with
Bronx Community College (BCC), New York City (NYC) public schools within the New
Visions network, and East Harlem community-based youth organizations, the The
Hunter Noyce Science Scholar Program (HC-NSSP) Phase 2 will recruit individuals
with strong STEM backgrounds and prepare them to become secondary science
teachers. Building on a successful Phase 1 project, this Phase 2 project will
support 15 new undergraduate STEM majors, each receiving 2 or 3 years of
funding, plus 11 new STEM professionals (recent graduates), each receiving 1
year of funding. Thus, the project will produce 25 new biology, chemistry, earth
science, and physics middle grades and high school teachers. The NYC middle and
high schools in which Hunter College Noyce Scholars will teach serve thousands
of students from underrepresented minority populations who live in high-poverty
communities across the city.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The HC-NSSP Phase 2 project
will prepare and support Noyce Scholars to teach in high-need schools through
professional learning communities for Noyce Scholars and Teachers, extensive and
intensive clinical field experiences prior to student teaching, and a
comprehensive induction program that will provide science teachers with coaches,
faculty mentors, and "near peer" mentors (second year Noyce Teachers who will
mentor first year Noyce Teachers). HC-NSSP Phase 2 research and evaluation
studies will advance understanding of the distinguishing factors related to
urban STEM teacher recruitment, retention, and career satisfaction by examining
the contextual and attitudinal factors of Noyce Phase 1 and 2 teachers. The
longitudinal study will investigate questions such as: What factors of the
school environment, including the presence of teacher support and induction as
reported by the teacher, are related to their decisions to continue teaching at
high-need schools? How do these factors relate to any changes in school
assignments or the decision to leave teaching? What was the nature of in-school
support for novice, inservice Noyce teachers? Data to address these questions
will come from such sources as surveys and interviews as well as instruments
such as a self-efficacy to teach instrument.