* 1540792
* Recruiting Impassioned STEM Educators (RISE)
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2016
* Jaromy Kuhl, University of West Florida
* Standard Grant
* Lidia C. Yoshida
* 08/31/2016
* USD 124,999.00

With funding from the National Science Foundation's Robert Noyce Teacher
Scholarship Program, the University of West Florida (UWF) Recruiting Impassioned
STEM Educators (RISE) capacity building project will develop a multidimensional
program for recruiting and retaining highly-qualified middle and secondary
Science Technology Engineering and Mathematics (STEM) teachers in the Northwest
Florida region. RISE educational partners will include UWF, Northwest Florida
State College, Pensacola State College, STEM Master Teachers, STEM learning
centers, and three area school districts that have the combined challenge of
serving both urban and rural low-economic high need schools. The RISE
educational partners will work together to recruit highly qualified STEM majors
to become secondary teachers. These teacher candidates will impact students in
grades 6-12 by working in local school districts and science learning centers. A
recruitment course, Exploring Inquiry Teaching, will serve as a model for other
undergraduate colleges to recruit math and science students to become
teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Within the one-year grant project, RISE will
achieve the following major outcomes: 1. Design a Professional Teaching
Certification Program for STEM majors; 2. Increase recruitment to STEM teaching
by developing a new course to attract STEM majors to the field of education; 3.
Build a learning community for future STEM middle and secondary teachers;
4.Target recruitment of dual-enrolled high school students to a career in STEM
teaching; 5. Formalize internship sites at STEM learning centers; 6. Create
social media sites for STEM students, Master Mentors, and faculty; 7. Increase
retention of STEM teachers by training STEM Master Mentors; and 8. Engage high-
needs schools that serve both urban and rural low-economic students. In
addition, RISE will formalize cooperative activities in the STEM disciplines,
connect higher education institutions with local schools and teachers, and
expand the STEM learning community in Northwest Florida. To broaden the
distribution of results, RISE team members will disseminate reports and
resources developed through the project with grant partners as well as at
regional and national conferences and through publications in peer reviewed
journals.