* 1540199
* Workshop: Future Directions for Science of Organizations
* SBE,SES
* 05/15/2015,04/30/2017
* Sara McComb, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* chu-hsiang chang
* 04/30/2017
* USD 50,000.00

Nontechnical Description of Significance and Importance The hallmark of the
Science of Organizations is its applicability to a variety of disciplines
including business, communication, economics, engineering, information
technology, psychology, public administration, and sociology. These disparate
disciplines offer varying perspectives about a range of issues associated with
organizations of all sizes (e.g., corporations, small non-profit organizations,
government agencies, teams) and scopes (e.g., multi-national, local, subsets of
larger organizations). At the same time, however, the breadth of disciplines
present challenges in identifying areas to strategically grow the field?s
research portfolio, encouraging interdisciplinary and international research
activities, and promoting the applications of research results. Moreover,
methodological advances have occurred that make new, more sophisticated
approaches to organizational research possible. A workshop will be held that
assembles participants from multiple disciplines to participate in focused
discussions about this inherently interdisciplinary field. The successful
completion of this workshop has the potential to fundamentally change
organizational science research by highlighting new, innovative opportunities
for research and promoting opportunities for longitudinal, complex,
interdisciplinary research activities. The results of such efforts may provide
new insights about how to foster more effective organizations. Significant
effort will be made to ensure that underrepresented populations are invited to
participate in the workshop. Students will be involved in the workshop, thereby
exposing them to cutting-edge research ideas and providing the opportunity to
meet leaders in the field of organization science.

Technical Description The community of Science of Organizations has a strong
history of welcoming a broad array of disciplinary perspectives researching
organizations of all sizes and scopes, including business, sociology,
information/information technology, engineering/operations research,
communication, economics, political science, public administration, industrial
labor relations, and psychology. The purpose of the proposed workshop is to
assemble scholars from these various disciplines to (1) discuss the future of
research in science of organizations, (2) identify strategies for encouraging,
and rewarding, interdisciplinary and international collaborative research
initiatives in the science of organizations community, and (3) brainstorm how to
promote the results of research conducted in science of organizations. The one-
and-half day workshop will be held on October 1 and 2, 2015 at Purdue University
in West Lafayette, IN. Three half-day sessions will each focus on one of the
three elements of the workshop purpose. The invited participants will bring a
variety of perspectives about the research process including previously funded
principal investigators for the Science of Organizations (SoO) program at NSF,
journal editors, thought leaders, and active researchers. The complement of
participants will engage in rich dialogs about the aforementioned issues that
may be instrumental in prioritizing research activities in this field and
highlight opportunities for the research community.