* 1540459
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Regulation of Immune Gene Expression and Disease Susceptibility
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Nelson Ting, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 08/31/2018
* USD 28,980.00

Gastrointestinal parasites represent one of the major drivers of global disease
burden, particularly neglected tropical diseases, with nearly 800 million
infected worldwide. In the U.S., for example, parasitic infections are known to
disproportionately affect impoverished and under-represented minority
populations, and preliminary estimates suggest potentially hundreds of thousands
of individuals are infected, making it one of the top health disparities in the
U.S. The investigators will conduct basic research on how genetic variation
confers gastrointestinal parasite infection resistance or susceptibility in a
primate species. The results of this study will provide a more complete
understanding of the biological mechanisms that underlie disease susceptibility,
which is fundamental to the development of more effective prevention and
treatment strategies for infectious diseases. The scientific value of this
project will be further amplified through the creation and implementation of an
educational module in disease genetics developed to engage Oregon middle-school
students traditionally underrepresented in STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
specific goals of this project are to identify regulatory genetic variants in
immune genes that are associated with parasite infection in the red colobus
monkey, and demonstrate that those variants have a causal relationship with
infection intensity through their effects on gene expression. DNA
variant/infection associations will be determined through a combination of DNA
sequencing and classical parasitological approaches. The ability of regulatory
variants to drive differential gene expression will then be tested in-vitro
using bioluminescent reporter assays in multiple cell lines. Predictions based
on cell experiments will then be tested in-vivo using RNA-seq. This study will
advance our understanding of the evolution of immunity to pathogens and provide
a comprehensive, mechanistic, explanation for observed genotype-parasite
infection intensity associations.