* 1540313
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Deciduous Dental Phenotypes and Biodistance Analyses
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2016
* Kathleen Paul, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 08/31/2016
* USD 18,255.00

Teeth are the most durable parts of the human body and provide information on a
number of aspects of an individual's life such as diet, physical health, and
movement across the landscape. Teeth also record information on genetic
relatedness, which makes them useful for research on human population
relationships and forensic identification of missing persons or accident/crime
victims. Importantly, because teeth preserve in the archaeological record, the
same types of information can be reconstructed for people who lived in the past.
This doctoral dissertation research project will explore the genetic
underpinnings of the human deciduous dentition (i.e., "baby teeth" in children
younger than 10 years of age) and develop methods for identifying child
relatives using teeth alone. The project's primary rationale is to explore the
dynamics of human social groups in the past. However, the results may also
improve forensic efforts to identify missing children, refine data collection
standards for forensic evidence, and provide information on dental inheritance
relevant to clinical dentistry and orthodontics. The project will also support
student training and development of international
collaborations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project examines the genetic structure
of the deciduous dentition and has three goals: 1) to analyze the developmental
program underlying deciduous dental phenotypes, 2) to evaluate the performance
of deciduous dental phenotypes for accurately reconstructing known genealogical
relationships, and 3) to compare the performance of deciduous versus permanent
dental phenotypes for reconstructing known genealogical relationships. Data on
tooth size and morphology will be collected from deciduous and permanent tooth
crowns on dental casts representing individuals of known pedigree. Biological
distances generated from deciduous dental data will be compared to known genetic
distances between individuals to determine how deciduous traits can be used to
accurately reconstruct genealogies. These biological distances will also be
compared to those generated from permanent dental phenotypes as well as
"environmental distances" generated from health history data to examine
potential developmental and environmental factors that affect crown morphology.