* 1540648
* EAGER:  Langmuir Turbulence Measurements at 35-40m Depth off Cape Hatteras in Fall 2015
* GEO,OCE
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2018
* Dana Savidge, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 04/30/2018
* USD 200,001.00

Langmuir circulation is a well-known response of the upper ocean to wind and
wave forcing and is often visible as a series of windrows where foam and other
floating material is aggregated by converging surface flow. The main sense of
circulation is on a vertical plain perpendicular to these rows, where the water
circulates down under the rows, out to either side at some depth and back up
again. Wind forcing tends to grow, merge and deepen the Langmuir Cells, while
density stratification or the presence of denser layers below tends to limit
their downward extent. Under the right conditions, supercells are observed going
the full depth of the water column. These cells are very efficient at mixing the
water vertically and lifting sediments and other material from the bottom into
the water column. This project will deploy an acoustic Doppler current meter
(VADCP) specially designed to accurately resolve the vertical motion as an
addition to an existing experiment separately funded by Office of Naval Research
and run by the Naval Research Laboratory (NRL). These detailed Doppler
measurements will be used to study the development and evolution of the Langmuir
Cells at a location significantly deeper than any of the previous measurements
and under a wider range of stratification. The data about Langmuir Cells will
help better interpret the extensive NRL measurements, while those measurements
provide a spatial context for the analysis of the Langmuir dynamics. The most
critical element in the deployment of the VADCP is the precise alignment of the
vertical axis. The deployment will be at 35-40m, which is at the edge of safe
deployment with divers, but other means of deployment will also be developed and
tested, possibly leading to deeper deployments in the
future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NRL experiment is an intensive 30-day campaign
in October 2015 near Cape Hatteras. It includes two aircraft carrying a
multichannel synthetic aperture radar, infrared and visible hyperspectral
imagers, and air-sea fluxes of momentum and heat, directional surface wave
spectra from wave buoys, basic air-sea measurements of temperature, humidity,
and wind using wave gliders and drifting buoys, sub-surface profiles of the
mixed layer from gliders with turbulence microstructure probes, and multi-color
dye releases surveyed by aircraft, and an AUV with optical/microstructure
probes. This project will add a VADCP and taut-line conductivity-temperature
string at 35-40m depth, between 36o and 36.5oN in August through October, to
measure storm events during and after destruction of the strong Mid-Atlantic
Bight summertime pycnocline. Aircraft and mooring/glider spatial coverage will
reveal the range of cell horizontal scales; whether cells are wind-elongate and
wind-aligned as expected, and whether temporal variability in the VADCP records
represents spatial variation in a statistically frozen-field ocean response,
recorded as cells drift by the stationary VADCP. Horizontal spatial structure of
surface fluxes, winds and wave fields will inform how the forcing regimes may
evolve in the cross-shelf direction with increasing wind and wave forcing,
competing with evolving buoyancy fluxes. Glider microstructure measurements can
be used to cross-validate TKE dissipation rates from the gliders with the large
eddy approach from the VADCP, as done previously for freefall probes and VADCP
in tidal flows. VADCP velocity fields will significantly enhance the
interpretation of the NRL group's optical data. Still, the most compelling
motivation is the project's potential to broaden our view of turbulence in the
coastal ocean. There is growing evidence the full depth supercells occur often
over the continental shelf. This deployment will extend existing VADCP
measurements at 15m and 27m depth. If Langmuir supercells can be verified with
direct measurements, their effects will need to be considered over a much wider
range of shelf settings than appreciated before. This will require reassessment
of current understanding and modeling of seawater and sediment fluxes under
wind/wave forcing in the coastal ocean.