* 1540032
* I/UCRC Phase II:  Collaborative Research: Water Equipment and Policy Center
* ENG,EEC
* 08/01/2015,08/31/2022
* Junhong Chen, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Continuing Grant
* Crystal Leach
* 08/31/2022
* USD 728,432.00

This project supports the second Phase (five years) of the Water Equipment and
Policy I/UCRC (WEP) headquartered in Southeastern Wisconsin, which is home to
more than 150 local and international companies serving the water industry. Co-
located at University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee (Lead institution) and Marquette
University, the WEP research center serves as a catalyst for synergizing
regional and global assets to create the next generation of products and
processes to advance the water industry. WEP research focuses on creating new
sensors and devices, novel materials, innovative water treatment systems, and
water policies that will help change the way the world manages its acutely
stressed water resources. The new sensing technologies will address major
drawbacks of the existing water contaminant detection methods to provide early
warning of water contamination and avoid catastrophes. New materials and
processes are proposed for water conveyance systems which could reduce energy
and water loss due to corrosion and leakage from water pipes. Projects focusing
on water treatment systems will lead to new water filtration and reuse
technologies through efficient and low-cost removal of contaminants. The water
policy-related projects will develop policy components to assess risks, promote
benefits, and identify opportunities to advance water technology. The envisioned
projects will benefit potential and current WEP I/UCRC industry companies by
enabling new or additional capabilities for their water equipment to increase
product performance, market share, profits, and job creation. The proposed
program aims to train the current and future workforce at the frontier of water
equipment and policy. The proposed education plan also features proactive
efforts to improve entrepreneurial engineering education; to attract
underrepresented students, including women and minorities, into Science,
Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics fields; to integrate research and
education; and to broadly disseminate water research and educational
findings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Envisioned WEP projects can
potentially lead to game-changing water technologies and policies to safeguard
our water quality with sustainable approaches. WEP PIs will carry out research
to advance water technologies in real-time sensors for detection of water
contaminants, self-cleaning and self-healing materials that can reduce energy
consumption and water leakage in water equipment and distribution systems,
innovative water treatment systems that can address emerging contaminants while
reducing energy and cost, and water policy that can inform policy makers. A
portfolio of real-time sensing technologies has been proposed which includes
optical fiber technology, single live cell technology, electrochemical
technology, acoustic wave technology, and field-effect transistor technology.
Novel surface microstructures and high-performance superhydrophobic concrete and
coatings are proposed to minimize maintenance cost and pumping energy for water
components. Self-healing and wear-resistant coatings are proposed to reduce
water leakage. Novel photocatalytic nanomaterials are proposed for water
treatment. Several technologies are proposed to address emerging contaminants
such as pathogens and micropollutants and an advanced, rapid wet-weather
treatment process is proposed to safely treat stormwater. A localized model will
be developed to predict nutrient transport in Lake Michigan and inform decision
making to minimize algal blooms, beach closures, and clogging of water intakes.
Research also will be carried out to identify and analyze policy obstacles and
opportunities to develop, commercialize, and expand emerging water technologies
and intensive urban aquaculture projects.