* 1540703
* The Randolph-Macon College Noyce Teacher/Scholar Program - A Program Designed to Recruit, Train, and Support Well-Qualified Chemistry, Biology, and Physics Teachers
* EHR,DUE
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2021
* Traci Stevens, Randolph-Macon College
* Standard Grant
* Sandra Richardson
* 09/30/2021
* USD 1,199,276.00

In 2010, the President's Council of Advisors on Science and Technology called
for the education of at least 100,000 new STEM middle and high school teachers
with majors in STEM fields and strong content-specific pedagogical preparation.
This project is responsive to that call, and will support the education of 16
teachers with majors in the disciplines of biology, chemistry, or physics, and
education minors. Randolph Macon College will leverage an existing successful
teacher-preparation program in which all of the pre-service teachers passed
their STEM-related PRAXIS II examination and achieved employment. The Noyce
program will attract students to careers in STEM education through targeted
recruitment, with special emphasis placed upon recruiting underrepresented
students. The local area encompasses multiple high-needs school districts,
including the city of Richmond, Caroline County, and Petersburg, VA; these
districts struggle to find qualified, certified STEM
instructors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Noyce scholars will gain experience
working with youth from high-need school districts through field placements in
local school districts, participation in a summer program designed to bring STEM
education to students with high need, and seminar programs intended to give
participants strategies to overcome challenges of working in a high-need school
district. Program participants will receive dedicated induction support during
their first years as STEM educators teaching in high-needs school districts;
this support will include site visits, a stipend to fund classroom technology,
monetary support for professional development, funds to travel back to the
College to participate in a mentoring program for Noyce students still in
residence, and the establishment of a social media group for Noyce participants
to share their experiences and advice. The program will add to the broader base
of knowledge on recruiting, training, and providing induction support to STEM
educators by exploring the following topics: the effectiveness of targeted
recruitment of STEM students, the effectiveness of financial incentive in
attracting students to a Noyce program, how consistent field work effects
teaching effectiveness, and the effect of endeavoring to create cohesive group
dynamics on retention of Noyce Scholars. The project personnel will disseminate
results of the Noyce program at various discipline-specific venues, allowing
other institutions to adopt and adapt successful program strategies. The Noyce
scholars will disseminate the results of their original scientific and
educational research in the form of poster and oral presentations at
professional conferences in the students' areas of discipline.