* 1540619
* SL-CN: Development of Neural Body Maps
* SBE,SMA
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2019
* Andrew Meltzoff, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Soo-Siang Lim
* 08/31/2019
* USD 749,000.00

A great deal of research with adults has documented the presence of body maps in
the human brain. These neural maps have an organized spatial layout. Neighboring
parts of the body are connected in an orderly fashion to areas of the brain that
process touch and movement. Body maps are important for many aspect of everyday
life including the sense of one's own body and controlling our movements. Body
maps also likely play an important role in learning from others, through
allowing us to register similarities between ourselves and other people. Despite
the importance of body maps, very little is currently understood about how they
develop in the early months and years of life. The research supported by this
award would provide significant new information on the development of body maps
and their relation to early learning. The award supports a collaborative, cross-
disciplinary network of investigators who will combine expertise in
developmental psychology and infant learning, brain science, cognitive science,
computer modelling, and robotics. The proposed network will also support the
development and training of junior investigators through specific activities
designed to expose them to the benefits of an interdisciplinary approach.

Advances in methods for safely measuring the brain activity of human infants are
allowing new questions to be asked concerning the role of body maps in early
learning. The proposed research involves using magnetoencephalography (MEG) to
non-invasively measure responses of the infant brain to tactile stimulation of
different parts of the body (e.g., hands vs. feet), and to relate these
responses to aspects of infant learning. Another set of studies involving
electroencephalography (EEG) will examine how body maps facilitate early
imitation and learning from others. Insights from these studies will inform (and
be informed by) a further strain of research using computer modelling that takes
bodily factors into account in designing robotic systems that can learn from
people. The research questions will also provide insight into the control of
brain-computer interfaces that can assist disabled individuals in learning to
control artificial limbs and other external devices.