* 1540440
* Institutional Transformation: Institutional Re-engineering Ethical Discourse in STEM (iREDS)
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2019
* Kevin Esterling, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 09/30/2019
* USD 399,984.00

This award will fund a new campus initiative for the cultivation of ethical
climates and practices in STEM research, using a novel online communications
platform combined with a project-based training designed to be compatible with
that platform. UC Riverside will deploy and evaluate this campus-wide
interdisciplinary project, Institutional Re-engineering Ethical Discourse in
STEM (iREDS), by examining the effects of two randomized interventions,
separately and combined, and in comparison with a fourth control group receiving
the standard ethics training that currently exists on campus.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project represents a paradigm shift from changing
individuals' behavior through instruction, to cultivating a campus culture
intended to emerge from intensive digital interaction amplified by ethics
training introduced during laboratory projects. Broader Impacts of the
deployment and evaluation of the interaction of two novel interventions include
a model transferable to other institutions, a test bed at an Hispanic Serving
Institute (HSI) in the midst of rapid research and student population growth
(25% of incoming domestic PhD graduate students are underrepresented
minorities), and the potential offer guidance to federal agencies regarding
future Responsible Conduct of Research (RCR) policy.