* 1540585
* A Theoretical and Numerical Study of 2D and 3D Flow over Dynamically Tall Mountain Ranges
* GEO,AGS
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2019
* Laurence Armi, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Continuing Grant
* Jielun Sun
* 09/30/2019
* USD 559,082.00

This research will use a combination of theory and numerical simulation to study
the role of stratified air flow over simulated, dynamically varying mountain
range heights to determine when the flow must be characterized by fully
3-dimensional flow and when a 2-dimensional framework will suffice to model this
flow. The broader impact of this research will serve the Mountain Meteorology
community in the areas of aviation and fire safety, as well as micrometeorology
of small scale flows.

The proposed research seeks to use a Computational Fluid Dynamics (CFD) approach
to simulate 3-dimensional flow over dynamically tall mountain ranges. Numerical
results will be analyzed to determine when and why these flows split. The
proposal includes a refinement of earlier theories on these flow splits and
potentially the development of a new theoretical basis; particularly for the
along-ridge flow variability. Recent theoretical analyses have shown the
quantitative connection between blocked flow upstream and asymmetric,
supercritical, downslope flow in the lee. Simulations that resolve viscous
boundary layers, flow separation and non-hydrostatic shear instabilities suggest
these flows separate from the ridge and form an internal hydraulic pump
downstream of the separation point. This study will investigate this separation
point as a function of dimensionless mountain height and certain thermal
characteristics such as the cold pool in the valley between mountain ranges.