* 1540608
* Collaborative Research: GP-IMPACT: The Green Tech High School Academy: A Model Program of Combined Geoscience Field Learning, Classroom Instruction and Career Preparation
* GEO,RISE
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2019
* Katherine Ellins, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 08/31/2019
* USD 238,262.00

The transition between high school and undergraduate institutions is a
particularly important critical juncture for students considering whether to
pursue degrees and careers in the science, technology, engineering, and math
(STEM) disciplines. Due to state and local policies that govern high school
science curriculum and graduation requirements, most high school students are
not exposed formally to the geosciences prior to making choices about future
careers in STEM. As a result, many of the students who do ultimately choose the
geosciences have found this field through happenstance, making the geosciences a
"discovery major" in college. With the anticipated need of ~135,000
geoscientists in the next several years, due to retirements and higher-than-
average job growth rates, as well as the critical role that geoscientists play
in the employment sectors related to energy production, natural hazards
mitigation, and the infrastructure construction, more intentional approaches to
recruiting students into the geosciences are needed. In addition, greater
engagement of traditionally underrepresented minorities in STEM is needed to
build diversity in the geosciences workforce, which is currently very limited.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The University of Texas at Austin is testing the
underlying theory of change for the IUSE: GEOPATHS program that "using novel
ways of engaging a larger population of students and exposing them to authentic,
career relevant geoscience experiences that augment the formal curriculum will
increase their desire to earn degrees and pursue careers in the field." To test
this theory, the project is investigating whether a collaboratively developed
and implemented geoscience-focused program of career exploration, student
mentoring, 6-8 days of field excursions, and evidence-based geoscience-infused
classroom instruction will impact a students' sense of belonging in geoscience
and help them transition into undergraduate geoscience programs. The summer
mentored field program is offered through the award-winning GeoFORCE program;
the classroom instruction activities are using tested pedagogical approaches and
content developed with prior NSF support for the Diversity and Innovation for
Geosciences in Texas (DIG Texas) and EarthLabs projects. It is expected that a
sense of belonging will consequently lead to an increased desire to earn
geoscience degrees and pursue geoscience careers. This three year project is
establishing a robust collaboration between geoscience educators and researchers
in the Jackson School of Geosciences at UT Austin and Michigan State University,
educators and administrators at Akins High School in the Austin Independent
School District in Texas, and geoscientists at DrillingInfo, an oil and gas
firm. Activities are underway to (1) provide Akins administrators and science
teachers with educational resources and professional development, allowing them
to teach about geoscience, environmental systems, energy, and natural resources
in the school's Green Tech Academy; and (2) conduct educational research to
investigate the role that classroom and field experiences play in developing
students' sense of belonging in geoscience, with anticipated simultaneous
effects on (a) geoscience knowledge, (b) attitudes towards geoscience, and (c)
engagement in geoscience and geoscience career activities in high school. By
focusing on Akins High School, which has large a large minority (84 percent
Hispanic and African American) student population, the project has the potential
to achieve greater diversity in the geosciences through education, exemplary
teacher preparation, and career exploration.