* 1540011
* I/UCRC Phase II:  Collaborative Research: Center for Pharmaceutical Development (CPD)
* ENG,EEC
* 10/01/2015,12/31/2019
* Eric Munson, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 12/31/2019
* USD 235,000.00

Despite significant advances in the pharmaceutical industry over the last 50 to
100 years, there are still many problems with the drug supply, including drug
shortages, drug manufacturing failures, drug recalls due to manufacturing
issues, and problems with formulating and manufacturing new drugs that don?t
dissolve or aren?t stable over time. The Center for Pharmaceutical Development
focuses on increasing the safety and lowering the cost of drugs through research
into the formulation and manufacturing of both innovator and generic drugs. The
research interests of the center are threefold. First, the center is developing
new biological catalysts that are used to synthesize drugs in a way that is more
efficient and safer for the environment. Second, the center is improving
analysis methods for determining what happens to the drug during the
manufacturing process, and how that might lead to product failure. Finally, the
center is focused on large-molecule drugs such as proteins and antibodies, which
are emerging as potent new therapies. The societal benefit of this research
would ultimately be cheaper and safer drugs for the
patient.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite huge progress in pharma over the last 50
to 100 years, there are still a lot of unmet needs which cause shortened
lifespans and unnecessary suffering by patients. However, the development of
novel drugs takes a lot of time (commonly more than 10 years) and money
(commonly more than $1-2 billion). After discovery, the late-stage development
begins, with clinical trials, manufacturing studies, especially process
development and scale-up, and also with the development of the active ingredient
into a drug product, such as a tablet, or an injectable. Development into a drug
product requires solutions for formulation and drug delivery. The Center for
Pharmaceutical Development (CPD) covers late-stage development in the
development of new drugs; CPD focuses on manufacturing, formulation, and
analytical tools. In the upcoming phase II (2015-2020), the CPD will operate at
three sites: Georgia Tech (GT)/Emory in Atlanta, GA, the University of Kentucky
(UK), in Lexington, KY, and now also at the University of Delaware in Newark,
DE. Georgia Tech/Emory will focus on highly selective and environmentally benign
biological catalysts and integration of reaction and separation (with Delaware);
the University of Kentucky site will contribute with their unique strength in
analyzing and stabilizing solid pharmaceuticals, both small molecules and
therapeutic proteins (?biologics?) (with Delaware); and the University of
Delaware will add strength in the separation and purification of therapeutic
proteins (?biologics?) and in formulation, i.e. in keeping such biologic stable.
The challenges above draw in a significant number of women and underrepresented
minority students. Of the graduate students supported wholly or in part by the
CPD, more than half (53%) were women and 18% were underrepresented minorities.