* 1540919
* SL-CN: Science of Nature-based Learning Collaborative Research Network
* SBE,SMA
* 09/15/2015,09/30/2021
* Judy Braus, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Soo-Siang Lim
* 09/30/2021
* USD 746,327.00

This Science of Learning Collaborative Research Network project is a partnership
among the University of Minnesota, the Children and Nature Network, the North
American Association of Environmental Education and the University of Illinois
Urbana-Champaign. The network is composed of researchers from across the
country, as well as practitioner leaders in the non-profit, professional
society, public education and museum sectors, who have an interest in
accelerating the pace of research to understand if, and how, nature exposure
influences children's learning, cognitive development and academic performance.
The network serves three functions 1) to develop a long-term interdisciplinary
research agenda about nature and learning, 2) to conduct exploratory research to
understand possible mechanisms explaining how time spent in nature influences
children's classroom learning and behavior, and 3) to synthesize and disseminate
existing knowledge about nature and learning as well as the network's research
findings. Enhancing our understanding of the mechanisms of the nature-learning
connection, and particularly the questions of what works, for whom, how, and
under what circumstances, will inform the practice of educators, educational
administrators, policy makers, planners and designers, among others. Our best
chances of enhancing our understanding of this complex phenomenon is to
accelerate research progress on the science of nature-based learning. The
Science of Nature-based Learning Collaborative Research Network aims to provide
the structure and resources to permit such
acceleration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is increasing evidence that time spent
in nature produces a host of developmental benefits, including enhanced learning
and academic achievement. What are the mechanisms that underlie the relationship
between nature and learning? This is the focal scientific question grounding the
funded network and exploratory research. This Science of Learning Collaborative
Research Network project is a partnership among the University of Minnesota, the
Children and Nature Network, the North American Association of Environmental
Education and the University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign. The network is
composed of researchers from across the country, as well as practitioner leaders
in the non-profit, professional society, public education and museum sectors,
who have an interest in accelerating the pace of research to understand if, and
how, nature exposure influences children's learning, cognitive development and
academic performance. The network serves three functions 1) to develop a long-
term interdisciplinary agenda appropriate for sustained collaborative research,
2) to conduct collaborative, exploratory research to ground future rigorous
studies of the impact of nature on learning and of the explanatory mechanisms of
this effect, particularly for disadvantaged students, and 3) to synthesize and
disseminate existing knowledge about nature and learning as well as the
network's research findings. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The exploratory research
study embedded in within this project is intended to begin to elucidate the
mechanisms that explain why nature exposure enhances learning. In addition,
building on others' preliminary findings of differential impact of nature on
learning based on economic disadvantage, this study examines socioeconomic
status as an independent variable and attempts to elucidate possible
explanations for this effect. Three mechanisms - stress dysregulation, attention
fatigue, and behavioral disruption - are hypothesized as mediators of the
relationship between nature exposure and learning. In each case, there is a
rationale for why economically disadvantaged students might experience the
mediating effect to a greater degree than more advantaged students.