* 1540704
* Robert Noyce Teacher Academy at the College of Staten Island
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2021
* Jane Coffee, CUNY College of Staten Island
* Standard Grant
* Susan Carson
* 09/30/2021
* USD 799,630.00

There is an established need for well-qualified teachers in high-need school
districts, which are often located in urban communities. New York City, in
particular, has a need for teachers of science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics (STEM) who are competent with a diverse and international student
population. With funding from the National Science Foundation's Robert Noyce
Teacher Scholarship program, and in partnership with New York City District 31,
as well as seven high schools and two middle schools in that district, the
Robert Noyce Teacher Academy at the College of Staten Island (CSI) of City
University of New York (CUNY) will recruit undergraduate STEM majors and prepare
them to become secondary STEM teachers. The project will support an average of 8
Scholars per year, for a total of 24 new teachers. Each Scholar will receive 2
years of support. Most CSI students are first-generation college students and
their families have high expectations. An honors program devoted to preparing
high quality teachers of mathematics and science can play an important role in
changing the perception of the value and prestige of teaching. Each semester
these undergraduate STEM majors will spend 50 hours in a different high-need
host school and will assume increasing teaching responsibilities from tutoring
individual students, to tutoring groups, to presenting a "do now", to teaching a
lesson. Through advisement, they will satisfy the requirements for New York
State initial teaching certification. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to the
host school experience, CSI Noyce Scholars will engage in a cohort structure;
learning community environment; mentoring by STEM discipline faculty, education
faculty, and collaborating teachers; and international professional development
opportunities. A longitudinal research study will address questions such as: (1)
What is the effect of specific features of the Noyce program? (2) What topics or
issues should be added to the Noyce Scholar's college experience to increase
preparedness for teaching in a high-needs school? (3) How do changes in
assessment and curriculum in the New York City Department of Education impact
the CSI teacher education program and the preparation of Noyce Scholars? and (4)
What are specific examples of discrepancies between CSI teaching preparation and
school practices specifically in District 31? To address these questions, the
project team will gather data from Noyce Scholars and collaborating teachers
through surveys, portfolios, and the CSI institutional research office.