* 1540479
* SEP Collaborative:  Pathways to Scalable, Efficient and Sustainable Soil Borehole Thermal Energy Storage Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2015,08/31/2017
* John McCartney, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 08/31/2017
* USD 581,003.00

The NSF Sustainable Energy pathways (SEP) Program, under the umbrella of the NSF
Science, Engineering and Education for Sustainability (SEES) initiative, will
support the research program of Prof. John McCartney and co-workers at the
University of Colorado at Boulder, and Prof. Ning Lu and co-workers at the
Colorado School of Mines. The goal of this project is to understand the
fundamental multi-physics processes, engineering challenges, environmental
impacts, and implementation strategies for soil borehole thermal energy storage
(SBTES) of heat collected from solar-thermal panels. The thermo-hydraulic
properties of unsaturated soils and associated coupled heat, water, and vapor
flow processes will be engineered to form a heat pipe, enhancing heat transfer.
This is a departure from conventional borehole or aquifer thermal energy storage
systems, which rely on conduction or water extraction/injection to transfer heat
into or from the subsurface. The objective of this research is to seek the
optimum scalable efficiency of energy injection into SBTES systems and
subsequent extraction for direct use in building heating or electricity
generation. To reach this objective, specific tasks include: (1) constructing a
field-scale test facility to evaluate the efficiency of heat injection and
withdrawal for different borehole configurations, (2) evaluating coupled water,
vapor and heat flow processes and potential environmental impacts within
densely-instrumented soil tanks, (3) characterizing the nonlinear transport
properties of unsaturated soils from the different tests, (4) validation and
establishment of a scalable numerical model to examine the long-term operation,
efficiency, and environmental impact of SBTES systems, and (5) exploration of
engineering approaches to enhance the heat exchange efficiency.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A parallel effort will be to assess implementation
strategies for residential-, community-, and industrial-scale subsurface energy
storage through evaluation of policies and user experience from exploratory
SBTES sites. These sites have established high efficiencies of energy recovery,
but usage trends, barriers to implementation, or socio-economic issues related
to different policy strategies have not been fully analyzed. Preliminary
estimates indicate that SBTES systems have low capital cost compared to other
energy storage solutions, permitting rapid cost recovery through energy savings.
Low environmental impact is expected because SBTES are closed-loop systems and
because groundwater flow will not significantly affect thermal migration in the
vadose zone. This project will contribute to generation of a workforce with a
broad set of skills that can be applied to emerging renewable energy
technologies, including hydrology, civil engineering, thermodynamics,
environmental impact analyses, and energy policy. The researchers will build
upon their track records of recruiting and retaining students from diverse
backgrounds, will incorporate student exchange and active participation in tasks
at both universities, and will define tracks established courses for effective
training. Communities which have successfully implemented SBTES systems will be
used as case histories, forming the basis of short courses which will be given
by the investigators to communities and policy makers to ensure wider spread
implementation of this technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SBTES systems are
expected to play an important role in reducing the amount of electricity or
natural gas required to heat residential and commercial buildings by integrating
renewable heat sources with a sustainable thermal energy storage solution. By
considering the improvements in heat transfer investigated in this research, the
efficiency of energy recovery can be improved to provide scalable, sustainable
direct use heating for communities. In addition, in some cases extracted heat
may also be converted into electricity using thermal-electricity technologies
(binary cycle power plants), reducing greenhouse gas emissions. SBTES systems
could provide a key element in balancing the cost and efficiency of renewable
energy technologies such as solar-thermal panels, influencing the fate of these
technologies. Although these energy sources are renewable, energy is often
generated at times when it is not necessary or in locations far from where it is
needed. SBTES systems can be implemented in nearly any location in the US to
provide a sustainable storage solution. The potential for SBTES systems to be
scaled to different applications provides an important strategy for overcoming
socio-economic concerns with the up-front costs of these systems.