* 1540645
* GP: IMPACT: Science, Technology, Engineering and Math Student Experiences Aboard Ships (STEMSEAS)
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Jonathan Lewis, Indiana University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 08/31/2018
* USD 218,427.00

The science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) workforce is crucial
to the U.S. health and economy, yet retention rates in STEM fields are poor, and
the Geoscience community in particular is faced with a looming workforce
shortage. Moreover, the Geoscience community continues to lack the diversity of
the population at large. The STEM Student Experiences Aboard Ships (STEMSEAS)
project is a 1-year proof-of-concept initiative aimed at addressing three
priorities: (1) increasing the number and diversity of students pursuing degrees
and careers in geosciences; (2) preparing students for all possible career
trajectories in the geosciences; and, (3) contributing to the evidence base for
effective student engagement, learning and retention in STEM.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The STEMSEAS project is achieving these goals by taking
advantage of unused berthing capacity available through the federally funded
research vessel network, the University National Oceanographic Laboratory System
(UNOLS), as ships transit between U.S. ports in preparation for their next
scientific expedition. These short (~5-7 days) transits offer a mobile classroom
setting where undergraduate non-STEM, undecided-STEM, and geoscience majors can
be exposed to geoscience professional practice and career exploration. By
partnering with UNOLS and campus "champions" at universities, including
minority-serving institutions (MSIs) and historically black colleges and
universities (HBCUs), the project is sending diverse cohorts of students to sea
with a small team of geoscience faculty and mentors. Three cohorts (~10
undergraduate students each) are being recruited for this pilot study to
document both the logistical feasibility and potential impact of the STEMSEAS
model. While at sea, the students engage in a variety of hands-on activities
that incorporate geoscience content, lab exercises, data collection/analysis,
career exploration, and discussion/reflection. Upon completion of the transits,
each participant is required to complete a post-transit project, which they
present back at their home institution, write a short article about their
experiences, and participate in post-transit teleconferences with other cohort
members. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Application materials and evaluation surveys are
providing data to assess the impact of the STEMSEAS project on student knowledge
of and attitudes toward the geosciences and geoscience careers. The STEMSEAS
project is designed to add to the evidence base regarding what kinds of
experiences and interventions help to increase retention and persistence in
geoscience-related majors, and what strategies are most effective at increasing
the number and diversity of students entering the geoscience workforce pipeline.
By creating innovative learning experiences on board charismatic research
vessels, STEMSEAS is gathering data on the effectiveness of novel approaches for
engaging students who may never have considered the geosciences as a field of
study or career, students who are interested in the geosciences but are unsure
of what direction to go, and STEM-interested students who may not have
considered the specifics of the geosciences. Through these immersive
experiences, STEMSEAS is exploring the effectiveness of short-term but intense
learning activities.