* 1540701
* Workshop: Finding Pathways from NSF-Funded Basic Research to DOE-Funded Applied Research on Additive Manufacturing; Oak Ridge, Tennessee; June 3, 2015
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Steven Schmid, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 05/31/2016
* USD 36,291.00

This project supports a workshop to bring together Additive Manufacturing
researchers funded by the National Science Foundation and the Department of
Energy, and to identify synergisms between programs. The National Science
Foundation typically funds basic research that has a long-term significance.
Additive manufacturing describes a collection of manufacturing processes that
manufacture parts layer-by-layer, controlled by a computer, and without the use
of expensive tools or dies. The industry currently has sales in excess of $4
billion, and is expected to grow to nearly $11 billion by 2021, but additive
manufacturing is expected to fundamentally change the nature of advanced
manufacturing in the 21st Century. The main objectives of the workshop are to:
(1) examine and review the state-of-the-art in additive manufacturing equipment,
materials, and process technologies; (2) identify pathways for basic research to
transition to applied research and associated funding mechanisms; and (3)
formulate recommendations for the next steps to advance additive manufacturing
technologies. The workshop will be held at the Oak Ridge National Laboratories
facility in Oak Ridge, Tennessee. This workshop will promote continued research
developments in additive manufacturing. Recognizing research funded by the
National Science Foundation is properly characterized as basic research, and
Department of Energy-funded programs generally focus on more applied research,
there is significant synergy and limited overlap. As basic research is
conducted, the focus naturally progresses to applied research as is funded at
the Department of Energy. Both communities of researchers depend on each other
in order to have impact. One main focus of this workshop is to identify pathways
and funding opportunities to have technologies developed by basic researchers
(with National Science Foundation funding) be identified, funded and continued
by the Department of Energy. Such transfer of projects is hindered by a lack of
coordination and exposure of the agencies and their funded researchers. This
workshop will provide a forum to promote such technology development pathways.