* 1540662
* Pathway to Science Phase II
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2023
* Justin Sanders, University of South Alabama
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Ellis
* 08/31/2023
* USD 956,120.00

Currently the lack of certified science teachers is a major cause of poor
achievement and low expectations for high-risk pupils. This problem is greatly
intensified in both rural and urban areas because schools in these locales
typically have: overpopulated science classrooms and inadequate science teacher
staffing; teachers who teach outside of their field of certification; and/or
long-term substitute teachers who do not have a science, mathematics, or
engineering background. With funding from the National Science Foundation's
Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship program, the Pathway to Science (PTS) Phase 2
project, is recruiting undergraduate majors in science disciplines and recent
graduates and preparing them to become middle grades and high school science
teachers. The project is funding 12 scholarships over four years. In this
project, the Colleges of Education, Arts &amp; Sciences, and Engineering at the
University of South Alabama are collaborating with Mobile County Public Schools.
PTS Phase 2 will enable recent STEM bachelor degree graduates to complete
secondary science certification through an intensive, four-semester program that
culminates with an earned master's degree and will directly address the need to
increase the number of science teachers in Mobile County. A distinguishing
feature of the project is the pre-residency experiences provided to help
individuals with strong science backgrounds gauge their interest in a career in
teaching before they commit time to completing the education
coursework.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A research study will investigate the
longitudinal impact of the program, by addressing questions such as, (1) With
regard to preparedness, what are the effects of increased field experiences on
the self-efficacy of graduating Noyce PTS scholars? (2) With regard to retention
of Noyce graduates in the teaching profession, what are the effects of a
Professional Learning Community (PLC)? (3) What are the effects of a PLC on
Noyce graduates and current PTS scholars? (4) What effect does a mentoring
program have on the retention of current and graduated scholars? (5) How does
engaging in professional development (PD) both as a student and as a teacher
through the Noyce PTS program effect teacher self-efficacy? (6) What impact do
Noyce graduates have on the departments of the schools in which they work in
terms of teacher leadership and student advocacy? The results of the
longitudinal study on the effectiveness of former PTS graduates on student
achievement, along with qualitative data describing their experiences, will
assist in better preparation of science teachers to meet student needs.