* 1540398
* Standard: The Social Responsibilities of Scientists and Engineers: Developing a Global Survey
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2015,12/31/2016
* Jessica Wyndham, American Association for the Advancement of Science
* Standard Grant
* Wenda K. Bauchspies
* 12/31/2016
* USD 84,699.00

During the past four decades, a considerable amount of professional and public
attention and resources have been dedicated to examining the scope, content and
boundaries of researchers? professional responsibilities. In the U.S.,
legislation has been enacted, state and federal regulations have been
implemented, research institutions have established policies on the conduct of
research, and professional societies have adopted codes of ethics/conduct on
what constitutes good and ethical research practices. Moreover, ?research on
research integrity,? has grown significantly during this same time frame, with
funding available through public and private sources worldwide. As a result,
there is a vast amount of data collected on the conduct of research. If one
reviews that scholarship and data, it is possible to gain insight into how
researchers and others view the research enterprise, how the organization and
support of research contributes to or detracts from a culture of responsibility,
the factors that influence research behavior, and much more. The overwhelming
evidence is that when it comes to scientists? and engineers? professional
responsibilities, there has been no shortage of attention and activity, and this
has built a substantial knowledge base about the factors affecting a culture of
responsibility related to research practices. The same cannot be said, however,
with regard to the social responsibilities of scientists and engineers. There is
no consensus inside or outside the scientific community on the nature of such
responsibilities - what they are, how they can be operationalized, to whom they
are owed, and in what circumstances. Yet, calls for scientists and engineers to
accept and fulfill such responsibility are widespread, both from within and
outside science and engineering. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will result
in the design, pre-test and subsequent fielding of a rigorous and robust
international survey that will be the most globally comprehensive effort to date
to generate data that will advance knowledge and understanding in the fields of
science policy, science and technology studies, and the history and philosophy
of science and technology. The data generated by the survey and its analysis are
expected to make the following contributions: 1) influence ongoing national and
international conversations about the roles and responsibilities of scientists
and engineers in society; 2) help clarify public expectations about science and
engineering and inform the evaluation of options for exercising oversight of
science and innovation; 3) enhance discussions among scientists and engineers
about the normative forces that underlie their social responsibilities; 4)
provide a major data point for considering specific recommendations on the
nature and scope of those responsibilities (leading, perhaps, to their
codification in codes of ethics/conduct and other relevant statements of
principle and/or practice); 5) point to ways that consideration of social
responsibilities might be integrated into the education and training of
scientists and engineers.