* 1540118
* CAREER: Megawatt Electric Vehicle Superfast Charging Stations with Enhanced Grid Support Functionality as Energy Hubs
* ENG,ECCS
* 01/01/2015,06/30/2019
* Shuo Wang, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Anil Pahwa
* 06/30/2019
* USD 249,794.00

Research Objectives and Approaches The objective of this research is to
investigate major technological challenges and develop novel technological
solutions for next generation, superfast, energy efficient, and economic
electric vehicle charging stations with high performance power grid support
capabilities.

The approach is integrating and advancing novel power electronics, power system
and control technologies to develop high power, low energy loss and high
reliability power architectures and energy conversion units. The electric
vehicle charging station will work as an energy hub where renewable energy
sources, grid energy storage, electric vehicles and power grid exchange energies
to simultaneously achieve superfast charging and grid supports.

Intellectual Merit The proposed research activity develops critical technologies
for power architectures, control and high efficiency medium-frequency
transformer design for superfast electric vehicle charging and grid supports in
the applications of electrification of transportations and renewable energy. The
successful development of the proposed technologies will significantly improve
energy conversion efficiency for electric vehicle charging and grid supports,
increase system's reliability, and improve the electrical performance of
charging and grid support infrastructures.

Broader Impacts The proposed research reduces the energy cost and the
infrastructure expense of electric grids, reduces greenhouse gas emission
effects and facilitates the use of electric vehicles in our society. It aligns
with the national strategies of the electrification of transportation and green
energy. The research is integrated with education plans designed for
underrepresented minority students, female students, high school students,
university students and high school teachers from the university, local high
schools and local communities.