* 1540826
* Sustaining and Evaluating STEM Teacher Quality and Retention at Cal Teach Berkeley
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* George Johnson, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Sandra Richardson
* 08/31/2020
* USD 799,916.00

Through funding from the Robert Noyce Scholarship Program, this Track 1 Phase 2
project will address the established and growing national need to increase the
quality, quantity, and diversity of the K-12 teaching workforce in science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM). The University of California-
Berkeley (UC Berkeley) program will: (1) build on its current and expanding Cal
Teach program which supports undergraduate students as they pursue their STEM
disciplinary degrees along with credentials in teaching mathematics and science,
particularly in urban schools; (2) leverage a new collaboration with the
University of California-Merced (UC Merced) to offer education courses and
activities for STEM undergraduates at both campuses and a secondary teaching
credential in mathematics or science at UC Berkeley; and (3) enhance the overall
efforts and activities through strong extant partnerships with local school
districts (Berkeley, Oakland Unified, and Merced City) and with local research
and outreach institutions (e.g., Lawrence Hall of Science and the Chabot Space
and Science Center). The project will support a total of more than one-hundred
(100) students by providing (a) internships to twelve (12) lower division
undergraduate students per year to engage these students in research,
professional development, and interactions with outreach partners, and (b)
scholarships to nine (9) upper division students per year who are participants
in the Cal Teach program. These scholarship awards will be highly visible within
the STEM disciplines at UC Berkeley and UC Merced, and will be identified as
awards which reflect student accomplishment and success.

This Noyce Phase 2 project will be an integrated program, with early and
frequent field placements, allowing aspiring teachers to develop both deep
subject matter understanding and exemplary pedagogical skills as they engage in
both theory and practice. To accomplish this, the project will engage faculty
from the STEM content areas as well as from the Graduate School of Education at
UC Berkeley through an interdisciplinary approach to teacher preparation that
has been shown to be critical in the context of training mathematics and science
teachers for urban schools. In the process of project implementation, the
project team will investigate the following questions: (i) What are the key
activities which generate successful recruiting and retention of STEM major
candidates with diverse backgrounds--including gender, race, ethnicity, and
socioeconomic status--compared to entering teacher candidates for the state and
national teacher workforce? (ii) How do teacher candidates, their university
supervisors, and, once they begin a teaching position, their administrators,
perceive the quality of their preparation for a teaching career in urban
schools? What gaps and other issues need to be addressed in their preparation?
(iii) What is the nature of classroom practices for these teachers? What is the
impact on their K-12 students' learning? and (iv) What is the long term
retention rate of these teachers? To what extent do these teachers assume a
leadership role in their schools/districts? Research related to the key factors
behind answers to above questions will lead to a national model for success in
STEM teaching in urban settings that will also stimulate broadening
participation in STEM and promoting social justice through mathematics and
science teaching and learning.