* 1540396
* CCE STEM: Ethical Inclusion of People with Disabilities through Undergraduate Computing Education
* SBE,SES
* 12/01/2015,08/31/2021
* Kristen Shinohara, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Wenda K. Bauchspies
* 08/31/2021
* USD 449,987.00

It is estimated by the World Health Organization that 15% of the world's
population has some form of disability; a number that is rising due to
population growth and improvements in medical care leading to longer lifespans.
While computing devices and the Internet have become essential for full
participation in society, many of these technologies are not accessible for
those who experience disability. Equal access to technology has been discussed
as an issue in computing ethics, and many computing professionals report an
ethical motivation for their decision to consider accessibility in their work.
However, equal access is not typically addressed in ethics curricula for
computing students. To address this gap, the PI and her team will provide
evidence-based information as to the efficacy of various educational
interventions for training future computing professionals about inclusive
technology development. They also will provide the resources necessary to
replicate these interventions at other universities. Students trained in the
ethics of inclusive design will be motivated to meet global needs for inclusive
technology. Such design has the potential to level the playing field for those
who through age, accident, or medical circumstances experience disability. The
materials to be made available through this project (including a video showcase
of student projects, accessibility project ideas, and lecture slides) will
provide faculty with the means to incorporate accessibility information into
their computing curriculum. To ensure that these materials meet instructional
needs, faculty at other universities will be surveyed to evaluate these
resources. This work will be published in NSF-related ethics archive locations
and on the team's website. Students with disabilities will be involved in the
project as research assistants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While prior educators have
implemented specific interventions to train computing degree students about
accessibility, there is a need for a systematic comparison of alternative
interventions for accessibility education. The PI and her team will investigate
the efficacy of multiple interventions for accessibility education on a scale
and with a level of experimental rigor not previously attempted. While
accessibility and inclusion are key for professionals, these concepts have thus
far had limited coverage in ethics curricula in computing degree programs. In
another innovative aspect, this work will examine the extent to which
participation of people with disabilities contributes to the educational
interventions. The three investigators have each been involved in accessibility
research and education throughout their careers. This research will build on
that experience in developing educational interventions (e.g., lectures on
accessibility, assignments having hands-on experience with accessibility
technology, team projects on a topic related to accessibility or inclusion,
involvement by users with a disability as either an end-user, or as a project
team member). Interventions will be implemented within undergraduate programs as
part of required courses on human-computer interaction. The team will contrast
views about the need for inclusive design between students in these programs
with, as a control, students in other computing undergraduate programs at the
same institution who are not exposed to the interventions. Students' ethical
perceptions of their role in promoting accessibility will be measured in their
final year of study. Measurements will include standardized questionnaires of
attitudes toward people with disabilities, scenario-based evaluation of
accessibility considerations in design, and qualitative analysis of written
student work.