* 1540360
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Nutrient Drivers and Movement Ecology of Great Ape Foraging Behavior
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2017
* Cheryl Knott, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 07/31/2017
* USD 25,094.00

The primary goal of this project is to understand the nutritional drivers of
Bornean orangutan foraging behavior. The project will be the first to test the
assumption that orangutans maximize calories as part of their foraging strategy
and will examine the nutrient priorities and balancing of orangutans to
determine if protein is held at a constant level. Orangutan foraging may be a
good model for the evolution of human dietary adaptations, because orangutans
are large-bodied apes foraging in unpredictable habitats outside of the African
rainforest, similar to early human ancestors. Understanding orangutan nutrient
needs is also critical to the conservation of this endangered species. This
project will be one of the first describing the importance of non-fruit
orangutan foods, which are critical to conservation efforts. The research and
findings are being shared with the Indonesian Parks Department to develop
conservation strategies. Additionally, the project also will support
international research collaborations and capacity building, and training of US
students.

This research will be conducted in Gunung Palung National Park, West Kalimantan,
Indonesia, a field site that is unique in offering a mosaic of habitat types in
which 2,500 wild orangutans range. Non-invasive full-day focal animal follows
will yield a complete characterization of orangutan diet, with samples of every
consumed food collected and analyzed for nutrient content. Using new statistical
analysis techniques it is possible to test linear (optimal foraging,
maximization or minimization theories) and geometric (nutrient balancing
theories) models of orangutan foraging, and to determine if these strategies can
co-exist. Improvements in GIS technologies, and the introduction of the Movement
Ecology paradigm will allow an assessment of the goals of orangutan foraging and
whether orangutans utilize landmark based navigation and certain movement
patterns seen in humans.