* 1540593
* Nanoscale Science and Engineering for Agriculture &amp; Food Systems: Advancing Food Security, Nutrition &amp; Health,Agricultural Productivity &amp; Environmental Sustainability;
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Norman Scott, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* William Cooper
* 05/31/2016
* USD 38,400.00

1540593&lt;br/&gt;Scott&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nanotechnology has become a
significant focus for federal investment in research and development. Given that
discoveries in nanotechnology are leading to significant advances in
agricultural sciences, engineering and food sciences, the initiation of a Gordon
Research Conference is very timely and, in fact, has been accepted for the a
Gordon Research Conference in this area on June 7-12, 2015 at Bentley
University. Such advances have the potential to revolutionize our agricultural
and food systems in many ways. Recognizing that research and development in this
area is only about ten years young, it is an exceedingly opportune time to bring
together scientists and engineers, both senior and junior, postdocs and graduate
students from academia, and scientists and engineers from business, government
and NGOs to discuss advances and future directions and
needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The focus of this workshop is: 1)To bring together
experts in the field to discuss cutting edge research and for
scientists/engineers to meet to discuss advances and future directions and needs
in the field of nanotechnology for food and agriculture; 2)To identify cutting-
edge, unpublished research in the field of nanotechnology likely to advance
agriculture and food systems; 3)To identify the greatest opportunities for
funding in this area; and 4)To identify emerging opportunities in the area of
nanotechnology that will have the greatest impact in addressing global
challenges of food security, environmental sustainability, food safety and
agricultural productivity. The co-chairs of this GRC envision that the
convergence between nanotechnology, biotechnology and information science
applied to plant science, animal science, crop and food science/technology will
lead to revolutionary advances in the next 5-15 years including: re-engineering
of crops, animals and microbes at the genetic and cellular level, nano-
biosensors for identification of pathogens, toxins and bacteria in foods;
identification systems for tracking animal and plant materials from origination
to consumption; development of nanotechnology based foods with lower calories
and with less fat, salt and sugar while retaining flavor and texture; integrated
systems for sensing, monitoring and active response intervention for plant and
animal production; smart field systems to detect, locate, report and direct
application of water; precision and controlled release of fertilizers and
pesticides; development of plants that exhibit drought resistance and tolerance
to salt and excess moisture; and nanoscale films for food packaging and contact
materials that extend shelf life, retain quality and reduce cooling
requirements.