* 1540418
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Evolutionary and developmental influences on skeletal maturation and internal structure
* SBE,BCS
* 10/15/2015,09/30/2017
* Philip Reno, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 09/30/2017
* USD 30,140.00

The shape of the skeleton for a given species reflects both developmental
genetic processes dictated by genes and environmental influences resulting from
life history. In studies of primates and humans, understanding the relative
contributions of these processes can help in making inferences about behavior
and relatedness among both living and extinct species. For example, in humans,
the enlarged calcaneus, or heel bone, with its expanded trabecular (spongy) bone
volume is a well-known adaptation associated with walking upright. In contrast,
the dramatic reduction of the pisiform bone in the in human wrist compared to
other primates is not well appreciated. The fact that these are the only bones
of the wrist and ankle to form growth plates suggests that they are under
similar developmental control despite their different functional demands in
humans. As such these bones form an ideal model to determine differential
effects of genetic patterning and life history on skeletal shape. Increased
knowledge of how differences in skeletal growth affect bone shape may also
improve our understanding of the etiology of skeletal disease. This work will be
used to train a female graduate student and several undergraduates, and will
also be the basis of several K-12 student and educator outreach programs
throughout central Pennsylvania.

Functional morphological studies of the calcaneus, and specifically its
trabecular bone structure, are abundant given its critical role in the unique
forms of locomotion observed in hominoids, but little is known about how
development influences trabecular structure. This study will investigate how
trabecular structure changes when growth is altered by mutations in
developmental genes. A comparative study of pisiform and calcaneus ossification
across anthropoid primates and a mouse outgroup will be used to assess degree of
developmental integration between the fore and hind limbs. Developmental effects
of growth plate structure on trabecular bone will be studied using CT scans of
calcanei from mice with normal growth plates and Hox11 loss-of-function mice
with known growth plate abnormalities.