* 1540107
* I-Corps: Remote Therapeutic Patient Engagement and Communication System
* TIP,TI
* 04/15/2015,09/30/2016
* Maria Muzik, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 09/30/2016
* USD 50,000.00

More than 40 million Americans suffer from anxiety. This creates a major social
and economic burden upon individuals, their families and employers. One proven
treatment for anxiety recovery is cognitive-behavioral psychotherapy. Treatment
involves in-clinic psycho-education and out-of-clinic homework for the patient
to complete at home or in their daily lives. While cognitive behavior therapies
have been proven to help anxiety disorders, positive outcomes depend on patient
engagement with their homework for a prolonged period of time. Unfortunately,
the paper- or workbook-based homework often has the following problems: (1)
clients try to hide their homework from family and friends who care; (2) they
often intentionally or unintentionally forget to do homework; (3) while the
clinicians expect the client to do homework off-session, the client hopes to do
it as much in-session as possible for the reasons mentioned above. Thus, the
clinician can be frustrated when the client fails to do homework as expected,
and clients can be frustrated when they don?t see the promised improvement. This
project seeks to quantify the potential commercial market for a mobile health
platform designed to support clinicians providing cognitive behavioral therapy
and their patients.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed technology will engage
patients with digital cognitive behavior change exercises through a secure HIPAA
compliant platform. In addition, other functions related to therapy, such as
recording in-the-moment anxious episodes, will be done through an easy and
intuitive mechanism using our technology rather than recording on sheets of
paper or recollecting from memory later on. Clinicians will also have secure
access to review patient's progress as well as to set-up engagement reminders.
The proposed innovation provides a secure and engaging environment for clients
that supplement their treatment with the clinician. In addition to typical
clinicians and patients, this team will explore the potentials for organizations
such as universities to sponsor their at-risk students and employees to use our
system as a mobile health tool for promoting wellbeing.