* 1540208
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Paleodemographic Analysis of Urbanization, Famine and Mortality
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2015,11/30/2016
* Sharon DeWitte, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 11/30/2016
* USD 19,404.00

Rapid increases in population density resulting from urban expansion facilitate
the transmission of infectious diseases, unsanitary living conditions, and
precarious food supplies. The potential negative effects of urbanism in living
populations are of considerable interest to public health experts, particularly
the ways in which urban factors play a role in the development and severity of
disease. Research on urbanization in the past provides temporal depth to our
understanding of the consequences of urbanism. This project will examine
patterns of health and diet in medieval London (c. 1120-1539) to investigate the
relationship between pathology and nutrition in the context of urbanization.
Paleodemographic and biochemical analyses of skeletal samples from medieval
England will be used to investigate urbanization and famine, combining
approaches in a unique way that will advance research in biological
anthropology. The project will be generally informative about environmental
pressures that affect human health and adaptability to changing environments.
Broader impacts include training of a female graduate student, public science
outreach efforts, and development of international
collaborations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This 12-month dissertation project
integrates paleodemographic (hazard analysis) and biochemical (stable isotope
analysis) approaches to examine the health and diet of inhabitants in medieval
London and to investigate the interaction of pathology and nutrition on
mortality during urbanization and incidences of famine. Skeletal data from the
urban St. Mary Spital cemetery and rural Barton-upon-Humber cemetery will be
analyzed to determine how morbidity and mortality patterns in medieval London
changed over time as a result of increased urbanization; evaluate how temporal
changes in morbidity and mortality of medieval London compare to a
contemporaneous rural population; investigate the relationship between diet and
health during the transition to a more urban environment by integrating
paleodemographic approaches with stable isotope analysis; and examine how
potential biochemical markers of famine are manifested in medieval London using
stable isotope analysis, including an innovative incremental dentine analysis
method.