* 1540513
* Ultrashort Single Photon Generation via Conditional Excitation of an Atomic Barium Ensemble
* MPS,PHY
* 01/01/2015,08/31/2016
* Virginia Lorenz, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Cronin
* 08/31/2016
* USD 92,457.00

This project explores the use of an atomic barium ensemble as a scalable source
of pure ultrashort single photons and the creation, preservation and detection
of various types of entanglement between distant photons, atomic ensembles and
combinations of both. By applying an off-resonant ultrashort laser pulse to warm
atomic barium vapor, we generate a collective excitation in the atomic ensemble,
called a spin wave, together with a quantum of electromagnetic excitation, i.e.
a photon. The detection of the photon signals a successful event and the
presence of the spin wave in the matter. This long-lived collective excitation
can be converted into an ultrashort single photon in a pure wave-packet at a
later desired time by applying another ultrashort pulse. By combining numerous
atomic ensembles, we are able to create multiple pure ultrashort and identical
photons synchronously, an essential requirement for high bit-rate quantum
computation and communication applications. The broad bandwidth of the involved
fields permits us to study the spectral properties of nonclassical correlations
between the created photon and the atomic excitation, adding to our
understanding and ability to control the properties of light-matter interaction
at the quantum level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work of this project provides and
demonstrates a method to generate photons suitable for high-speed quantum
communication and computation operations, such as entanglement swapping and Bell
state measurements. These applications are essential components of protocols
such as quantum teleportation, quantum cryptography and Bell inequality
detection. Through this project graduate and undergraduate students are trained
in experimental and theoretical ultrafast quantum optics and atomic physics. The
project serves as the basis for an undergraduate tutorial at the University of
Delaware to motivate and improve student understanding of quantum mechanics.