* 1540018
* I/UCRC Phase I:  Collaborative Research: I/UCRC Center for Atomically Thin Multifunctional Coatings (ATOMIC)
* ENG,EEC
* 07/15/2015,09/30/2022
* Joshua Robinson, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Crystal Leach
* 09/30/2022
* USD 1,184,358.00

Coatings are often characterized/classified by their application or
functionality, and the economic impact of coating technologies is staggering and
estimated to be in the trillions. Therefore, even incremental improvements in
coating properties have an impact, and revolutionary improvements in the
coatings could lead to quantum leaps in the technologies that rely on these
coatings. In this context, atomically thin layers, commonly known as ?two
dimensional materials?, exhibiting highly tunable properties, can be engineered
to solve fundamental scientific and technological challenges in the coating
arena. This Industry/University Cooperative Research Center (I/UCRC) is devoted
to the design and development of advanced coatings based on two-dimensional (2D)
and layered materials (Center for Atomically Thin Multifunctional Coatings
-ATOMIC). Key to the center is a diverse set of industrial partners (glass,
polymer, coating manufacturers, electronics and automobile companies,
equipment/tools manufacturers, national labs, and small businesses). ATOMIC is a
unique synergistic effort that exploits the unprecedented properties of 2D
nanomaterials and establishes the foundations to revolutionize multifunctional
coatings. The center activities are student-centric, focused on carrying out
transformational and applied research, developing intellectual property,
providing student mentorship, internships, and undertaking technology
transfer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ATOMIC synergistically integrates world-leading
faculty, researchers, students and staff from The Pennsylvania State University
and Rice University with industry and national laboratories. ATOMIC advances
coating science and technology in key strategic areas including: corrosion,
oxidation and abrasion resistance, friction and wear, energy storage/harvesting,
large-scale synthesis and deposition of multifunctional coatings, and others.
The ATOMIC goals are: 1) Demonstrate the importance of fundamental and pre-
competitive research for economic growth; 2) Establish an innovative scientific
and technological platform to develop novel coatings based on 2D systems; 2)
Develop fundamental process/property relationships in 2D materials driven by
industry needs; 3) Standardizing measurement, characterization, and modeling
techniques for benchmarking coating performances; 4) Build and maintain strong
relationships with industry to advance ATOMIC research and to facilitate
knowledge transfer to ATOMIC members; 5) Educate undergraduate and graduate
students, and postdoctoral scholars, who will become effective members of the
research community in this interdisciplinary area, and 6) Broaden participation
in STEM through a strong outreach program aimed at all levels of education,
ethnicities and minorities.