* 1540041
* Planning Grant: I/UCRC for Joining Center for Configuration Analytics and Automation
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2016
* Indrakshi Ray, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Dmitri Perkins
* 08/31/2016
* USD 14,500.00

This award will help explore the feasibility of a new site addition to the
Center for Configuration Analytics and Automation led by the University of North
Carolina at Charlotte (UNCC). The award would look at adding Colorado State
University to George Mason University (GMU) as a site of the center. The
proposed site plans to complement the existing activities by bringing expertise
in the areas of networking, software assurance, data streams, privacy and
applied cryptography. The UNC/GMU CCAA focuses on cyber-security risks and
defense management capabilities in enterprise IT systems, cloud/SDN data
centers, and cyber physical systems. The planned CSU site complements the
strengths of the existing center by focusing more on these issues in the context
of infrastructure security and resilience, data privacy and human factors.

If successful, students and faculty will be working on industrial relevant
applied research problems that could generate US Jobs in this unique area, and
help with the industrial job placement of students working on Center projects.
The emerging generation of IT systems are more complex, more integrated with
others, more mobile, and more connected through the Internet that introduce
complex sources of misconfigurations, exposure, and newer vulnerabilities.
Unavoidable and/or intentional human interactions with these systems introduce
an additional layer of vulnerability and source of misconfiguration. The
proposed center will bring in projects that are driven by the needs of the
industry and aim to solve real-world problems.