* 1540888
* SL-CN: Project LENS: Leveraging Expertise in Neurotechnologies to Study Individual Differences in Multimedia Learning
* SBE,SMA
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2021
* Matthew Schneps, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Soo-Siang Lim
* 08/31/2021
* USD 817,500.00

The use of multimedia in STEM education is undergoing a remarkable growth. Such
growth has been so rapid that it has far outstripped the abilities of research
to keep pace with its application. Project LENS is designed to establish a
Science of Learning Collaborative Network (SL-CN) consisting of the Educational
Neuroscience Laboratory and Center for the Study of Emotion and Attention at the
University of Florida, the Laboratory for Visual Learning at the University of
Massachusetts Boston, and the Educational Neuropsychology Laboratory at
Washington State University. The network brings together scholars from the
following disciplines: STEM Education, Cognitive and Developmental Psychology,
Neuroscience, Educational Technology, Computer Science, and Educational
Measurement. Experts from the Project LENS network will employ novel methods and
neuroimaging technologies to investigate multimedia learning in order to address
the gap in knowledge developing in this field. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The purpose
of this collaborative network is to capitalize on the strengths of each node
leveraging expertise in cognitive neurotechnologies (Electroencephalography,
functional Near Infrared Spectroscopy, and eye tracking) to enable a rigorous
interdisciplinary research ecosystem. Project LENS will advance fundamental
research about learning through integrative neurocognitive conceptual and
empirical approaches. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This interdisciplinary team will
advance the science of learning in several ways, including: 1) While most
existing multimedia learning research focuses on cognitive load and learning
without much consideration of individual learner characteristics, these
investigators propose a paradigm shift to put the diversity of learners and
their individual differences in the center of multimedia learning research; 2)
While the few existing studies that use the individual differences paradigm
focus primarily on the role of working memory capacity, this project takes a
broader approach and study individual differences at a more precise level,
exploring the role of such attentional and cognitive variables as visual
attention span, inhibitory control etc. 3) The integrative and interdisciplinary
research approaches used in this project will reduce educational researchers?
reliance on self-reports in the study of attention, cognition and learning and
promote the use of relevant cognitive neuroscience frameworks and tools to
improve the science of learning; and 4) the accumulated data on individual
differences will lay important groundwork for the construction of comprehensive
computational models that can be used to personalize and adapt multimedia
learning. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to advancing the understanding of
designing multimedia learning, the network's webinars, guest presentations, and
composite mentorship of graduate students will enhance learning, teaching, and
student advisement within and across our network nodes. The project will broaden
participation of underrepresented groups by focusing on the diverse community
college student population with a wide range of demographic, attentional, and
cognitive differences, and by recruiting research assistants from groups that
are currently underrepresented in STEM. The purpose of Project LENS is to
enhance infrastructure for research and education, which would be accomplished
by establishing collaborations and partnerships in the science of learning.
Project LENS addresses at least three national initiatives: a) the BRAIN
initiative (2014), b) American Graduation Initiative (2015), and c) US House
Resolution on Dyslexia (#456, 113th Congress).