* 1540403
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Grouping dynamics of lowland woolly monkeys
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2015,02/28/2017
* Kelsey Ellis, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 02/28/2017
* USD 14,114.00

Multilevel societies are some of the most complex social systems found in nature
and have been identified in a wide array of taxa including elephants, cetaceans,
birds, some species of non-human primates from Africa and Asia, and humans.
However, little attention has been paid to possible examples of multilevel
societies among New World primates. To resolve this gap and to provide
additional insights into the causes and consequences of multilevel societies,
the proposed research will focus on within- and between-group association
patterns of woolly monkeys at the Tiputini Biodiversity Station (TBS) in
Amazonian Ecuador. At TBS, woolly monkey groups may fission into small
coordinated subgroups that persist for hours or even days, but similar to other
multilevel societies, socially-cohesive groups may also coalesce into temporary
supergroups that rest, travel, and forage together for several hours. Both of
these patterns of behavior are reminiscent of human social systems. The project
will contribute to long-term ecological, behavioral, and genetic datasets on an
Amazonian research site of global biodiversity significance and will support the
professional development of a female graduate student and research
assistants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Utilizing social network analysis, this project
will quantitatively assess whether woolly monkeys form predictable grouping
levels consistent with other multilevel societies. Additionally, behavioral data
will be coupled with molecular genetic methods to investigate how range use,
genetic relatedness, reproductive status, and attraction to others of the same
age and/or sex class influence spatiotemporal associations. The proposed study
represents one of the first investigations of the social dynamics of a New World
primate from an explicitly multilevel perspective and promises to bring new
insights to the understanding of sociality in humans and non-human primates.
Additionally, by correlating genetic relatedness with social network structure,
this project will provide a critical comparative dataset in which to examine the
importance of kinship in maintaining affiliative relationships within and across
social units.