* 1540702
* GP-EXTRA:  Building an affective pathway to the geosciences through experiential learning opportunities for non-geoscience majors
* GEO,RISE
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2021
* John Wagner, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 07/31/2021
* USD 599,139.00

A strong workforce in the geosciences is needed today more than ever if America
is to overcome resource security challenges for water, food, and energy in the
face of global change and widespread land use transitions. Despite this critical
need, there is a deficit of students opting to pursue geoscience-related career
paths. The overarching goal of this project is to increase the number of
students at Clemson University intending to pursue a geoscience-related career
by providing opportunities for both Geology majors and non-majors to engage in
career-relevant geoscience research. The approach that is being taken focuses on
accessing the affective domain of learning as a mechanism to increase student
engagement with the geosciences, via student motivation, emotion, and
connections to Earth. Targeting non-geoscience majors in this project is an
important goal as they represent a large population of students that are often
exposed to the geosciences through service (e.g., general education) courses,
but rarely have an opportunity to participate in field or research activities,
both of which are well known to be important doorways to careers in geoscience.
This project enables thousands of students to be exposed to geoscience research
and STEM communication, thereby making a significant impact on the development
of the geoscience workforce in South Carolina. A new Industrial Affiliates
program further engages students with existing geoscience professionals to
promote student selection of careers in geoscience-related areas.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses the deficit in the geoscience
workforce by creating a three tier extracurricular approach to gradually
transform non-majors into geoscientists by leveraging the existing undergraduate
research component of Clemson's Geology Bachelor's (BS) degree. The first tier
of engages non-major students enrolled in geoscience service courses in
extracurricular inquiry-based thinking that draws on the research activities of
Clemson's undergraduate geoscience majors. Building on this effort, students
recruited to the second tier of engagement take part in non-major oriented
project-based learning activities that utilize a "citizen science" approach to
data collection, geoscience problem solving with GIS, or geoscience
communication and outreach. Students transitioned into the third tier of the
program take part in formal undergraduate geoscience research projects.
Investing in Clemson's current research program not only strengthens research
experiences for current Geology majors, but also provides more diverse, engaging
and interesting projects to attract non-majors. For example, the project enables
cutting-edge science questions to be addressed in areas ranging across the
fields of climate change, water sustainability, geomechanics, and geochemistry.
The newly-developed Industrial Affiliates program further strengthens the
outcomes of both this project and the undergraduate BS degree program through:
professional lectures, co-mentoring of student projects and internships, and
evaluation of student preparation for careers in the geosciences. Building on
the existing BS degree program also allows the project to leverage Clemson's
geoscience majors as ambassadors to non-majors and geoscience professionals,
thereby strengthening the overall geoscience community in South Carolina. The
activities in this project build on best-practices developed in the geoscience
education literature and contribute to this body of research by studying how the
affective domain of learning contributes to student motivation in pursuing a
career in the geosciences.