* 1540016
* Planning Grant: I/UCRC for Center for Dynamic Data Analytics Site at the University of Virginia
* CSE,ITR
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2016
* Abhi Shelat, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Thyagarajan Nandagopal
* 08/31/2016
* USD 14,740.00

The University of Virginia (UVA) is planning to join the Center for Dynamic Data
Analytics, an existing multi-university Industry/University Cooperative Research
Center (I/UCRC) which is currently comprised of Rutgers University (lead
institution) and Stony Brook University. This award provides UVA with the
support from the NSF for exploring the feasibility of establishing this new
site. The planning grant will be used to plan a joint industry and university
research agenda, to organize and attend the meetings with potential industry
members and the existing sites, and to host a planning meeting that will be the
center point of the effort to articulate the vision for the site to potential
members. The principal industry domains for UVA/CDDA research are: (1) Finance
and banking, including financial markets and electronic trading, systemic risk,
and data analytics for regulators; (2) Internet analytics, including marketing
and the Internet of Things; (3) Advanced manufacturing, including data-driven
approaches to automation, human factors, process improvement, and prognostics;
(4) Cyberphysical systems, including cybersecurity of physical systems and
autonomous systems. Together these domains constitute a portion of the economy
that is both substantial and increasing. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary
mission of the UVA site of CDDA is to perform research on data analytics to
support decision making in industry and government. The focus is on analysis of
data sets distinguished by their velocity, variety, volume, complexity, and
other features commonly associated with Big Data. The UVA site of CDDA will
pursue a research agenda that complements that of the existing sites and
features an integration of control, decision, and systems modeling concepts with
statistical methods, machine learning and pattern recognition. Areas of
concentration include behavioral and preference modeling, state-based models,
reinforcement learning, secure computation and data privacy, and data-driven
approaches to cybersecurity. A principal distinguishing characteristic of the
UVA site research agenda is an emphasis on prescriptive modeling and
understanding the collection and use of data in the context of decision making
in complex systems.