* 1540943
* SL-CN: Group Brain Dynamics in Learning Network
* SBE,SMA
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2021
* Matthew Fitzgerald, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Soo-Siang Lim
* 08/31/2021
* USD 749,922.00

Electrophysiology has long played an important role in our understanding of
brain dynamics in learning, but only at an individual level. With the advent of
low-cost, easy to use electroencephalography (EEG) devices that can measure
brain responses from an entire classroom at a time, it is now possible to study
group brain dynamics during learning in a naturalist classroom setting. This is
opportunity to gather data from thousands of students and schools will provide
insights not available from earlier approaches. There is however, a critical
need to rigorously define how this technology might play a role in improving
learning. To address this need, the present project will form a research network
of experts to develop and test new EEG methods to measure group brain dynamics.
This network includes experts in child development, learning EEG technology,
classroom teaching and outreach. Collaborative research will be conducted in
three geographic areas reflecting diverse populations: San Diego, the San
Francisco Bay Area and the Washington DC Area. The research will focus on
assessing important foundational skills: using EEG to assess the quality of
encoding of speech by the brain, using EEG to assess attention in real-time, and
examining the role of temporal synchronization in promoting attentional
behaviors. In addition to research the project features a strong commitment to
building interdisciplinary connections within science, as well as vigorously
engaging the study communities in the research to foster productive dialog among
educators, students, and other researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;EEG techniques
have made important contributions to understanding dynamic processes in
learning, attention, prospection, memory, and executive function. Newer
measures, such as the complex Auditory Brainstem Response (cABR) reveal how the
brain encodes sound, providing a powerful tool to link brain function to reading
and language impairment. Traditional EEG methods are too cumbersome and
intrusive for large- scale classroom use. Network researchers have developed a
transformative low-cost, dry-electrode, high sampling rate EEG system that is
ergonomic and suitable for children. Their software innovations, which enable
the synchronization of large-group EEG recordings, will support data recording
from twenty+ students simultaneously. These will contribute to at least two
innovations in education-based research: 1) It will be possible for a large
number of traditional, individual EEG tests to be conducted in parallel, vastly
increasing study efficiency, yield and power, and 2) the more revolutionary step
of assessing individual and group brain dynamics in ecological learning
environments to obtain real-time insight into the dynamics of learning, speech
comprehension, and attention. Four experimental goals have been proposed: 1)
Identifying Individual Learning Differences with cABR, 2) Developing measures of
nested hierarchical processing of speech, 3) Developing protocols for individual
and group cognitive state (attention, alertness) assessment, and 4) examining
how brain dynamics at a group level reflect speech comprehension in a classroom
setting. In addition to its scientific goals, the network will foster scientific
dialog by hosting a Workshop on "Brain Dynamics in Learning" to develop a
roadmap for future research in the field.