* 1540669
* Smart and Connected Health (SCH) PI and Aspiring PI Meeting, 2015
* CSE,IIS
* 06/15/2015,05/31/2016
* Thurmon Lockhart, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 05/31/2016
* USD 92,009.00

This proposal supports the NSF Smart and Connected Health (SCH) Principal
Investigators Meeting and Aspiring Investigator Workshop in Arlington, VA in
July 2015. The meeting brings together principal investigators of projects
awarded by the Smart and Connected Health program from 2011 to 2014. The SCH
program was set up in order to bridge gaps in fundamental science and
engineering necessary to transform health and healthcare in accordance with the
with recent PCAST reports (2010), as well as to be focused on prevention and
person-centered care. In particular, the workshop addresses a wider range of
challenges in advancing health with foundational research from the computer
science, engineering and the social, behavioral and economic disciplines. An
objective of the workshop is to provide an opportunity for the principal
investigators to explore research progress in a diverse set of funded projects
and discuss important current issues, as well as future challenges associated
with research in transdisciplinary scientific areas. The discussions will be
supported by projects-related posters and further stimulated by a number of
invited speakers in relevant fields that will explore the scientific frameworks
in moving findings from discovery to dissemination and implementation research.
It is anticipated that the meeting will stimulate discussions, connections, and
collaborations that will facilitate progress in the area of Smart and Connected
Health. Additionally, there is a one-day Aspiring Investigator workshop attached
to the Principal Investigator meeting, that should grow the field by providing
mentorship and support for a new cadre of investigators looking to do work in
the Smart and Connected Health area. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop should
have a significant impact on the participants and the future of the Smart and
Connected Health program (SCH). The focus of the workshop is on shared resources
and assessing health impact in foundational research. The workshop results are
likely to include new research directions that will be publicized to the
research community through publications and a workshop website. The results
dissemination should inform and the developing Smart and Connected Health
research community in their transdisciplinary collaboration, educational
activities, and spur other innovative research directions. The broader impacts
of the workshop are to facilitate progress in the field and stimulate
conversations, connections, and collaborations that will lead toward better
informed and effective smart and connected health research and resulting
technologies for the broadest possible user populations.