* 1540040
* I/UCRC Phase II:  ASU Research Site of the NSF Net-Centric and Cloud Software and Systems I/UCRC
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2022
* Andreas Spanias, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Mohan Kumar
* 12/31/2022
* USD 263,000.00

With this award, the Arizona State University IUCRC site of the Net-centric and
Cloud Software and Systems (NCSS) I/UCRC will transition to a Phase 2 Site. The
NCSS involves University of North Texas (Lead Site), Southern Methodist
University, University of Texas at Dallas, Missouri University of S&amp;T and
Arizona State University. The site has already established the necessary
intellectual base and marketing infrastructure to attract and retain industry
partners for Phase 2, and has an excellent track record of industry membership
and engagement within the NCSS. Networked sensing systems are important in
homeland security, Net Centric defense systems, industry applications, health
monitoring and other areas. The Phase 2 center will enable the creation of new
capabilities in sensor signal processing and will bridge the gap between sensor
development and large scale sensor deployment. The center is uniquely positioned
to promote fundamental research, education, scholarship, and industry activities
in an innovative manner that will continue integrating well in the existing Net-
Centric umbrella. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the NCSS, this Site focuses on
research areas such as digital signal and image processing, sensor networks,
information technologies and algorithm and cloud software development for
wireless communications. Specific areas of planned research advances and
contributions include: a) Advances in radar direction of arrival estimation
using virtual sensor arrays, b) development of networked sensor monitoring
algorithms and cloud software which predict process failures, c) fault detection
in sensors monitoring networked PV arrays, d) networked imaging sensors for
activity detection, and e) net centric approaches with camera arrays for image
understanding.