* 1540931
* Stampede 2: The Next Generation of Petascale Computing for Science and Engineering
* CSE,OAC
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2021
* William Barth, University of Texas at Austin
* Cooperative Agreement
* Robert Chadduck
* 05/31/2021
* USD 30,000,000.00

The Texas Advanced Computing Center (TACC) at the University of Texas at Austin
will acquire and deploy Stampede 2, a new, nearly 20 petaflop High Performance
Computing (HPC) system. This system will be available to and accessed by
thousands of researchers across the country. It will enable new computational
and data-driven scientific and engineering, research and educational discoveries
and advances. As a national resource, Stampede 2 will replace and surpass the
current highly successful Stampede system. The new system will deliver over
twice the overall performance as the current system in many dimensions most
important to scientific computing, including computing capability, storage
capacity, and network bandwidth. TACC and its academic partners will team with
Dell, Inc. and Intel Corp. to procure and provide this system. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;HPC is intrinsic to discovery across the science and engineering
disciplines served by the NSF. This resource allows researchers to explore those
scientific and engineer frontiers that require very large scale computations not
otherwise possible. Over the life of Stampede 2, the system is expected to serve
many thousands of researchers spanning all NSF-supported disciplines, as the
current system has done. In addition to being an immediately productive resource
for a large community of computational engineers and scientists, Stampede 2 will
also continue the community on an evolutionary path to future "many core"
computing technologies. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Stampede 2 will employ upcoming
generations of Intel's Xeon and Xeon Phi processors, as well as the Intel Omni-
Path network fabric. The system will maintain a familiar Linux-based software
environment to insure a smooth migration of the large existing user base to the
new system. The system and its software stack will be designed to support
traditional large scale simulation users, users performing data intensive
computations, as well as emerging classes of new and non-traditional users to
high performance computing. Stampede 2 will support breakthrough discoveries and
advances across a wide range of research topics.