* 1540270
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Effects of anthropogenic habitat fragmentation on primate movement patterns and dispersal
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2017
* Lina Valencia, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 08/31/2017
* USD 8,598.00

Over the past several thousand years, human expansion into tropical forests and
the associated transformation of landscapes into patchworks of forested,
agricultural, and urban habitats has had a negative impact on primate
populations and led to increases in direct conflict between humans and wild,
nonhuman primates. However, despite this long history of contact, the influence
of human (anthropogenic) factors on primate evolutionary trajectories is not
fully understood. This project will examine how anthropogenically-fragmented
landscapes affect gene flow, genetic structure, and functional connectivity
among wild populations of the silvery-brown tamarin, a charismatic and
endangered primate from the Rio Magdalena valley in northern Colombia. The study
will strengthen long-term international collaborations between US and Colombian
researchers and help bolster relationships between researchers, the local
community, and the state environmental corporation, which will further support
the conservation of this endangered primate. It will also provide research,
training, and mentorship opportunities for a female graduate student and
undergraduates, thereby promoting and engaging greater participation of
underrepresented constituencies in STEM
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Tamarins are small-bodied monkeys with
relatively short generation times, and across their geographic range they are
subject to ongoing anthropogenic landscape changes. At the same time, they show
a high degree of mobility and ability to survive in human-modified habitats,
resulting in their sharing space with humans and making tamarins ideal models
for understanding the evolutionary consequences of habitat fragmentation. Using
next-generation genomic techniques, this project will type tens of thousands of
markers from across the nuclear genome for dozens of individual tamarins to
determine how natural and anthropogenic factors together shape patterns of
genetic variation at the landscape level. This will be one of the first genomic
studies of population structure in wild primates and one of the first to
explicitly examine the effects of human-induced habitat change. The genetic data
and results will be disseminated through scientific journals and presentations
and will be given to environmental agencies for future implementation of
conservation actions.