* 1540038
* Planning Grant: I/UCRC for Microbial Forensics
* ENG,EEC
* 09/15/2015,02/28/2017
* Michael Allen, University of North Texas Health Science Center at Fort Worth
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 02/28/2017
* USD 14,490.00

This project will help plan for a potential NSF I/UCRC for Microbial Forensics,
in order to address the gaps necessary for the further development of the field,
including the exploitation of new technological developments, the rigorous
testing and validation of techniques, and the standardization of processes. It
will do this under a unified banner, with input from academia, industry, and
government stakeholders. As a result it will serve as a national platform for
interdisciplinary research and communication, charged with investigating natural
microbial phenomena relevant to law enforcement and national security, with an
eye towards commercialization and economic development for the nation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Though the field of microbial forensics is young, the
potential is exciting: ten times the number of bacteria as human cells in the
body provides dramatically increased opportunities for detection and attribution
of crimes, the tracking of individuals and materials, and even the utilization
of microbes as sentinels or recordings of past events. Fundamental questions in
microbiology remain and are of broad significance to human health, agriculture,
national security, industry, and the environment. Application of these
technologies to the field of forensics, with its unique applications and
requirements, will support and advance all of these endeavors. This proposed
Center's research goals are well aligned with these needs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Center will leverage existing efforts currently
underway at awardee institution for the recruitment and training of
underrepresented minorities and women in the forensic sciences. Specifically,
the PI will recruit underrepresented minorities and women to the Center by
targeting and leveraging existing Bachelors-to-Masters 3+2 agreements between
the Department of Medical and Molecular Genetics and historically black and
minority serving undergraduate institutions. The Center will be able to provide
research opportunities to these students and others in a Professional Master's
Degree Program, the population of which is heavily minority and overwhelmingly
female. Outreach and research opportunities to participants of the awardee
institution's Summer Multicultural Advancement Research Training (SMART) Program
will be provided with a goal to bring undergraduate students to the campus for
10-week research opportunities during the summer. In addition to the research
opportunities, students will also receive invaluable experience in industry
relevant applied research and network opportunities with industry representative
in order to capitalize on these experiences for their eventual employment.