* 1540675
* Collaborative Research:  Partnerships for Geoscience Education: Bridging Shared Waters for Geoscience Studies
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2020
* Melissa Peacock, Northwest Indian College
* Standard Grant
* Jody Chase
* 09/30/2020
* USD 949,000.00

A goal of the Tribal Colleges and Universities Program (TCUP) is to increase the
science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) instructional and
research capacities of specific institutions of higher education that serve the
Nation's indigenous students. Expanding the STEM curricular offerings at these
institutions expands the opportunities of their students to pursue challenging,
rewarding careers in STEM fields, provides for research studies in areas that
may be culturally significant, and encourages a community and generational
appreciation for science and mathematics education. This project aligns directly
with that goal, and moreover will inform the body of knowledge about the
importance and conduct of undergraduate and graduate research experiences in
recruiting and retaining underrepresented individuals into STEM studies, and
preparing the next generation of STEM professionals. The connection of faculty
to research and thereby the students to culturally and geographically relevant
research is an important step in producing retained students who are more likely
to pursue advanced degrees. For those students entering the workforce directly
from a tribal college it is equally important that they have a well-defined
skill set in mathematics, science, and technology for entry into the STEM
workforce. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Northwest Indian College (NWIC) and Western
Washington University (WWU) will collaborate to increase and modify the
geosciences curriculum at the tribal college, establish an educational continuum
that will facilitate the articulation of NWIC graduates into the graduate
geoscience curriculum at WWU, and develop a shared research agenda between the
two institutions that uses the ecosystem of the Bellingham Bay as a theme for
scholarly studies and place-based instruction. Administrative changes at both
institutions will include student mentoring, articulation agreements, co-listing
courses, and cross-cultural faculty development.