* 1540898
* CAREER:Development and Application of Compressive Sensing Based Interior Tomography
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2019
* Hengyong Yu, University of Massachusetts Lowell
* Standard Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 05/31/2019
* USD 203,301.00

ABSTRACT-1149679&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While classic computed tomography (CT)
theory targets exact reconstruction of a whole cross-section or entire volume
from complete projections, biomedical applications often focus on relatively
small internal region-of-interests (ROIs). However, traditional CT theory cannot
exactly reconstruct an internal ROI only from truncated projections associated
with x-rays through the ROI because this interior problem does not have a unique
solution in an unconstrained setting. In 2007, the PI and his collaborators
proved that the interior problem can be exactly and stably solved if a sub-
region is known inside the ROI. Inspired by the compressive sensing (CS) theory,
in 2009 the PI proposed the concept of CS-based interior tomography and proved
that exact interior reconstruction is achievable with an interior scan if the
ROI is piecewise constant, which is subsequently extended to the case of
piecewise polynomial ROI.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this CAREER proposal
is to advance the CS-based interior tomography theory and algorithms, and make a
paradigm shift from traditional global filtered back-projection (FBP) to
contemporary interior reconstruction. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The three objectives
are to 1) perform mathematical analysis on a general scarcity constraint model
to establish uniqueness, exactness and stability, as well as the properties of
the corresponding discrete scheme; 2) develop and optimize novel interior
reconstruction algorithms in a general POCS framework incorporating the split-
Bregman and statistical reconstruction methods; 3) verify the theoretical
findings and validate the proposed algorithms via numerical simulation, and
demonstrate its utility by solving the big patient problem.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will be closely integrated with educational
and outreach activities including creating a Medical Image Reconstruction course
at both graduate and undergraduate levels at the Virginia Tech-Wake Forest
University School of Biomedical Engineering and Sciences (SBES).