* 1540537
* EAGER: Viologen-catalyzed Electrochemical Conversion of Biomass  for Sustainable Energy and Products
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2017
* John Harb, Brigham Young University
* Standard Grant
* Triantafillos Mountziaris
* 08/31/2017
* USD 112,000.00

Harb, 1540537&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Carbohydrates from biomass have the potential
to generate renewable energy for electric automobiles and other power-consuming
needs. Current challenges inhibiting this technology include the low power
output and insufficient catalyst durability of biofuel cells, and low
carbohydrate conversion in non-biological fuel cells. A transformative
breakthrough has come with the discovery of a homogeneous non-biological
viologen catalyst that enables almost complete carbohydrate conversion. The
overall objective of this project is to explore the feasibility of using this
breakthrough to produce sustainable energy through biomass conversion in an
electrochemical reactor. This preliminary feasibility study will identify the
key fundamental processes and constraints that will determine the design and
operation of a reactor system to produce sustainable energy, fuel or biochemical
products.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Four tasks have been defined to accomplish this
objective. Task 1 will determine whether the homogenous and heterogeneous
reaction rates can be effectively balanced to obtain the current density needed
for a sustainable, economically viable process. Experiments under controlled
flow conditions will the influence of pH, reactant concentrations, temperature,
and potential. Task 2 will explore strategies, informed by the conditions
identified in Task 1, for promoting near-complete carbohydrate conversion in a
practical reactor system. Task 3 will assess the feasibility of hydrogen
production as an alternative to electricity production. Viologens with more
negative redox potentials will be evaluated as possible catalysts. Finally, Task
4 will identify and quantify fundamental properties and limitations of the
proposed electricity or hydrogen generating system based on results from the
previous tasks. The possibility of using separate reactors for the homogeneous
and heterogeneous reactions will also be explored as part of this task to
potentially enable greater efficiency and additional, transformative products.
Completion of this preliminary study will 1) determine if the newly discovered
viologen catalyst can be used for carbohydrate conversion at high rates (current
density) in order to justify further consideration of this system as part of a
full proposal, 2) identify a reactor strategy by which it may be possible to
produce electricity from near-complete conversion of a carbohydrate, and 3)
explore the feasibility of using carbohydrates to generate hydrogen.
Fundamentally, this research will examine the interaction of homogeneous biomass
reactions, a heterogeneous electrochemical reaction, and the reaction conditions
in order to achieve potentially conversion of carbohydrates to produce
sustainable energy. Fundamental issues related to carbon removal in the form of
carbonate will also be explored in the context&lt;br/&gt;of potential reactor
strategies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is expected that the results of this study
could have a far-reaching impact on the development of viable and sustainable
biomass conversion strategies, with emphasis on energy and transportation fuels.
Inherent is the potential benefit of multiple platforms (electricity, hydrogen,
and biologically reactive species) utilizing near-complete conversion of
carbohydrates to increase the appeal for development of biomass-based economies.
Increased adoption and sustained use of biomass-based processes from dedicated
energy crops could (i) reduce dependence on other energy resources such as
petroleum, (ii) reduce the impact of fossil fuels on global climate change, and
(iii) reduce the use of food crops currently dedicated for biofuel production.
Both graduate and undergraduate students, including those from underrepresented
groups, will (i) gain experience in the design and implementation process for
use of renewable resources (ii) demonstrate an appreciation for working within
engineering constraints to develop a sustainable process, (iii) demonstrate
effective teamwork and leadership skills as they work together as a team, and
(iv) recognize the extent to which renewable resources can be applied to
multiple process platforms.