* 1540019
* Joint NSF/ERA-CAPS: EVOREPRO - Evolution of Plant Reproductive Processes
* BIO,IOS
* 06/15/2015,05/31/2019
* Mark Johnson, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Clifford Weil
* 05/31/2019
* USD 539,100.00

PI: Mark A. Johnson (Brown University)

ERA-CAPS Collaborators: Jörg Becker (Instituto Gulbenkian de Ciência, Oeiras,
Portugal), Frederic Berger (Gregor Mendel Institute, Vienna, Austria), Thomas
Dresselhaus and Stefanie Sprunck (University of Regensburg, Regensburg,
Germany), David Twell (University of Leicester, Leicester, United Kingdom),
Marek Mutwil (Max Plank Institute of Molecular Plant Physiology, Potsdam,
Germany), and Jose Gutierrez-Marcos (University of Warwick, Warwick, United
Kingdom)

The key agricultural products derived from corn, rice, wheat, and tomato all
require successful reproduction by fertilization. The ability to increase crop
production in the coming years will depend on developing a better understanding
of reproductive mechanisms. The goal of this project is to take what has been
learned about the molecules that mediate fertilization in a model plant species
(Arabidopsis) and extend this knowledge using a comparative genomic approach in
seven plant species including corn, rice, and tomato. The expected findings will
allow for the identification of specific mechanisms that are targeted by
environmental stresses during sexual reproduction in crops and will assist in
the selection of stress-resistant cultivars. The outputs of this project will
provide a deeper understanding of the evolution of sexual reproduction of
economically important plant species. In addition this project will provide
cutting edge training in biological imaging, genetics and genomics in the
context of a critical crop plant (tomato) for a diverse team of researchers that
will include a post-doctoral fellow and an undergraduate researcher.
Importantly, this research team will be benefit from participation in this
large, multidisciplinary and international effort comprising eight laboratories
from five nations.

Research during the past five years has delivered tremendous new insights into
gamete physiology and the mechanisms involved in fertilization in Arabidopsis.
This progress has established the view that gametes are hyper-differentiated
cell types with highly specific transcriptional profiles. Advances in microscopy
based on fluorescent reporters and live cell imaging have also transformed
research capability and provided insights into the mechanisms involved in gamete
delivery, interaction and activation of seed development. Yet, the understanding
of the complexity of double fertilization that characterizes flowering plants is
far from complete and lacks any knowledge about the origin of mechanisms that
predate double fertilization. In this project, emerging models representing key
stages in plant evolution will be used to provide insight into the ancestral
mechanisms of gamete differentiation and fertilization. Gene co-function
networks will be identified from expression atlases for several plant species
that include the liverwort Marchantia, the moss Physcomitrella and the extant
basal flowering plant Amborella. These will be complemented with co-function
networks from Arabidopsis and the economically important crops maize, tomato and
rice and used to study the conservation of gene co-function networks governing
male and female gametogenesis, pollen tube growth and fertilization mechanisms
in flowering plants. Moreover, these investigations will provide novel molecular
markers of fertility in crops. It is expected that this project will result in
identification of fertilization factors that were lost from ancient angiosperms
during the evolution of monocots (grasses) and eudicots and those which have
evolved de novo in the angiosperm lineage. All data produced will be freely and
continuously shared within the consortium. Specifically, RNAseq datasets will be
accessible through a consortium database as well as through publicly available
data repositories.