* 1540282
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement - The Health Implications of Periodic Dietary Restrictions on Animal Products among Orthodox Christians in the United States
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2017
* Hilary Bethancourt, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2017
* USD 30,898.00

Currently there exist conflicting views about the role of modern animal- and
plant-based foods in human health and disease. Anthropological theories suggest
meat and animal fat played critical roles in the evolution of energy-intensive
human traits and that transitions to grain-based agricultural diets were
detrimental to health and longevity. In contrast, perspectives advanced in the
field of nutritional epidemiology suggest that consumption of meat and animal
fat tend to be associated with increased risk of chronic diseases while plant-
based diets appear to be protective. To address this debate, this project will
explore the health effects of dietary restrictions on animal products and assess
whether any shifts in health indicators vary in relation to the amount and
quality of animal-based foods (e.g., processed versus unprocessed meats)
consumed prior to restriction, the types of plant-based foods (e.g., refined
versus whole grains versus vegetables and legumes) consumed as caloric
replacements, and shifts in energy balance. Just as the health effects of
omnivorous diets may depend on the overall caloric intake and nutritional
composition of specific animal- and plant-based products, the health benefits of
plant-based diets may depend on the amount of whole grains, legumes, fruits, and
vegetables consumed in relation to processed grain products and sugars. A
clearer understanding of these interactions is of key interest to public health,
anthropological, nutritional epidemiology, and population health scientists.
Sharing the project results across these fields has the potential to influence
how nutritional guidance is taught in schools and communicated to the public, as
well as more broadly inform global and local efforts to understand and tackle
the growing health and economic burden of nutrition-related chronic diseases in
the U.S. and worldwide.

This project will explore these nuances through the study of a ritualized eight-
week voluntary dietary restriction on animal products practiced by Orthodox
Christians (OCs) in the U.S. during Lent, the period prior to Easter. Because
OCs receive guidance on which animal-based foods to abstain from during Lent but
not on which plant-based foods to consume as caloric replacements, this study
context allows the researchers to explore how natural variations in plant-based
diets within industrialized contexts alter their influence on physiological
health and how this co-varies with the effects of animal product restriction. A
group of U.S.-born OCs will be followed through their Lenten period and a prior
eight-week period of minimal church-guided dietary restrictions. Both
individuals who do and do not follow the OC Lenten dietary traditions will be
recruited for this study. Detailed dietary data, lifestyle information, and
common markers of cardiovascular and metabolic disease risk will be collected to
compare health indicators across the two time-points and relate any changes in
health indicators to the degree of shifts in specific plant- and animal-based
foods. These data will help answer the questions of whether restricting animal
products from the diet necessarily confers a health benefit and to what degree
any measureable health benefits might be contingent upon the amount and types of
foods that comprise the baseline and restricted diets.