* 1540106
* I-Corps: Implantable Brain-Computer Interface with Integrated Optics and Electrodes
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2015,06/30/2016
* Euisik Yoon, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* lydia mcclure
* 06/30/2016
* USD 50,000.00

The lack of a systematic theory of neural activity is complicated by the scale
of the human brain, with an estimated 85 billion neurons, 100 trillion synapses,
and 100 chemical neurotransmitters. Understanding what makes any one neuron fire
or not is a central question in neuroscience and so the ideal sensing tool must
span from the single neuron to its network of connections if we are to
understand how that particular "cell type" assimilates information. Through
recent advance in optogenetics, specific cell types can be activated and/or
silenced by optical control using specific wavelengths to achieve high precision
manipulation of cellular activity. Combined with an electrical recording system,
an optogenetic probe can simultaneously stimulate and record from targeted
neural population with high spatiotemporal resolution. In spite of recent rapid
advances in optogenetics, supporting technologies to reliably deliver light to
and record electrical signals from deep brain structures are not readily
available. Early work involving in vivo optogenetics relied on the manual
assembly of commercially available components such as microwires and optical
fibers, which are not only bulky but can also experience large misalignments due
to human error.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps team has developed the
technical solutions to support optogenetic applications using advanced micro-
fabrication techniques to monolithically integrate optical and electrical
components into a compact MEMS probe. The technology allows for multiple micro-
LEDs or waveguides to be precisely aligned on the same probe shank with the
recording electrodes, obviating the need for hybrid processes to assemble
components onto the probe shank. This, in turn, leads to increased scalability
of the number of light sources per probe shank, minimized shank dimensions, and
provides individual control of light sources for confined emission at cellular
resolution and multiple locations. The probes the team has designed are
practical to fabricate in bulk wafer processes with high yield and require
minimal assembly effort. Excellent performance has been demonstrated in acute
and chronic, behaving animal models through collaborations with several world-
class neuroscience labs. The impact of this technology can be categorized by its
utility in either research or clinical applications: to support optogenetic
research where neuroscientists control cells through light to study brain
functions; to better understand and to treat neurological diseases (Parkinson's,
epilepsy, etc.), and to restore lost body functions (deafness, blindness,
artificial limbs, etc.).