* 1540805
* Urban STEM Teacher Capacity Building
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2015,05/31/2017
* Jeffrey Loats, Metropolitan State University of Denver
* Standard Grant
* Keith Sverdrup
* 05/31/2017
* USD 73,997.00

Urban STEM Teacher Capacity Building at Metropolitan State University of Denver
(MSU Denver) will prepare STEM majors with experiences, skills, and knowledge to
become highly effective inquiry-based teachers committed to working in high-need
urban schools. The capacity building phase will strengthen the foundations of
the university's science and mathematics licensure programs while also ensuring
a possible future Noyce Scholarships &amp; Stipends (S&amp;S) program aligns
with the needs of its K-12 and community partners. Particular emphasis will be
placed on recruiting women and students of color into STEM majors and the
teaching pipeline. MSU Denver currently partners with more than 20 metropolitan
area school districts; the capacity developed under this grant will enhance
these relationships to positively impact schools and districts throughout the
extended Denver metro area. Primary goals for the project include expanding
mutually beneficial partnerships with high-need school districts in the metro
Denver area; ensuring the content and structure of mathematics and science
teacher licensure programs support a future Noyce S&amp;S program; developing an
undergraduate physics teaching licensure program that includes engineering
concepts; and collaborating with local partners to hone recruitment and
retention strategies specific for students underrepresented in STEM fields.
During the capacity building phase, data from diverse stakeholder groups will be
collected and analyzed to improve program design, revise curricula, and enhance
the classroom readiness of science and mathematics teacher candidates for urban
contexts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Metropolitan State University of Denver will
research and develop the infrastructure needed for broad participation in a
Track 1 Scholarships and Stipends Program (S&amp;S) capacity building project
called Urban STEM Teacher Capacity Building (U-STEM). The interdisciplinary
Leadership Team will investigate what diverse U-STEM stakeholders recommend as
key elements of a successful program design specific to MSU Denver's urban
commuter setting and the needs of its first generation and underrepresented
student populations. Focus groups and online surveys will be used with these
stakeholders (e.g. STEM scholars, MSU Denver Physics administrators and faculty,
School of Education administrators and faculty, MSU Denver Student Services
administrators and staff, and partner school and district administrators and
faculty). The Leadership Team will cultivate strong partnerships with local
high-needs school districts; ensure that the content and structures of current
licensure programs will effectively prepare and support S&amp;S recipients
through course programming, clinical field experiences, and integrated STEM
instruction; develop an undergraduate teacher licensure program for physics
majors that incorporates engineering coursework; create a Learning Assistant
Program embedded with cultural responsiveness; and collaborate with community
partners to develop and test effective recruitment and retention strategies that
focus on increasing the percentage of underrepresented students majoring in STEM
fields who successfully enter the K-12 teaching profession. This integration of
research and education will build sustainable capacity for a possible Track 1
Noyce project at MSU Denver.