* 1540610
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Religion and Empire, A Comparative Study of Inka and Spanish Imperialism in the Ayo Valley, Peru AD1000-1800
* SBE,BCS
* 06/15/2015,05/31/2017
* Alexander Menaker, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 05/31/2017
* USD 25,181.00

Alexander Menaker, of the University of Texas-Austin, along with colleagues in
Peru will carry out research examining how religion and ideology promote and
legitimize imperial growth as well as investigating the effects of imperial
expansion and colonial programs on local landscapes and populations. Although
imperial ideologies claim absolute and universal authority, recent scholarship
has emphasized the varied processes and relations through which states and
empires attempt to exert control over people and territories outside of their
geographic boundaries. Attending to the material conditions of life,
archaeological research has illuminated the limits and local manifestations of
states and empires, bringing into question written sources and absolute claims
made by states and empires. Archaeology is poised to reconstruct local
engagements with states and empires over the long-term, tracing the complex
interactions among local and non-local state actors and populations, thus also
challenging reductive binaries, such as, domination/resistance,
European/Indigenous, and prehistoric/historic categorizations. This research
demonstrates how the archaeological record along with multiple lines of evidence
not only yields insight into local realities but also foregrounds productive
approaches for investigating the experiences and conditions of local, often
marginalized and indigenous, populations entangled among broader regional and
global processes. This project promotes collaboration among local community
members along with forming partnerships with Peruvian archaeologists and
academics, with this project contributing to discussions of cultural heritage
and encouraging local community involvement in considering and protecting
materials of significant community importance. The research is of direct
relevance to understanding contemporary issues of state maintenance and
boundaries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this dissertation project, Mr. Menaker and
his research team will conduct an archaeological and historical examination of
Andagua and the Ayo Valley in the Southern Peruvian Andes, investigating the
local cultural history and offering a comparative study of Inka and Spanish
imperial strategies and effects in the region from AD1000-1800. Despite growing
studies of the Inka there remain considerable gaps in research concerning Inka
imperial expansion in the Southern Peruvian Andes, and while historical
archaeology of Spanish colonialism in the Andes is currently a burgeoning field,
few studies offer substantive comparative research of pre-Hispanic and Spanish
imperial effects on a region. Historical accounts describe how the Inkas
intensified local settlements and constructed new sites in the region,
resettling populations to labor in administrative and ceremonial sites dedicated
to sacred volcanoes and mountains. Constructed as a Spanish colonial reducci√≥n,
with the forced resettlement of indigenous people, and surrounded by significant
pre-Hispanic remains, the town of Andagua and the Ayo Valley present important
natural and built features for investigating the extent of imperial statecraft
in the area, yet the region has received no systematic archaeological attention
and little academic research. This research offers a multi-scalar, long-term and
comparative perspective of local occupations and cultural practices in the
region during pre-Inka, Inka and Spanish rule, providing original data and
research through using multiple archaeological field methods including, full
coverage regional pedestrian and site-intensive surveys, systematic shovel test
pits and 2x2m excavation units, and spatial mapping. Historical research will be
conducted to provide insight into long-term regional processes that can be
tested by archaeological evidence.