* 1540984
* EarthCube IA: Collaborative Proposal: Enhancing Paleontological and Neontological Data Discovery API
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Lawrence Gall, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 08/31/2018
* USD 274,244.00

Understanding future environmental change requires researchers to access and
integrate data from the geological and biological sciences, in order to answer
questions about how environmental change will affect life on Earth. In many
cases the data needed to answer these questions already exists but,
unfortunately, technology has not kept pace with research needs. This places
increasing demands on researchers, who have to search for and download data from
multiple separate online databases; compile published information from many
different literature sources; and track down specimens housed in museum and
other collections scattered around the world. The time needed to search and
retrieve this information is enormous and, once found, the data often have to be
standardized before they can be used. This project will tackle this problem by
developing software tools to connect three established, well-supported, and
critically important data sources: the Paleobiology Database (PBDB,
paleontological, literature based), iDigPaleo (paleontological, specimen based)
and iDigBio (neontological, specimen based). This project will allow users of
any one of these databases to access and query the others at the same time,
returning a much richer, combined set of data to the user. Connecting these
resources will open up a whole host of research questions that are currently
difficult to answer, even by multiple researchers working as a team. The
development of this system will allow scientists to ask and answer new research
questions affecting fields as diverse as biogeographic/niche modeling,
systematics, functional morphology, evolutionary biology, ecology, climatology,
conservation biology, oceanography, and petroleum geology. This project will
fundamentally change the nature of the research questions that can be addressed
by the scientific community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The connectivity between
modern and fossil, and specimen and literature-based resources does not
currently exist. The digital infrastructure provided by the composite ePANDDA
application programming interfaces (APIs) will streamline and normalize data
acquisition, including retrieval from disparate data sources, and will
facilitate coordination with future data initiatives. Rather than creating
another portal for the aggregation of data, ePANDDA will unify results that
normally would have required multiple searches on numerous platforms. For the
researcher, this eliminates a significant barrier to data collection and
processing. Researchers will now have the ability to collaborate across
disciplinary boundaries to study earth system processes and the nature of biotic
response to environmental change across both space and time. Linking
publications to specimens will enrich the potential of museum collections and
augment their value for both research and education. The ePANDDA project also
provides an opportunity to build collaborative programs that leverage existing
education and outreach activities in addition to the primary research goals.