* 1540338
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Skull Growth and Biomechanical Constraints on Molar Emergence in Primates
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2016
* Gary Schwartz, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 08/31/2016
* USD 10,100.00

Human life history is unique among living primates. Humans grow slowly and have
long lifespans coupled with short inter-birth intervals, resulting in fast
reproductive rates. Among primates, there is a strong relationship between life
history and the age at which the first permanent molar emerges into the mouth.
Paleoanthropologists use this relationship to probe the antiquity of the unique
human life history profile, but exactly why molar emergence varies and is
closely associated with life history remains unclear. This study will examine
molar emergence as part of a developing, functionally integrated chewing system,
to provide a model for contextualizing variation in the timing of molar
emergence among primates. It will also contribute to understanding the close
association between molar emergence and life history. The project will yield a
rich public database of 3D primate skull growth with relevance to the study of
craniofacial growth and molar impaction, and support public science outreach and
training of graduate and undergraduate students in a STEM field.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Molars function with the jaws and chewing muscles to break
down food. Developmental coordination among these parts of the chewing system is
critical for food ingestion throughout life. In adult primates, the
configuration of the chewing system constrains the position of molars to avoid
damage to the temporomandibular joint during chewing. Using 3D coordinate data
from cross-sectional ontogenetic samples of primate skulls (n = 18 species;
1,182 specimens) this study will determine if the position of molar emergence is
constrained in the same manner, thereby regulating the timing of molar
emergence. This research will examine how ontogenetic changes in the
configuration of the chewing system drive variation in molar emergence schedules
among primates, and may suggest that life history is closely associated with
molar emergence ages through its influence on facial growth rates. It will
further suggest that selection for shorter faces and a prolonged growth schedule
in the lineage leading to humans would have had the concomitant effect of
delaying molar emergence.