* 1540348
* CCE-STEM: Collaborative Research:  Efficacy of Macroethics Education in Engineering
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2015,07/31/2021
* Angela Bielefeldt, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Wenda K. Bauchspies
* 07/31/2021
* USD 349,660.00

Non-Technical: This award by the Cultivating Cultures of Ethical STEM program in
the Directorate for Social, Behavioral &amp; Economic Sciences is managed by the
Biomaterials program in the Division of Materials Research. The goal of this
collaborative project at University of Colorado at Boulder, Tufts University and
Seattle University is to evaluate the various ways in which macroethics is
taught in STEM topics (both in and out of the classroom), and determine the most
effective methods that can then be adopted by others. In order for STEM areas to
reach its full potential to benefit society, students must be prepared to engage
in broad considerations of the ethical issues that face the profession.
Established codes of conduct describe standards for professional behavior, but
these largely relate to individual actions associated with individual projects,
so-called 'micro'-ethical considerations. But engineering and other STEM areas
fall short of its societal duties, if it ignores 'macro'-ethical challenges -
ethical issues that must consider societal implications of technology as well as
the collective responsibility of the STEM profession. Macroethics includes
issues such as sustainability, poverty and underdevelopment, security and peace,
social justice, bioethics, nanoscience, and social responsibility. The extent to
which STEM students graduate with an understanding of macroethical issues is
unclear, and is in need of organization. The research will start with a large
survey of STEM faculty across the U.S., followed by interviews of selected
faculty who are effectively using a diversity of methods to teach a range of
macroethical issues. In addition, a set of case studies that can serve as models
for others will be developed. Best practices that are identified will be
propagated through STEM education via a faculty training workshop and online
resources.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Technical: There is a need for STEM education
to prepare students to address macroethical issues such as social responsibility
and sustainability. The extent to which students graduate with an understanding
of macroethical issues is unclear and in need of organization. The goal of this
research is to evaluate the various ways in which macroethics is taught in STEM
topics, examining variations in pedagogy and content between different STEM
disciplines and institution types. Macroethics educational practices will be
examined through Vanasupa's Four-Domain Development Model, which includes both
cognitive and affective outcomes, as well as the impact of social context. The
methods that are most appealing and successful for educating women and minority
students in STEM will be determined. The research goals will be achieved
through: (1) a national survey and targeted interviews of ethics instructors;
(2) a case study approach to identify effective macroethical instruction
settings based on student surveys and interviews, rubric assessment of student
work, ethnographic observations, and surveys/interviews with alumni regarding
the impacts of ethics education in their practice of STEM topics; and (3)
propagate and scale the best practices of macroethics education using approaches
similar to that of NSF's I-Corps-L model. Instructors at Seattle University and
the University of Colorado will adapt effective methods in their teaching.
Dissemination will include a faculty workshop, project website, and
publications.