* 1540719
* GP-Impact: Improving Geoscience Education Pathways through Engaging Scientific and Career Experiences
* GEO,RISE
* 09/15/2015,05/31/2020
* Karen Kortz, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 05/31/2020
* USD 311,994.00

The Community College of Rhode Island (CCRI) and the University of Rhode Island
(URI) together reach 1500+ students annually through general education and
introductory geoscience courses. These institutions train a subset of those
students as geoscience majors (~70 URI majors presently) for societally
important positions in education, industry, federal agencies, conservation
organizations, and more. The American Geosciences Institute 2014 Workforce
Report predicts a workforce shortage of 135,000 geoscientists by 2022. This
imminent need for well-prepared geoscientists must be answered by the engagement
of academic geoscience departments. The intellectual merit of this project is
multi-layered. A tractable set of changes is being implemented in Rhode Island
public institutions of higher education to yield measurable outcomes, in terms
of increases in the number and diversity of geoscience majors. A variety of
experiences are being integrated into and scaffolded with the undergradute
curriculum that are based on research-identified recommendations and strategies
to reduce barriers for becoming and remaining a geoscience major. The relative
importance of each factor for increasing student involvement and greater
diversity in the geosciences is being evaluated, with specific attention to the
case of 2YC-4YC geoscience transfer students. In this way, future activities (in
Rhode Island and elsewhere) can focus policies and resources on what will make
the largest difference in student decisions to become and remain geoscientists.
Overall, this project seeks to promote science and advance national prosperity
by strengthening the geoscience workforce, both through direct engagement with
students and sharing of successful strategies with other organizations and
institutions of higher learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recognizing the growing
importance of two-year colleges (2YCs) as the starting point for students who
earn bachelor's degrees at 4-year institutions (4YCs), CCRI and URI are
implementing a number of modifications and new programs that are aimed at
increasing the number and diversity of geoscientists in each institution's
programs. The goals of this program are to: (1) improve the 2YC/4YC transfer
rate in the geosciences in Rhode Island; (2) increase the number and diversity
of geoscience graduates; (3) enhance student training in geoscience and STEM-
related fields; and, (4) contribute to the evidence base of successful practices
in geoscience education. In this collaboration, CCRI and URI are putting in
place both on- and off-campus components, including: targeted improvements to
the gateway course to the major; systematic enhancements of the undergraduate
curriculum in terms of data-rich activities, collaborative learning, and field
experiences; streamlining of the transfer path into geosciences; a new research-
focused course that is team-taught by CCRI and URI faculty; a workshop engaging
students in the process of applying for internships and research opportunities;
a series of information-sharing and mentoring events for prospective geoscience
majors. A developmental evaluation strategy with formative and summative
assessments is being applied to monitor progress in achieving project goals.
This project is expected to increase the number and diversity of the pool of
geosciences majors and new, practicing geoscientists. For all students, this
project will have bettered the undergraduate experience and provided new
mentorship and paths to professional success. Changes made to the URI and CCRI
curricular programs will endure, and new community building events will foster a
more engaged community, with untold positive impacts. In addition, this project
will cement fledgling collaborations between 2YC and 4YC Rhode Island faculty in
the geosciences, paving the way for multiple future projects. Presentations at
regional and national meetings and publications resulting from this work have
the potential to transfer findings and enhance experiences in the larger
geoscience community.