* 1540712
* UR Noyce Master Teaching Fellows Program--Phase II:  Leveraging Unique Opportunities to Develop STEM Teacher Leaders for Urban Schools
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2015,02/28/2021
* Carl Mueller, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 02/28/2021
* USD 2,099,214.00

This Noyce Master Teaching Fellowship project will prepare a cadre of 14, K-12
STEM master teachers for high-need urban districts in upstate New York. Along
with standard professional development activities, Master Teaching Fellows
(MTFs) will have the option to (a) complete the additional requirements needed
to obtain state certification as a school/district leader, (b) obtain a
certificate in online teaching and learning, and (c) complete a doctorate in
education, in order to acquire the credentials to be leaders in their districts'
STEM reform plan. Additionally, the MTFs will have the unique opportunity to
participate in the restructuring of mathematics and science curricula at an
elementary school that is becoming a STEM school and at a failing high school
that is being revitalized by the University of Rochester. This project builds on
the important national systemic work of preparing a critical mass of master
teachers in a region that has the highest poverty in the state of New York and
the lowest graduation rate of African-American males in the entire
country.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of this project are to improve the
quality of teaching and to create teacher/leaders. Thus, the first two years of
the project, will focus the MTF's attention on their own teaching practice to
help them gain a deeper understanding of what it takes to create learning
experiences that are more interesting, meaningful and effective for all
students. The complement of additional activities will include: (a) graduate
coursework, (b) seminars of practice, and (c) mentored experiences. The emphasis
for the remainder of the project will be on the development of the MTF's
leadership (knowledge, skills, and habits of mind). Formative and summative
evaluation will be used to determine the extent to which the project elements
have supported its goals. The MTFs will be assessed through surveys, classroom
observations (Reformed Teaching Observation Protocol), and interviews. A subset
of the fellow's experiences will be used in case studies to be disseminated
through journals such as Journal of Mathematics Teacher Education and annual
meetings of mathematics and science teachers.