* 1540996
* EarthCube IA: Collaborative Proposal: LinkedEarth: Crowdsourcing Data Curation &amp; Standards Development in Paleoclimatology
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Nicholas McKay, Northern Arizona University
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 08/31/2018
* USD 113,015.00

Natural climate variability signficantly modulates anthropogenic global warming,
and only paleoclimate observations can adequately constrain it. Moreover, such
observations are most powerful when many records are brought together to provide
a spatial understanding of past variability. However, there is currently no
universal way to share paleoclimate data between users or machines, hindering
integration and synthesis. Large-scale, international, paleoclimate data
syntheses have a long and successful history, but have been needlessly labor-
intensive. Recognizing that (1) paleoclimate data curation requires expert
knowledge; (2) top-down data management approaches are ineffectual; (3) existing
infrastructure does not foster standardization; there emerges a critical need
for a flexible platform enabling crowdsourced data curation and standards
development.The platform will be combined with editorial and community-driven
processes which will result in a system that has the potential to engage a broad
user base in geoscientific data curation. The proposed framework will lower
barriers to participation in the geosciences, enabling more "dark data" to join
the public domain using community-sanctioned protocols. The pilot project will
facilitate the work of hundreds of paleoclimate scientists, accelerating
scientific discovery and the dissemination of its results to
society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Semantic wikis provide a simple, intuitive
interface to semantic languages and infrastructure that build on open Web
architecture. Like traditional wikis, they enable the collaborative authoring of
content. Secure access and time-stamped content also enable the tracking of
changes and the accountability of users, as well as moderation capabilities by
community members of recognized expertise. In contrast to traditional wikis,
semantic wikis allow contributors to assign meaning to their content, specifying
relationships between the objects they describe. This enables artificial
intelligence reasoners to parse, process and translate these data into more
useful forms. The technology is well-proven, scalable, and completely
transparent to the user, requiring no computer science knowledge or more
sophisticated technology than a web browser. The LinkedEarth Wiki will
automatically translate this information into Linked Open Data, a universal
format to share data across the Web. To demonstrate this concept?s broad
applicability across paleoclimate science, the project?s target community is the
PAGES2k consortium, an international collaboration dedicated to the climate of
the Common Era. Social technologies will be developed to power collective
curation, standards development and quality control by the community itself. The
project will demonstrate applicability to other paleogeosciences, serving as a
potential template for other geoscientific disciplines.