* 1540849
* EarthCube IA: Collaborative Proposal: Cross-Domain Observational Metadata Environmental Sensing Network (X-DOMES)
* GEO,ICER
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2017
* Krzysztof Janowicz, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 08/31/2017
* USD 55,288.00

Across-domains, agencies and political boundaries, our environment is being
continuously observed and studied. The researchers in this project are looking
for short-term, near-term and long-term changes while researching new and
evolving methods to observe properties and to process the collected
observations. Emerging technologies enable us to provide and discover the data
openly and freely. But, if we do not understand the newly discovered data, with
its inherent limitations and biases, it cannot be responsibly utilized for new
or collaborative research efforts. Working with environmental sensor
manufacturers and researchers, the X-DOMES project will develop tools and social
and technical infrastructure to facilitate the creation of data about data
(metadata). Metadata describes not only who, when and where the observations
were made, but also it must document how an observation came to be (provenance).
By taking this knowledge out of manuals and human-readable documents, the
X-DOMES model creates metadata that can be treated like data ? discoverable and
searchable, making it ready to be incorporated into automated archival and
processing for quality assurance and validation methods.

Leveraging existing relationships with large NSF-funded data management
programs, EarthCube building blocks and working groups, and environmental sensor
manufacturers and consortia, we will establish a community of sensor
manufacturers and other stakeholders to provide a unifying approach to
describing sensors and observations across geo-science domains. Built on an
existing sensor metadata model that references registered, standards-based
vocabularies, the X-DOMES pilot project will provide a suite of tools, built
upon community-adopted standards of the Open Geospatial Consortium (OGC) and
World Wide Web Consortium (W3C) to demonstrate and facilitate the generation of
documents that are discoverable and accessible on-line and/or directly from
onboard sensor descriptions. The project will also demonstrate mechanisms to
associate the data with the metadata through standards-based web services. With
vendor-ready tools implemented throughout a broad-based community, the X-DOMES
Network will lay the foundation for the development of and adoption of
interoperable access to much needed content-rich sensor metadata.