* 1540165
* CPS: Synergy: Collaborative Research: In-Silico Functional Verification of Artificial Pancreas Control Algorithms
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2014,06/30/2016
* Faye Cameron, University of Texas at El Paso
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 06/30/2016
* USD 374,347.00

Title: CPS:Synergy:Collaborative Research: In-Silico Functional Verification of
Artificial Pancreas Control Algorithms.

The project investigates a formal verification framework for artificial pancreas
(AP) controllers that automate the delivery of insulin to patients with type-1
diabetes (T1D). AP controllers are safety critical: excessive insulin delivery
can lead to serious, potentially fatal, consequences. The verification framework
under development allows designers of AP controllers to check that their control
algorithms will operate safely and reliably against large disturbances that
include patient meals, physical activities, and sensor anomalies including
noise, delays, and sensor attenuation. The intellectual merits of the project
lie in the development of state-of-the-art formal verification tools, that
reason over mathematical models of the closed-loop including external
disturbances and insulin-glucose response. These tools perform an exhaustive
exploration of the closed loop system behaviors, generating potentially adverse
situations for the control algorithm under verification. In addition, automatic
techniques are being investigated to help AP designers improve the control
algorithm by tuning controller parameters to eliminate harmful behaviors and
optimize performance. The broader significance and importance of the project are
to minimize the manual testing effort for AP controllers, integrate formal tools
in the certification process, and ultimately ensure the availability of safe and
reliable devices to patients with type-1 diabetes. The framework is made
available to researchers who are developing AP controllers to help them verify
and iteratively improve their designs. The team is integrating the research into
the educational mission by designing hands-on courses to train undergraduate
students in the science of Cyber-Physical Systems (CPS) using the design of AP
controllers as a motivating example. Furthermore, educational material that
explains the basic ideas, current challenges and promises of the AP concept is
being made available to a wide audience that includes patients with T1D, their
families, interested students, and researchers.

The research is being carried out collaboratively by teams of experts in formal
verification for Cyber-Physical Systems, control system experts with experience
designing AP controllers, mathematical modeling experts, and clinical experts
who have clinically evaluated AP controllers. To enable the construction of the
verification framework from the current state-of-the-art verification tools, the
project is addressing major research challenges, including (a) building
plausible mathematical models of disturbances from available clinical datasets
characterizing human meals, activity patterns, and continuous glucose sensor
anomalies. The resulting models are integrated in a formal verification
framework; (b) simplifying existing models of insulin glucose response using
smaller but more complex delay differential models; (c) automating the process
of abstracting the controller implementation for the purposes of verification;
(d) producing verification results that can be interpreted by control engineers
and clinical researchers without necessarily understanding formal verification
techniques; and (e) partially automating the process of design improvements to
potentially eliminate severe faults and improve performance. The framework is
evaluated on a set of promising AP controller designs that are currently under
various stages of clinical evaluation.