* 1540336
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Human Population Inferences Via Canine Genetics
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2015,04/30/2017
* Ripan Malhi, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 04/30/2017
* USD 31,481.00

Dogs were the first domesticated animal to be widely distributed through the
Americas, and their long association with humans suggests that dogs and humans
in the Americas may have migrated together. This project will analyze DNA from
100 skeletal dog remains from a wide variety of time periods and regions of the
Americas. If the project demonstrates that dogs and humans in the Americas have
similar genetic patterns, it is likely that dogs are a good proxy for human
population and migration history in the Americas. Given the ethical concerns of
excavating and performing destructive analysis on human remains in the Americas,
using dogs as a substitute species would be a way to continue to address
research questions about human population history while also being respectful of
the wishes of the cultural or biological descendants of the human remains.
Results from this project will be presented at the Summer Internship for Native
Americans in Genomics (SING) workshop, a week-long workshop that brings together
Native Americans who are interested in learning about the methods and ethics
involved in genetic research. A partnership with the Illinois State
Archaeological Survey will produce a virtual museum exhibit that discusses the
project as well as relates to the public how genetic and archaeological data can
be interpreted to learn more about human history.

Dog burials are widespread across the Americas, and ancient DNA analysis of dogs
can be used to infer human population history and movements in cases where human
remains are unavailable to study. Nearly all studies of ancient dogs have
focused on the hypervariable region (HVR) of the mitochondrial genome
(mitogenome), which has limitations as a reliable indicator of population
history. Sequencing the complete mitogenome can clarify understanding of
domesticated dogs in the Americas and their time of entry, and with the low cost
of next-generation sequencing it is possible to reassess previous analyses of
dogs in the Americas using mitogenome data in the place of HVR data. With access
to dog remains from a broad geographic and temporal span, and an aim to sequence
100 dog mitogenomes to compare to published ancient dog (N=3) and wolf (N=40)
mitogenomes, the investigators will assess whether dog and human demographic
histories show similar patterns, and if dogs in the Americas derive from
Eurasian or American wolves. Clarification of these points using mitogenome data
contributes to a better understanding of human populations in the Americas and
their demographic history, as well as the origins of dogs in the Americas.