* 1540634
* BSF:2014359:Invariance in error correcting codes and computational complexity
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Swastik Kopparty, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 08/31/2020
* USD 40,000.00

Information can be digitally encoded (as 0s and 1s) so that even if some of
these bits are lost or modified, the information can be recovered. This
foundational idea, which is the basis for such commonplace technologies as DVDs
and digital broadcast, is explored in theoretical computer science, where it
plays a key role in probabilistically checkable proofs and property testing.
Exploring the limits of this idea in these abstract settings can lead to new
understanding, which enables technological innovation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It
has been long known in mathematics that studying the invariances (symmetries) of
an object has an important role in understanding the object. In recent years,
the study of invariances has led to some significant advances in various topics
in theoretical computer science, such as property testing, error-correcting
codes and complexity theory. For example, codes with affine invariance and codes
with a transitive invariance group have been shown to have important
applications in complexity theory, such as constructing PCPs. This project will
support the travel of the PIs and their students for research collaborations on
these topics with collaborators in Israel. This research will deepen our
understanding of objects with invariances, and develop new applications of this
theory in complexity theory.