* 1540752
* GP_EXTRA: Academic Year Pathways Research Experience Program (AY-PREP)
* GEO,RISE
* 09/15/2015,02/29/2020
* John Taber, University of Texas at El Paso
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 02/29/2020
* USD 528,182.00

The United States needs to increase the number of awarded STEM undergraduate
degrees by about 34% annually over current rates to meet the high demand for
scientists and engineers in the workforce. Furthermore, the geosciences, which
address complicated and dynamic Earth systems, are one of the least diverse STEM
fields. Thus, recruiting, retaining, and preparing the next generation of
diverse geoscientists remains a top priority if the U.S. is to remain a leader
in the geosciences. This program, Academic Year Pathways Research Experience
Program (AY-PREP), exposes students to a wide-range of career opportunities,
emerging geoscience topics and environmental issues through hands-on activities
and research experiences, and prepares them as future geoscientists through
stratified mentoring and training of professional and soft
skills.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The El Paso region, surrounded by the Franklin
Mountains and within the Chihuahuan Desert, provides an ideal natural setting
for exploring geoscience and environmental issues. Located at the southern end
of the Rio Grande Rift and along the Rio Grande River, geology in El Paso
features visible and easily accessible fault scarps, basin and range topography,
and volcanoes. Furthermore, the El Paso area shares many environmental
challenges with our border city, Ciudad Juarez, Mexico, including limited fresh
water resources, elevated soil salinity in agriculture, and dust and air
pollution issues. The University of Texas at El Paso (UTEP) is building upon
past, successful efforts to broaden participation in STEM, as well as leverage
UTEP's unique demographic (80% Hispanic) and research infrastructure, to develop
a comprehensive program that recruits, retains, and prepares the next generation
of diverse geoscientists to earn advance degrees and/or enter the workforce:
Academic Year Pathways Research Experience Program (AY-PREP). The program
includes: 1) an academic year interdisciplinary research experience for a cohort
of six undergraduates per year, 2) weekly seminars and workshops to expose
students to cutting-edge research, graduate programs, and career opportunities,
and prepare students for technical, professional, and soft skills; 3) a
stratified mentoring program; 4) opportunities for the cohort to participate in
the deployment of a seismic field experiment; and 5) a two-week summer bridge
camp that brings together incoming AY-PREP students, undergraduate students,
senior high school students, and pre-service teachers. The summer camp includes
field trips to the Jemez Critical Zone Observatory in New Mexico, integration of
IRIS Education and Outreach programming, training on geophysical/geochemical
instrumentation and sensor technology, and the synthesis of large datasets that
serve as a foundation for undergraduate student research projects.