* 1540055
* 2015 Biomedical Engineering Society Annual Meeting, Tampa FL, October 7-11, 2015
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2016
* Richard Hart, Biomedical Engineering Society
* Standard Grant
* Michele Grimm
* 07/31/2016
* USD 20,000.00

PI: Hart, Richard T. Proposal Number: 1540055

This proposal seeks funding to support travel for students, postdoctoral
fellows, early career faculty and professionals, inclusive of underrepresented
groups and accessible to persons with disabilities, to participate in the 2015
Biomedical Engineering Society Annual Meeting. The 2015 BMES Annual Meeting will
be held in Tampa FL, October 7-11, 2015, and it will feature 19 parallel
technical Program Tracks focused on the overall theme of "Innovation at the
Interface." The BMES Annual Meeting serves as a primary vehicle for scientific
sharing and dissemination of the latest advances in biomedical engineering, as
well as a facilitator of important cross-fertilizations between the life
sciences and engineering technologies, which foster a multi-disciplinary
approach in the practice of Biomedical Engineering. The travel awards will
afford the opportunity for young investigators and investigators from
underrepresented groups to attend the Annual Meeting, be informed on the latest
scientific and technological advances in Biomedical Engineering, and participate
in programs and special sessions focused on health disparities and promoting and
sustaining innovative research in biomedical engineering and grant writing.

The requested funds will specifically be used to offset travel costs and
registration fees for students, early career professionals and session
participants and to support the Students Research and Design Awards, Student
Travel Awards, and the Biomedical Innovation and Career Development Travel
Awards. The recipients of these awards will be selected through competitive
processes organized and run by appropriate BMES Committees. A portion of the
funds from this conference proposal will be used to enable the participation of
more students from underrepresented groups to include racial and ethnic
minorities and others who traditionally have limited opportunities to
participate in BMES.