* 1540660
* I-Corps:  Commercialization Investigation of the Genomic Prescribing System
* TIP,TI
* 05/15/2015,10/31/2016
* Peter O'Donnell, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* lydia mcclure
* 10/31/2016
* USD 50,000.00

The Genomic Prescribing System (GPS) is a tool for seamlessly evaluating, at the
time prescriptions are written, the genetically determined consequences of
medication decisions. In many cases, individuals' genes determine whether they
will respond positively or negatively to particular medicines. For some people,
genetically influenced responses can cause particular medicines to be
ineffective. In one estimate, this effect causes the full or partial failure of
up to 50% of administered drugs. In other cases, genetically influenced
responses cause a toxic, or even a fatal, reaction to particular drugs. Properly
prescribed and taken medications generate adverse drug events that are estimated
to be the 5th largest cause of death in the United States. GPS enables medical
providers to differentiate between otherwise similar prescription choices based
on patient genetics. The goal of implementing the tool is to decrease the number
of both ineffective drug treatments and adverse drug events, and thereby
contribute to improving healthcare while reducing its cost.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;GPS has three main components. One component is a cost-
effective test panel for the one-time measurement of each patient's relevant
genes. A second component is a carefully curated set of databases capturing the
necessary relationships between drugs, genes, and diseases. The third component
is a software interface that brings all this information together in the clinic
for the prescribing physician. Improperly integrating software into health
professionals' workflows is a common failure mode. Likewise, the format, order,
and quantity of content frequently determine the success of software tools.
Finally, business model choices for products in the health care industry can be
crucial to new methods' success. The goal of this particular project is to
enable the implementation of GPS by measuring the how these three components
(workflow, software content and structure, business model) can be configured to
maximize the probability that GPS will broadly deliver its intended benefits.
The proposed project will focus evaluating how concierge medicine providers
might use and pay for GPS. As part of this process it will be important to
elucidate a more complete value proposition of what GPS would provide this group
and to identify the product features that would most effectively deliver that
value. The primary project activity will be identifying and interviewing
physicians in concierge medicine practices. The technology demonstration the
team will provide at the end of the project will be a software demonstration
incorporating the features delivering value proposition benefits verified or
discovered in the course of the project.