* 1540294
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Reproductive-immune trade-offs in preterm birth: a life history perspective
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2017
* L. Christie Rockwell, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 08/31/2017
* USD 31,200.00

Evolutionary tradeoffs between mother and offspring, and between reproduction
and immune function, are likely to have shaped human life history. This study
will investigate such tradeoffs in the context of preterm birth, which is
frequently associated with mild infection and/or inflammation, suggesting that
physiological compromises between reproduction and the immune system may
influence gestation length. The investigators will evaluate placental
characteristics, including the placental microbiome, in the context of maternal
immune challenge and preterm birth. Project findings may extend current limited
knowledge of the role of microbiomes in human physiology and health,
specifically at the placental interface. The U.S. ranks alongside South Asia and
Sub-Saharan Africa in rates of preterm birth, with extreme disparities based on
race, ethnicity, and socioeconomic status. By considering the evolutionary roots
of why immune activation might compromise reproduction, this project will bring
a new perspective to a persistent public health problem, and has the potential
to inform community health efforts and public health policy. Other broader
impacts include undergraduate training and the fostering of interdisciplinary
research collaborations.

This study of U.S. women will integrate maternal condition, placental function,
the placental microbiome, and gestation length within an evolutionary life
history framework based on reproductive-immune trade-offs. The investigators
will test two hypotheses: 1) that the placental phenotype characterized by
reduced size and efficiency, and a distinct microbiome, will be associated with
preterm birth, and 2) that this association will depend on maternal systemic
inflammation. The results of this research will shed light on the effects of
immune activation during pregnancy, and will advance evolutionary perspectives
on placental microbiome function and variation, and its role in preterm birth.