* 1540652
* GP-EXTRA: Engaging Students in Inclusive Geoscience Field Experiences via Onsite-Remote Partnerships
* GEO,RISE
* 09/15/2015,02/29/2020
* Jennifer Piatek, James Madison University
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 02/29/2020
* USD 353,742.00

The importance of field-based learning experiences in geoscience education is
well-documented. However, learning in the field is not entirely accessible for
students with physical disabilities. This collaborative project will engage
students with disabilities (SWD) in authentic field experiences via a peer
instruction approach that pairs SWD with more physically capable students in
collaborative field-based exercises. The overarching philosophy is that
partnerships of students with diverse physical abilities, as well as student-
instructor pairs, constitute a collective set of human senses and perspectives
that can be as effective as individuals with no physical limitations. Outcomes
from this work should apply to a wide variety of barriers to onsite field
investigations that SWD and others may face during the course of their
geoscience careers. This work is anticipated to increase the probability of
retaining and graduating geoscience SWD and other collaborating students, and
encourage and empower them to pursue geoscience careers, thereby broadening
participation of underrepresented minorities in the science, technology,
engineering, and math (STEM) disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Investigators at
James Madison University (JMU) are collaborating with colleagues at the
University of Cinncinatti, Old Dominion University, and Central Connecticut
State University to pilot and test innovative approaches for enabling SWD to
gain meaningful exposure to field-based activities relevant to the geosciences.
The project is designed to work with two cohorts of undergraduate geoscience
students: one with mobility disabilities (SWD) and another without. Students
(primarily sophomores) are being recruited from a national pool of undergraduate
geoscience majors. Students from each cohort are paired in a variety of field
experiences, and collaborate both on-site in the field and through remote
connections. Field data collection and analyses occurs in real-time via web-
linked tablets and other interactive mobile devices. Real-time video and audio
communication, both student-student and student-faculty, are facilitated through
cutting-edge wearable technologies. The field program incorporates a range of
experiences that are traditionally included within an undergraduate geoscience
curriculum. These include: day-long field trips that focus on a specific set of
field skills, such as generating strip logs for stratigraphic analyses;
measuring structural orientations using a geologic compass; and, mineralogical
and petrologic analyses using a hand lens. Field experiences in the second year
of the project are focused on more advanced, multi-day exercises that require
student teams to synthesize geologic field data collected into maps and reports
that summarize the tectonic history of a region. Assessment of project
activities by an external evaluator is being used to inform continuous
improvements to the project design; summative evaluation and synthesis of the
impacts of the project are expected to contribute to the evidence base regarding
best practices for working with SWD in field settings. Results and experiences
from this project are being disseminated via presentations, peer-reviewed
publications, and a capstone field trip for geoscience students, faculty, and
professionals.