* 1540359
* 2015 Molecular Mechanisms in Evolution Gordon Research Conference held   28 Jun - 3 Jul 2015 at Stonehill College, Easton MA.
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2016
* Christine Queitsch, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 06/30/2016
* USD 25,000.00

Quantitative approaches such as mathematical modeling, high-throughput
phenotyping combined with technology development may yet yield a united theory
of biology and life. The "modern synthesis" of the early twentieth century
predated the molecular biology revolution and the genomics era. Although many of
the assumptions and predictions of traditional population genetics have proven
correct, others have to be modified due to new discoveries such as non-genetic,
protein and RNA-based inheritance and stress-inducible mutations. Likewise,
researchers in the fields of molecular biology, genomics, and medicine are often
unacquainted with population genetics theory. This meeting is aimed at the
growing numbers of investigators attempting to unite these formerly disparate
fields and to learn from physicists how to arrive at universal principles. This
meeting aims to provide a home and community for researchers involved in this
ongoing, cross-disciplinary endeavor. The Gordon Research Conference (GRC)
program includes invited and contributed oral and poster presentations by both
younger and more established researchers, focusing on the best emerging science
in the field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The second meeting of the new Gordon Research
Conference Molecular Mechanisms in Evolution, June 28th-July 3rd, 2015 at
Stonehill College, Easton, MA breaks new ground by focusing on the mechanistic
understanding of how genetic and epigenetic variation arises, especially in
response to environmental stress, and to which extent this variation generates
phenotypic diversity, shapes evolution, and contributes to disease. The meeting
sessions address a wide range of topics, including discussions of the
constraints that cell biology and stochasticity pose for non-traditional
mechanisms of inheritance, insights garnered from experiments in the laboratory,
mechanisms of coding and regulation highlighting the unexpected plasticity of
genomes. The meeting will discuss how mechanistic knowledge could be used to
predict and arrest inheritance processes in infectious diseases and cancer. The
GRC will promote international and national collaboration between physicists and
biologists of diverse disciplines to promote systematic and quantitative
analyses of biological processes, intensified theory building and deeper
understanding of basic biology. This meeting will provide networking
opportunities, inspiration and connections for young scientists, mentoring, and
perspectives on cutting-edge new research for young participants at a critical
stage in their careers. The requested funds will be used to defray the costs of
a diverse group of graduate students, postdocs, new investigators, women, and
minority participants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is being jointly
supported by the Physics of Living Systems program in the Division of Physics
and the Genetic Mechanisms Program in the Division of Molecular and Cellular
Biosciences.