* 1540854
* SL-CN: Contributions of Executive Function Subdomains to Math and Reading Cognition in the Classroom
* SBE,SMA
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2018
* Melina Uncapher, University of California-San Francisco
* Standard Grant
* Soo-Siang Lim
* 08/31/2018
* USD 750,000.00

Understanding how the brain of a student learns new information and flexibly
applies that information in real-world settings is critical for guiding efforts
to improve the U.S. education system. How a student learns is fundamentally
related to core aspects of cognition, termed executive functions (EFs). EFs are
known predictors of academic achievement across multiple content areas (e.g.,
math and reading); however, there remain many unanswered questions regarding
exactly how EFs contribute to academic performance and whether weak EFs can be
enhanced with cognitive training. It is important to build a precise
understanding of how these abilities develop over childhood and how they can be
improved in order to supply educators with precise tools and insights about
whether, when, and how to intervene when a student is
struggling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study of how EFs contribute to academic
achievement has advanced rapidly in recent years, but has not typically included
the investigation of EFs in middle childhood. Because middle childhood is a
period of high neural plasticity, it promises great opportunity to intervene
when EFs are weak. This research program develops an innovative approach that
improves both diagnostic and intervention methodology for detecting and
remediating EF weaknesses in educational settings. The program leverages a
novel, precision EF assessment tool in order to rapidly assess and
longitudinally track the multidimensional profile of EFs in children over time.
The critical advancement is the adaptive nature of the assessment tool, which
increases in difficulty as the learner improves. This adaptivity allows
multiple, precise assessments over time and thus enables unprecedented
understanding of how different EF profiles develop across middle childhood and,
critically, how these profiles contribute to math and reading achievement.
Additionally, by utilizing a novel intervention that uses each student's
multidimensional EF profile to selectively challenge subdomains of EF during
physical fitness training, the research will inform us if personalized, multi-
factor EF training can improve math and reading outcomes. Specifically, the
research will: (1) fill gaps in existing knowledge about the relationship
between EF profiles and academic skills beyond early childhood, (2) characterize
how these relationships evolve across age, (3) determine whether EFs are more
critical to certain content areas (subdomains of math and reading), and (4)
advance the field's understanding of the feasibility and timeline of
personalized EF interventions. Importantly, this research will serve to lay a
definitive foundation for future science of learning research to build upon. In
particular, the proposed investigations of the typically developing mind will
inform efforts to understand disorders of development such as ADHD and autism.
Finally, the EFs assessment tool will be made publicly available, to promote
widescale investigations of EFs across the diverse range of student learners. A
precise understanding of how the multidimensional profile of EFs contributes to
academic achievement promises tremendous societal impact by guiding efforts to
intervene when students are struggling academically.