* 1540657
* BSF: 2014324: Streaming Algorithms for Fundamental Computations in Numerical Linear Algebra
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Michael Mahoney, International Computer Science Institute
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 08/31/2019
* USD 40,000.00

Streaming algorithms that use every input datum once (single-pass) or scan the
input a small number of times (multiple passes) are gaining importance due to
the increasing volumes of data that are available for business, scientific, and
security applications. Performing large-scale data analysis and machine learning
often requires addressing numerical linear algebra primitives, such as least
squares regression, singular value decompositions, least absolute deviations
regression, and canonical correlation analysis. In this proposal, the PIs aim to
improve significantly the theory and practice of streaming algorithms for these
fundamental linear algebra kernels. The new algorithms will provide faster and
more accurate kernels for the ubiquitous big data applications, reducing
resource use (hardware and energy) of machine learning applications, and will
make security applications that rely critically on accuracy provably
trustworthy. In addition, they will enable improved exploitation of data in
physical, chemical, and biomedical applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
computations that will be considered are performed either using inexact
incremental single-pass algorithms, or by expensive multi-pass algorithms.
Although existing inexact algorithms often work well enough in practice, the
worst-case behavior of applications relying on these building blocks has not
been characterized. This is especially troubling in the security and anomaly-
detection areas, where a malicious party could conceivably exploit such
inexactness. The PIs will develop a set of provably-accurate single-pass
algorithms for numerical linear algebra. They will also explore alternative
algorithmic routes, mainly multi-pass randomized algorithms, both for the core
problems (least squares regression regression and singular value decomposition)
and for the more challenging ones (least absolute deviations regression and
canonical correlations). They will characterize the accuracy/performance
tradeoffs associated with these computations, where performance refers mostly to
the number of passes but also to the total computational effort (including
communication). The PIs will carry out this investigation using benchmarks from
significant applications, as well as theoretical lower bounds on single-pass
algorithms.