* 1540718
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Getting it right. A strategic planning workshop to develop a sustainable pathway for educating underrepresented Puerto Rican students in geosciences
* GEO,RISE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Maria Barberena-Arias, Universidad Del Turabo
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 05/31/2016
* USD 28,140.00

The progress of science in the United States is dependent on the development of
a future STEM workforce that is well-trained, highly effective, and enriched
through participation of the diverse talent of the nation. This award is being
used to support a week-long strategic planning workshop that will bring together
faculty, graduate students, and undergraduate students from the Universidad del
Turabo, Universidad Metropolitana, and University of Maryland Center for
Environmental Sciences, with additional participants attending from government
and private sector organizations within Puerto Rico. The goal of the
collaborative effort is to develop sustainable education and research pathways
into the marine and coastal sciences for Hispanic
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this workshop is to develop
novel educational models, or adapt existing ones, that are necessary for
building a comprehensive coupled geoscience education and research program at
minority serving institutions in Puerto Rico. The overarching goal is to create
a pathway to STEM success that will lead to an increase in the number of
underrepresented students from minority serving institutions participating in
geoscience-relevant disciplines and careers, as well as increase geoscience
literacy. The workshop is bringing together new and existing Puerto Rico
partners in government, academia, non-governmental organizations, and the
private sector to discuss and develop an educational framework for creating a
new linked academic year and summer research curriculum. The workshop agenda
consists of a two-day symposium and strategic planning meeting followed by 5
days of fieldwork and seminars. Participants will include UT,UMET and UMCES
faculty, 12 undergraduates and 5 graduate students. The field/seminar components
are designed to help identify areas of mutual strength among the collaborators,
to inform strategies for developing an effective and sustainable multiyear
undergraduate science education and research curriculum at institutions in
Puerto Rico, as well as test the efficacy of potential research programs with
new and existing partners. Extensive evaluation and assessment of the workshop
processes and outcomes will help to document opportunities and barriers for
achieving the goals of the workshop.