* 1540337
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Insect Consumption in Sympatric Primate Species
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2015,02/28/2017
* Joanna Lambert, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 02/28/2017
* USD 24,615.00

Insects are found in the diet of many primates, and in humans they are an
underappreciated but significant component of many non-Western diets. Insects
are particularly important for hunter-gatherer societies and groups living in
tropical regions. However, despite their dietary importance, the role that
insects have played over the course of primate and human evolution and in living
primates is understudied. Gaining a complete understanding of entomophagy
(insect eating) has been challenging historically because primate insect
consumption is difficult to observe, and because insects themselves are often
cryptic. However, recent advances in genetic methods have made insect prey
identification more practical, allowing for the evaluation of explicit
hypotheses related to entomophagy that were previously untestable. This project
incorporates methodologies from anthropology, ecology, entomology, and molecular
biology to examine insect consumption in closely related monkey species. The
project will provide training of a woman (Co-PI) in a broad range of cross-
disciplinary scientific methods, thus increasing the participation of women in
science.

This project will examine variation in insect consumption by sympatric,
omnivorous primates to test the hypothesis that differential use of insects as a
food resource facilitates coexistence of omnivorous species. This will be
accomplished by integrating advanced molecular methods and noninvasive field
data collection to identify insect prey consumed by redtail monkeys
(Cercopithecus ascanius) and blue monkeys (C. mitis): two omnivorous
cercopithecine primate species. These data will be used to investigate variation
in entomophagy between species, sex-class, and seasons. Results of this research
will add to our understanding of the influences of ecological and life history
variables on primate insect consumption, and will have implications for
interpreting the role of entomophagy in feeding niche differentiation and
coexistence among closely related primate species.