* 1540679
* EAGER: Contribution of outbreak insect herbivore ecological subsidies to stream food webs
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2018
* Clay Arango, Central Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Blood
* 05/31/2018
* USD 149,454.00

Spruce budworms are the most important defoliators of conifer forests in the
United States Pacific Northwest, injuring or killing hundreds of thousands of
acres of trees each year. Budworm infestations can decrease forest growth and as
a result affect streams that drain from those forests. But the actual
connections between infestations and the functioning of streams remain unknown.
Budworms could increase the amount of organic material entering streams directly
as they feed, or they could increase the amount of nutrients that runoff the
landscape indirectly as a result of reduced forest growth and nutrient demand.
In either case, the growth of algae and bacteria in streams, both key components
of stream food webs, could be stimulated with consequences for fish or other
stream organisms. Since so little is currently known about these possible
connections, it is difficult to predict how streams will respond to budworm
attacks, especially as budworms are expected to become more active in the future
under a warming climate. This project will enable better predictions of how
streams in the forests of central Washington state will change as a result of
increased spruce budworm feeding and how they would likely respond under a
warmer climate. There are clear implications of project results for the regional
economy, which has a large base in timber production, recreation, and water
supply for hydropower, fisheries and irrigation. Researchers will engage natural
resource managers in the region to assist in the development of better adaptive
management plans for Federal, State, and Tribal forests and streams. The project
will support the education and training of two undergraduate students and will
provide new activities for local fifth grade classes who already are learning
about ecosystems in their science curriculum. Finally, the researchers will
collaborate on the curation of a display about the management of Pacific
Northwest forests and streams at a public museum at Central Washington
University. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The focus of this project is on the
sensitivity of streams to increased organic matter and nutrient inputs. There
are three main approaches to be employed. First, whole-stream experiments will
be used to simulate increased nutrient runoff for measurements of how algae and
bacteria respond to nutrient additions under light and dark conditions. Second,
observations will be made of how budworms affect stream food webs by tracing how
stable isotopes of important nutrients derived from budworm material become
incorporated into stream insects. Third, historical data about spruce budworm
feeding intensity will be gathered to gain insights about where spruce budworms
will most likely affect forests in the future. The exploratory nature of the
project, which takes advantage of current regional budworm infestations to
generate important background data and experimental infrastructure for future
studies, justifies this project as an EAGER.