* 1540027
* I/UCRC Phase II:  Collaborative Research: Ceramic, Composite and Optical Materials Center
* ENG,EEC
* 08/15/2015,12/31/2022
* Richard Haber, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Crystal Leach
* 12/31/2022
* USD 477,250.00

The Ceramic, Composite and Optical Materials Center (CCOMC) is an NSF Phase II,
I/UCRC which is managed by Rutgers, the State University of New Jersey (Rutgers)
and Clemson University (Clemson). The Center is integrated between the two
university partners and is directed by an Industrial Advisory Board (IAB)
comprised of 21 multinational member companies and national laboratories. The
mission of the CCOMC is to develop new, interdisciplinary technologies to
increase the level of ceramic, polymer and optical material science, technology
and engineering and to transfer these technologies to its industrial members to
foster the development of competitive, reproducible ceramic, polymer fiber and
composites made of them for advanced, high performance systems. The continuation
proposal aims to broaden the scope of the Center to new areas that are
technologically complementary and will lead towards the Center?s long terms
self-sufficiency. &lt;br/&gt;The programs within the Center focus on the
creation of new materials, new synthesis and processing methods, process based
models, measurements and characterization methods for complex, integrated
systems and devices. CCOMC began with program thrusts in ceramic and polymeric
materials and processing, nanoparticulates and processes, opaque armor ceramics,
optical material synthesis and processing and materials for energy conversion.
As we move forward into the next five years, we will expand the scope of our
research to include new research thrust areas in ceramic matrix composites and
superhard, high temperature material. In addition we will explore
green/ecofriendly processing as potential thrusts. It is critical to long-term
self-sufficiency that we not only attract a broader base of members, but also be
successful in securing Federal funding to strengthens new and existing thrusts
to improve the visibility of the Center within both universities and abroad.