* 1540419
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Female Counterstrategies to Male Aggression Among Primates
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2018
* Larissa Swedell, CUNY Queens College
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 08/31/2018
* USD 25,200.00

This study focuses on the interacting male and female reproductive strategies of
hamadryas baboons, a nonhuman primate with a unique and complex multilevel
social system in which males transfer females between social units. The
hamadryas social system may have more parallels to humans of any nonhuman
primate, thus this study has great potential to enhance our understanding of
human social evolution. In addition, this study will provide empirical data from
wild animals to improve captive animal management in zoological parks in the USA
and may also inform human obstetrics and gynecology. The project will support
researcher training, conservation awareness, prevention of human-wildlife
conflict, and improvement of snake-bite treatment options in areas surrounding
the research site.

Hamadryas takeovers involve substantial male aggression; they lead to delayed
reproduction in females as well as higher rates of infanticide and infant
mortality in general. Using observational behavioral data and endocrine measures
from fecal hormone samples collected from wild hamadryas baboon females at
Filoha, Ethiopia, the investigators will study female strategies that may
function to counteract this coercion and its implications. For example,
lactating females may display false signals of sexual receptivity to males post-
takeover, thereby preventing the loss of a dependent infant. In addition,
pregnant females may use a strategy of pregnancy termination post-takeover, thus
mitigating the eventual loss of investment in offspring. This project would be
the first to provide hormonal evidence of deceptive swellings in any primate
species, as well as the first to provide hormonal evidence for pregnancy failure
in hamadryas baboons. More broadly, the results of this study will fill gaps in
the theoretical scientific literature on sexual selection, sexual conflict, and
the co-evolution of male and female reproductive strategies.