* 1540699
* Using Reality-Based Learning Practicum and Mentoring Structures to Enhance STEM Teacher Preparation for High Need Schools
* EHR,DUE
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2021
* Jerry Kavouras, Lewis University
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Green
* 09/30/2021
* USD 1,440,000.00

With funding from the National Science Foundation's Robert Noyce Teacher
Scholarship program, "Using Reality-Based Learning Practicum and Mentoring
Structures to Enhance STEM Teacher Preparation for High Need Schools" is
recruiting undergraduate majors in biology, chemistry, mathematics, and physics
and preparing them to become 6-12th grade mathematics or science teachers. The
project will fund 36 scholarships over five years. In this project, Lewis
University is collaborating with Joliet Junior College, the College of DuPage,
Midewin National Tallgrass Prairie, Three Rivers Manufacturers Association,
Valley View Public School District U365, Joliet District 86, and Oak Lawn
District 218. The program will equip candidates to provide the highest quality
of mathematics and science instruction to at-risk student populations through
rigorous coursework, extensive field experiences, and innovative approaches.
Noyce scholars will attend workshops and work with STEM and education faculty as
they learn student-centered best practices for the mathematics and science
classroom. To further develop their expertise, scholars will participate in
community outreach programs. The results of Lewis University's program
strategies and accompanying research findings have the potential to address a
fundamental challenge facing STEM education today: the success and retention of
talented mathematics and science teachers in high-need secondary schools. By
researching the impact of the program's emphasis in teacher mentoring and in
translating teaching theory into effective practice, Lewis' Noyce program is
poised to contribute to advances in the preparation of mathematics and science
teachers, help address the shortage of highly qualified STEM teachers in high-
need schools, and lead to stronger mathematics and science outcomes among at-
risk 6-12th grade students.

Lewis University's Noyce project team will examine three research questions: (1)
Does Noyce scholars' participation in a Reality-Based Learning Practicum (RBLP)
influence the content and methods of their teaching towards a more student-
centered, engaging STEM curriculum, (2) How can mathematics and science teacher
preparation programs better define the role of the cooperating teacher, as both
a clinical supervisor and a mentor, from the perspective of teacher candidates,
and (3) How can programs apply the findings of this research to better prepare
practicing teachers? To answer question 1, the researchers will establish a
baseline of the candidates' teaching approaches in their first field experience.
Following the Reality-Based Learning Practicum RBLP, focus groups will explore
scholars' engagement and challenges in creating student-centered lessons, and
the researchers will examine lesson plans and observation evaluation from two
additional field experiences to determine the impact of the practicum. To
address questions 2 and 3, the researchers will utilize (1) entrance and exit
interviews from teacher candidates, (2) surveys, (3) evaluation and observation
instruments, and (4) debriefing notes by mentor teachers and university
supervisors of the teacher candidates. The results of this evaluation will be
analyzed to gain an understanding of the impact of RBLP on instructional
practice and develop a new model of mentorship that will engage teacher
candidates, mentors, and university supervisors in the effective preparation of
teacher candidates. The results of the research will be shared with the
education and STEM communities via publications, presentations, and the project
website.