* 1540562
* Workshop: The Pathway to a Roadmap: Phytobiomes 2015, Designing a New Paradigm for Crop Improvement; Washington, D.C., June 29-July 2, 2015; and Winter, 2015
* BIO,IOS
* 06/15/2015,05/31/2016
* Jan Leach, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Anne W. Sylvester
* 05/31/2016
* USD 58,654.00

Co-PIs: Gwyn Beattie (Iowa State University); Kellye Eversole (Eversole
Associates)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two workshops will assemble an
interdisciplinary and diverse group of scientists to develop a roadmap for
advancing the study of phytobiomes. Defined as all the organisms that interact
with plants, phytobiomes are understudied biological systems such as microbes,
fungi, insects and algae that significantly affect the growth, development and
function of plants. Understanding how phytobiomes influence and are influenced
by plants will provide information that can transform plant science and
agriculture. During the first workshop in June 2015, scientists and educators
from around the world will identify gaps in knowledge, training and tools needed
to advance the study of phytobiomes. Workshop participants will discuss over-
arching questions about the nature of the science, discuss how the science can
move forward and explore how educational outreach can be promoted. The second
workshop in the fall of 2015 will synthesize the community-driven ideas into a
guiding document, or white paper, that will serve as the roadmap for future
actions. Such documents are the gold standard for newly emerging communities to
identify needs, establish new collaborations and develop international
partnerships. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A systems approach is needed to understand
the multitrophic interactions that occur among phytobiomes, plants and the
environment. A major goal of the workshops is to develop an effective roadmap
that incorporates cutting edge scientific approaches from all disciplines. The
workshop structure will facilitate discussion and networking to help establish
interdisciplinary collaborations. Scientists of all career stages and across
broad representation in the US and globally will participate in the discussion.
Specific outcomes of these workshops will be: (1) the public dissemination of
the white paper via a project website, scientific journals and public agencies;
(2) publication of a special issue of a top scientific journal will be devoted
to the outcomes of the workshop followed by peer reviewed articles in the area
of phytobiomes; (3) a summary of surveys and evaluation procedures to guide next
steps and (4) establishment of a phytobiomes website (www.phytobiomes.org) that
will be a public portal to all outcomes, collaborations and information related
to phytobiomes. (www.phytobiomes.org)