* 1540094
* SHINE:   Accelerating the Turbulent Solar Wind: One Flux Tube at a Time
* GEO,AGS
* 12/15/2014,08/31/2019
* Steven Cranmer, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Ilia Roussev
* 08/31/2019
* USD 193,297.00

This three-year SHINE project aims to improve physical understanding of the
origin of the turbulent solar wind. The hot, ionized outer atmosphere of the Sun
is a unique laboratory for the study of magnetohydrodynamics (MHD) and plasma
physics, with ranges of parameters that are inaccessible on the Earth. However,
even after many years of investigation, the basic processes responsible for
heating the million-degree solar corona and accelerating the solar wind are
still not known. One primary reason for this lack of understanding is that the
Sun's magnetic field is so topologically complex, with spatial and temporal
scales that vary over many orders of magnitude. New observations are revealing
heretofore unavailable details, so the related theoretical models must similarly
improve in order to have any hope of providing deeper understanding of the
physics. This project will use novel combinations of observations and
theoretical models to put firm constraints on the connectivity between the
rapidly evolving magnetic flux tubes in the solar corona and various types of
MHD fluctuations that propagate through them into the heliosphere and dissipate
to heat the plasma. The results of this research project will be published in
widely available journals and presented at scientific conferences. In addition,
the PI will continue developing software tools and databases to encourage and
enable others in the solar-heliospheric community to make practical use of these
research results. The research agenda of this project supports the Strategic
Goals of the AGS Division in discovery, learning, diversity, and
interdisciplinary research.