* 1540863
* The fifth international workshop on Finance, Insurance, Probability and Statistics
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/2015,05/31/2016
* Rong Chen, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 05/31/2016
* USD 10,000.00

Rutgers University is hosting the 5-th workshop on Finance, Insurance,
Probability, and Statistics between June 25 to 27, 2015. With the current global
economic environment, the proliferation of complex insurance and risk management
products, and modern information technologies and data collection and processing
capability, the importance of using probability and statistics theory and
methods in discovering efficient financial instruments that accelerate instead
of damage economic development, in understanding and measuring risk, and in
develop effective insurance and risk management tools have never been greater.
The needed interdisciplinary research not only require close collaboration and
cross-fertilization between diverse academic fields in probability, statistics,
finance and actuary science, but also require close collaboration and deep
understanding between academic communities, industry experts, and government
regulators in a truly interdisciplinary approach. The IMS sponsored workshop
series on Finance, Probability and Statistics was started in 2011, under the
leadership of Professors Tze L. Lai (Stanford University), Philip Protter
(Columbia University) and Xin Guo (University of California-Berkeley). The goal
of the workshop was to bring together leading academic experts, practitioners
and junior researchers, which will highlight important contributions to
mathematical and computational finance made through the use of statistics and
probability. Rutgers University and Columbia University are co-hosting the 5-th
workshop in this series on June 25 to 27, 2015. The 2015 workshop has added
'insurance' to its scheme and has renamed the series IMS sponsored workshop on
Finance, Insurance, Probability and Statistics (IMS-FIPS 2015). It is also co-
sponsored by International Chinese Statistical Association, Korean International
Statistical Association, Global Association of Risk Professionals, Financial and
Risk Modeling Institute, Stanford University, and International Association for
Quantitative Finance. The conference has planned six plenary sessions, 13
invited sessions and 4 contributed sessions. The NSF award provides financial
support exclusively to junior faculty members and graduate students who may not
have funding to attend the conference. The funding supports travel, lodging and
registration fee to approximately 15 to 20 junior
participants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF supported conference allows exchange
of ideas, research results, potential problems among academic researchers and
industry practitioners on the current development of mathematics, probability
and statistics in the applications of finance and insurance. Such an exchange
promotes further research in the area and advance the theory, method and
application of probability and statistics related to finance and insurance. The
NSF supported conference has broad impacts in advancing the advance the theory,
method and application of probability and statistics related to finance and
insurance, hence enhancing the society's ability to maintain an efficient
financial market, to effectively manage risk and to promote economic
development. The fund is exclusively used to support junior and minority
researchers to attend the conference, who may not have funding otherwise to
participate the conference.