* 1540259
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The development of social bonds in male apes
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2018
* John Mitani, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 08/31/2018
* USD 25,200.00

Friendship is an integral part of being human, and intimate and cooperative
relationships are key to becoming an adult. Despite this, little is known about
the nature of friendship, its function, and when in our species' history it
arose. Answers to these questions may be found in our closest living relatives,
chimpanzees. Like humans, adult male chimpanzees form strong social bonds with
unrelated individuals, which confer benefits, including mutual aid. This project
will investigate how and why friendship develops for male chimpanzees, how it
relates to cooperation, competition, and the transition to adulthood, and when
in life friendships are forged. The findings may be useful for reconstructing
the evolutionary history of human friendship. This research will also employ two
novel methods to assess growth non-invasively in wild chimpanzees. Because body
size and growth are key life history variables, these methods will have far-
reaching importance for biological anthropology and related fields. This project
will also have social and conservation benefits. The investigators engage in
educational activities in rural Uganda and the United States. In addition, the
continued presence of researchers in Kibale National Park will help protect one
of the last tropical rainforests in all of East Africa, and one of the principal
strongholds of chimpanzees in this area. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
research will investigate the development of social bonds in male chimpanzees
living in an exceptionally large community at Ngogo, Kibale National Park,
Uganda. Behavioral observations will be carried out to assess when, why, and how
social bonds between male chimpanzees are formed. The investigators will also
assess the physical transition to adulthood. Digital photography, with parallel
lasers acting as a scale in the photo, will be used to measure limb lengths non-
invasively across a one-year period. In addition, collagen biomarkers will be
implemented for the first time to assess growth in wild chimpanzees. Through a
systematic study of adolescent male chimpanzee behavior, physiology, and
morphology, this research aims to elucidate the development of friendship and
the meaning of adulthood.