* 1541247
* RAPID: How Does Environmental Change Influence Landscape Evolution in the Pantanal Wetlands (Brazil)?
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2017
* Kevin Yeager, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Richard Yuretich
* 06/30/2017
* USD 49,999.00

A non-technical description of the project, which explains the project's
significance and importance&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Pantanal region of Brazil
is a vast domain of headwater wetlands that represents a little-documented
aspect in the evolution of river systems. These environments are extremely
important for the ecological health of tropical rivers. The environment is
sensitive to both climatic and environmental changes, but the degree to which
these will affect the region is unknown. This project will examine lake cores
collected from the region to establish a chronology of environmental change in
the region that documents the response of the system to climate and can help
evaluate the possible effects of human intervention. This is a collaborative
project that is co-funded by the NSF Office of International Science and
Engineering (OISE).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A technical description of the
project&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This RAPID project will examine how changing
environmental conditions can (1) impact surface processes (e.g., erosion and
weathering); and (2) influence landscape evolution in lowland tropical wetlands.
The field site is the little- studied Pantanal of central South America. The
Brazilian Pantanal offers an excellent example of extensive savanna-floodplain
wetland development along several coalescing megafans (large distributive
fluvial systems). The main objective of this research is to collect new lake
sediment cores from a large floodplain lake in the northern Pantanal. Lake
deposits are a potential archive of Quaternary landscape evolution, as the
dynamics of sediment composition and accumulation are sensitive to environmental
transitions. The project will use standard techniques to assess how the lake
accumulates sediment today, and use these data as a framework for interpreting
older material recovered from the lake cores.