* 1541620
* EarthCube RCN: Collaborative Research: Research Coordination Network for High-Performance Distributed Computing in the Polar Sciences
* GEO,ICER
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Lynn Yarmey, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 08/31/2018
* USD 44,472.00

One of the major current challenges with polar cyberinfrastructure is managing
and fully exploiting the volume of high-resolution commercial imagery now being
collected over the polar regions. This data can be used to understand the
changes in polar regions due to climate change and other processes. The
potential of global socio-economic costs of these impacts make it an urgent
priority to better understand polar systems. Understanding the mechanisms that
underlie polar climate change and the links between polar and global climate
systems requires a combination of field data, high-resolution observations from
satellites, airborne imagery, and computer model outputs. Computational
approaches have the potential to support faster and more fine-grained
integration and analysis of these and other data types, thus increasing the
efficiency of analyzing and understanding the complex processes. This project
will support advances in computing tools and techniques that will enable the
Polar Sciences Community to address significant challenges, both in the short
and long-term.

The impact of this project will be in the improvements in the ability to utilize
advanced cyberinfrastructure and high-performance distributed computing to
fundamentally alter the scale, sophistication and scope of polar science
problems that will be addressed. This project will not implement those changes
but will identify and lay the groundwork for such impact across the Polar
Sciences. The Project personnel will identify primary barriers to the uptake of
high-performance and distributed computing and will help alleviate them through
a combination of community based solutions and training. The project will also
produce a roadmap detailing a credible and effective way to meet the long-term
computing challenges faced by the Polar Science community and possible plans to
effectively address them. This project will establish mechanisms for community
engagement which include, gathering technical requirements for polar
cyberinfrastructure and supporting and training early career scientists and
graduate students.