* 1541771
* FEW: Food-Energy-Water infrastructure systems, engineering solutions and institutions
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2015,03/31/2018
* John Sabo, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Torgersen
* 03/31/2018
* USD 94,905.00

The Arizona State University will convene a workshop to advance an operational,
national-scale definition of food-energy-water (FEW) systems complexity and
outline a portfolio of basic research questions and programs needed to improve
efficiency and resilience across the components of the FEW systems on the local
and national scale. The workshop will create new synthetic knowledge that will
contribute to the definition of necessary research programs. Workshop activities
will provide a platform for collaboration and the creation of new teams to
pursue research across the food-energy-water challenge area. Participants
include faculty from universities in EPSCoR states and from minority serving
institutions such that workshop activities will strengthen science and
technology opportunities on these campuses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Food-Energy-Water (FEW) nexus is a rich area for basic research in
sustainability science that would harness and synthesize insights from multiple
fields, including complex systems, materials science, hydrology, civil,
electrical and environmental engineering, computation and social science. The
nexus contains myriad components covering technology, infrastructure or
institutions that need to be included in any problem resolution. The 3-day
workshop on the ASU campus will host approximately 60 attendees from multiple
universities, national labs, and federal/state agencies. The goal is to invite a
balance of participants representing food, water and energy with expertise in a
mix of subjects including infrastructure, environmental engineering and
institutions. This workshop will advance an operational, national-scale
definition of FEW systems and outline research challenges that contribute to
improved efficiency and resilience of national and regional FEW systems.