* 1541611
* 2015 Applied and Environmental Microbiology Gordon Research Conference, July 11-17, 2015, Mount Holyoke College, South Hadley, MA
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2015,12/31/2015
* Yuri Gorby, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 12/31/2015
* USD 15,000.00

This award will support student and/or postdoctoral participation in the Gordon
Research Conference in Applied and Environmental Microbiology (GRC-AEM). The
main goal of the conference is to present and discuss new, fundamental research
findings related to the activities of microorganisms. The GRC-AEM embraces the
philosophy that early dissemination of pioneering research into microbial
physiology and metabolism facilitates translation of fundamental knowledge into
practical application with contributions to ecosystems monitoring and
management, bioremediation, bioenergy production and other commercial uses.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This year the GRC-AEM has scheduled a series of topics
that directly serve national and global interests and align with the missions
put forth by the National Science Foundation. The scientific program illustrates
attention given to globally significant themes ranging from nitrogen and
phosphorous cycling in the ocean to the connection between gut microbiota and
human health. Presenters were invited based upon their scientific contributions
and their ongoing commitment to education and community outreach. This year the
GRC-AEM also introduces the Gordon Research Seminar for Applied and
Environmental Microbiology. The Gordon Research Seminar is a one and a half day
meeting that precedes the GRC and is designed to provide graduate students,
postdoctoral fellows and early career scientists the opportunity to present and
discuss recent research findings on topics related to environmental impact and
industrial application of microorganisms at the single cell and ecosystem
level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The GRC-AEM has been a forum for the consideration
of critical or even controversial issues that have led to the development of new
technologies. The conference has always had a diverse theme of topics, covering
the metabolic, physiologic and evolutionary diversity of microbial life, the
complex roles that microorganisms play in life on Earth, and the multitude of
applications of microbes in biotechnology, the food industry, agriculture, and
medicine. The Conference has a long record of stimulating advanced research in
industrial laboratories, colleges and universities, research foundations, and
government laboratories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This year's conference will cover
a diverse range of research areas including the ecophysiology of microbes,
molecular ecology, genomics, metagenomics and postgenomic technologies,
evolutionary diversity of microbial life, the complex roles that microorganisms
play in life on Earth, and the many important applications of microbes in
medicine, agriculture, biotechnology and the food industry. In continuing to
provide a forum for presentation and discussion of cutting edge science in
applied and environmental microbiology, the conference will hold scientific
sessions on a wide range of microbes and how they sustain and protect our
planet. The environments harboring microbes and how microbes adapt to these
environments and interact with each other will be considered; for example
biogeochemical cycles of carbon, nitrogen, sulfur and other elements in the
terrestrial and marine environment, interactions between microbes and animals
and between microbes and plants, virus-host interactions, microbial
communication and signaling will be covered. The importance of new methods in
microbial ecology, single cell technologies and the use of genomics and post-
genomics in environmental and industrial microbiology will be also be covered.
These topics, together with sessions on the use of microbes as fuel and
bioenergy sources, as sources of natural products and in bioremediation and
biocatalysis processes, will all provide platforms for established and newer
researchers in the field to discuss a wide variety of aspects of the fundamental
and applied aspects of environmental microbiology and to provide the driving
force for innovation and impetus in this vibrant research field.