* 1541869
* A Workshop for Integrative and Sustainable Food, Energy, and Water in Transitioning Urban Landscapes
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2015,03/31/2016
* Carol Miller, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 03/31/2016
* USD 28,840.00

1541869 (Miller). This workshop will: 1) provide a forum to consider
sustainability within the context of transitioning urban landscapes and
economies, and 2) lead to a deeper understanding of the integrative nature of
food, energy, and water systems within post-industrial urban environs (e.g.,
Detroit and Baltimore). Research on sustainability in maturing urban
environments, yet with potential for future growth and development, provides an
opportunity for setting and meeting sustainable goals. The pursuit of
environmental sustainability, especially in relation to food, energy, and water,
is less intuitive in aged and shrinking post-industrial urban settings despite
the prevalence of such cities within the global arena and there is a clear need
for research and education that supports such a mission in these areas. Given
their age, geographical locations, and complex social-ecological histories, the
examination and comparison of the Cities of Detroit and Baltimore provide a
unique opportunity for evaluation of research needs and opportunities in food-
energy-water sustainability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop will provide a
collaborative gathering of experts and practitioners with a specialized focus on
sustainability of food, energy, water systems in the context of transitioning
landscapes. The workshop will identify gaps in existing intellectual resources
and plan a path forward for resolution of those gaps.