* 1541450
* CC*DNI DIBBS: Merging Science and Cyberinfrastructure Pathways: The Whole Tale
* CSE,OAC
* 03/01/2016,02/28/2023
* Victoria Stodden, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Cooperative Agreement
* Alejandro Suarez
* 02/28/2023
* USD 5,887,240.00

Scholarly publications today are still mostly disconnected from the underlying
data and code used to produce the published results and findings, despite an
increasing recognition of the need to share all aspects of the research process.
As data become more open and transportable, a second layer of research output
has emerged, linking research publications to the associated data, possibly
along with its provenance. This trend is rapidly followed by a new third layer:
communicating the process of inquiry itself by sharing a complete computational
narrative that links method descriptions with executable code and data, thereby
introducing a new era of reproducible science and accelerated knowledge
discovery. In the Whole Tale (WT) project, all of these components are linked
and accessible from scholarly publications. The third layer is broad,
encompassing numerous research communities through science pathways (e.g., in
astronomy, life and earth sciences, materials science, social science), and
deep, using interconnected cyberinfrastructure pathways and shared technologies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to strengthen the second layer
of research output, and to build a robust third layer that integrates all parts
of the story, conveying the holistic experience of reproducible scientific
inquiry by (1) exposing existing cyberinfrastructure through popular frontends,
e.g., digital notebooks (IPython, Jupyter), traditional scripting environments,
and workflow systems; (2) developing the necessary 'software glue' for seamless
access to different backend capabilities, including from DataNet federations and
Data Infrastructure Building Blocks (DIBBs) projects; and (3) enhancing the
complete data-to-publication lifecycle by empowering scientists to create
computational narratives in their usual programming environments, enhanced with
new capabilities from the underlying cyberinfrastructure (e.g., identity
management, advanced data access and provenance APIs, and Digital Object
Identifier-based data publications). The technologies and interfaces will be
developed and stress-tested using a diverse set of data types, technical
frameworks, and early adopters across a range of science domains.