* 1541434
* CC*DNI Integration: Network Cyberinfrastructure (CI) for Biomedical Informatics Innovation
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Vinod Vokkarane, University of Massachusetts Lowell
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 08/31/2019
* USD 1,016,000.00

The application of large-scale cyberinfrastructure to applications such as bio-
informatics is resulting in the need to transport and store large quantities of
data. Due to the large scale and distributed nature of the biomedical data and
health information systems, developing a robust, distributed, and scalable
network cyberinfrastructure is a major focus for biomedical informatics research
innovation. Among the issues associated with such an infrastructure is the
transport of time or delay sensitive data, what is often described as Quality of
Service (QoS). Software Defined Network (SDN) technology has the potential for
providing QoS but it has not been integrated and demonstrated in end-to-end
systems. In addition to health care applications, an integrated system providing
QoS is applicable to real time instrument control, transport of real time video
and other time-sensitive applications.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project is
enhancing the current network infrastructure with an intelligent middleware
service that operates as a broker between the SDN controller and the end-user
application. The flexible co-scheduling middleware engine (referred to as
Flexware) will provide the capability to dynamically configure a network to best
support the varied nature of biomedical inputs. Flexware combines several
emerging intelligent network services, such as anycast, manycast, survivability,
and parallel transfers for large-scale biomedical data storage and retrieval
under a shared umbrella that provides an application with customized and
optimized network performance. This project will have significant impacts on
improving the quality of healthcare applications, providing clinical and
scientific researchers with flexible and efficient network resource allocation
for studying patient behavior, and training the next generation workforce in
medical and engineering fields.