* 1541105
* CRISP Type 2: Collaborative Research: Towards Resilient Smart Cities
* CSE,OAC
* 01/01/2016,09/30/2021
* Sheryl Ball, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 09/30/2021
* USD 1,100,000.00

Realizing the vision of truly smart cities is one of the most pressing technical
challenges of the coming decade. The success of this vision requires synergistic
integration of cyber-physical critical infrastructures (CIs) such as smart
transportation, wireless systems, water networks, and power grids into a unified
smart city. Such smart city CIs have significant resource dependence as they
share energy, computation, wireless spectrum, users and personnel, and economic
investments, and as such are prone to correlated failures due to day-to-day
operations, natural disasters, or malicious attacks. Protecting tomorrow's smart
cities from such failures requires instilling resiliency into the processes that
manage the city's common CI resources. Such processes must be able to adaptively
and optimally reallocate smart city resources to recover from failure. The goal
of this Critical Resilient Interdependent Infrastructure Systems and Processes
(CRISP) collaborative research project is to address this fundamental challenge
via a coordinated and interdisciplinary approach that relies on machine
learning, operations research, behavioral economics, and cognitive psychology to
lay the mathematical foundations of resilient smart cities. The anticipated
results will break new ground in the understanding of synergies between multiple
cyber-physical infrastructure and resilient resource management thus catalyzing
the global deployment of smart cities. This research will yield advances to the
areas of resilient systems, cyber-physical systems, security and privacy
engineering, game theory, computer and network science, behavioral economics,
data analytics, and psychology. The project will involve students from diverse
backgrounds across engineering, computer science, economics, and psychology that
will be trained on pertinent research issues related to smart cities and
resiliency. The project will also contribute to fostering trust between
residents and the various technological processes that are fundamental to the
operation of a smart city.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will introduce a
foundational, transformational, analytical framework for leveraging synergies
between a city's CIs to yield resilient resource management schemes cognizant of
both technological and human factors. By bringing together researchers from
interdisciplinary fields, this framework yields several advances: 1) Rigorous
mathematical tools for delineating the inter-dependencies between CIs via a
complementary mix of novel tools from graph theory, power indices, machine
learning, and random spatial models; 2) Resilient resource management mechanisms
that advance notions from frameworks such as behavioral game theory to enable
optimized management of shared CI resources in face of failures stemming from
agents of varying intelligence levels; 3) Behavioral models for characterizing
the trust relationships between the residents of a smart city and the CIs; 4)
Behavioral studies that provides guidelines on how to influence the users of the
CIs in such a way so as to improve the resiliency of the CIs; and 5) Large-scale
smart city simulators coupled with realistic experiments that will bridge the
gap between theory and practice. The insights from this project will apply to
the future scientific cyber-infrastructures that are likely to be interconnected
as well as interdependent. The simulator will be a software artifact that would
be a useful component of a scientific cyberinfrastructure aimed at understanding
(for example) smart cities.