* 1541440
* CC*DNI Networking Infrastructure: Texas Woman's University Science Research Network
* CSE,OAC
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2017
* Robert Placido, Texas Woman's University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 12/31/2017
* USD 498,542.00

Texas Woman's University (TWU) is committed to establishing a dedicated science
research network (SRN) for faculty and student researchers, with access to
worldwide resources to enrich scientific discovery. In conjunction with TWU's
intensive focus on funded, research-active faculty in the sciences, health
sciences and technical areas, the SRN is essential to meeting the data-intensive
requirements for a growing number of disciplines. Key academic programs include,
but are not limited to, physical therapy, nursing telehealth, informatics,
computer science, biology, chemistry and nutrition. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TWU's
plan is to construct and support a 10 Gbps SRN for researchers to effectively
use and share large data sets. The SRN plan has 10 Gbps connectivity to TWU's
regional area network, "Lonestar Education and Research Network", providing TWU
researchers access to Internet2. Such capability is necessary for many faculty
and students needing significantly more bandwidth. For example, TWU's recent
development of an informatics program touches multiple disciplines, particularly
in health informatics where study questions include hospital reaction time,
improved patient care, viral preparedness, and health care outcome
modeling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Additionally, this project provides enhanced
research and educational opportunities to a diverse TWU student body, consisting
of 87% women, 19% African American and greater than 25% Latino - TWU is
designated as a Hispanic-serving institution. Thus, this project unquestionably
furthers TWU's efforts to engage women and minorities in important research
opportunities across critical STEM and health care fields. Recognition of
underrepresentation of women and minorities in technical arenas is longstanding.