* 1541256
* Joint NSF/ERA-CAPS: INTREPID - INvestigating TRiticeae EPIgenomes for Domestication
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2019
* Robert Martienssen, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Clifford Weil
* 05/31/2019
* USD 1,453,176.00

PI: W. Richard McCombie (Cold Spring Harbor
Laboratory)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CoPI: Robert Martienssen (Cold Spring Harbor
Laboratory) &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ERA-CAPS Collaborators: Anthony Hall
(University of Liverpool, Liverpool, United Kingdom), Klaus Mayer (Helmholtz-
Zentrum Muenchen, Munich, Germany), and Michael Bevan (John Innes Centre,
Norwich, United Kingdom)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Wheat is one of the major food
crops in the world and specifically in the United States. This project will take
a comprehensive approach to define the epigenome of bread wheat, the functional
consequences of epigenetic modifications, how the genome is re-shaped,
stabilized and inherited in newly formed hybrids, and how the environment may
influence patterns of epigenetic modification. These are fundamentally important
questions in biology and are necessary for understanding trait variation in
wheat hybrids. It is anticipated that this project will have broad impacts
across three specific themes. The first of these relates to food security. Food
security is an ever-increasing challenge in the face of factors such as
urbanization and world population growth. One factor that significantly affects
agricultural yields of bread wheat is the epigenetic regulation of high-yielding
hybrid lines. A better understanding of this process will help others understand
the basic processes involved in the creation and stabilization of hybrid lines
and thus improve the efficiency at which they can be derived and contribute to
food security. The second broad area where the work will have significant
impacts is in the area of climate change. Understanding how changing climate
affects epigenetic regulation of an important crop genome will likely have broad
implications for the understanding of how agricultural yields will be challenged
and can be modified to respond to changing climate. Lastly the project will have
broad impact in the area of enhancing scientific education and understanding.
Rapidly advancing science and technology presents a challenge in conveying a
general understanding of that technology and the science behind it to the
general public. This project will be used as a platform to better explain
science to the general public using different and new educational tools. In
addition to the training of students, the project will provide summer
international exchange research training for graduate students associated with
the US-EU consortium.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Wheat is a polyploid arising from
recent hybridization of goat grass (Aegilops tauschii, DD) with wild tetraploid
emmer wheat (Triticum dicoccoides, AABB) to form hexaploid bread wheat (Triticum
aestivum AABBDD). This process of hybridization is critical to achieving the
high yields produced by modern wheat varieties. However, much is not understood
about this process particularly in terms of how epigenetics regulates which
parental line is expressed within the agriculturally significant hybrids. This
project will generate information about the epigenetic regulation of the bread
wheat genome and its role in the stabilization of the component genomes within
the hybrids. One aim is to understand how epigenetic variation alters gene
expression in hybrid wheat by identifying how epigenetic traits or epigenetic
marks are set during hybridization in the formation of new wheat strains and how
these are maintained in stable wheat hybrids to allow for high agricultural
yields. It is the expectation that this project will provide a much better
understanding of the molecular mechanisms related to epigenetics that are
involved in the creation and stabilization of high-yielding hybrid wheat
strains. All data produced will be freely and continuously shared within the
consortium. Specifically, all datasets will be accessible through the iPlant
Collaborative and European Bioinformatics Institute (EBI) as well as through
publicly available data repositories including GenBank.