* 1541888
* Workshop on Food-Energy-Water Nexus Issues in Energy
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2015,01/31/2016
* Sonia Kreidenweis, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 01/31/2016
* USD 59,643.00

1541888 (Reardon). This workshop addresses Food-Energy-Water (FEW) nexus
challenges in energy. Discussions will cover FEW issues in two key energy
sectors, unconventional oil and gas production, and biofuels production, before
expanding out to evaluate general research needs related to sustainable energy.
The workshop participants will include basic researchers and those with in-the-
field experience so that the issues identified are of practical significance.
Both technical and social science perspectives are incorporated in the agenda.

The challenge of providing food, energy, and water in the future is
characterized by a complex, dynamic network of interactions. Solutions to these
nexus problems must therefore evolve from a systems-level understanding.
Numerous FEW issues are encountered in energy, including competition for water
between food and energy conversion, energy industry impacts on water quality for
food production, and competition for resources (land, nutrients, and water)
between biofuel and food production. Addressing these nexus issues is essential
for moving toward sustainable energy. The workshop will include expertise and
viewpoints from across the nation and will engage subject experts in a focused
discussion of the state of understanding of the multidimensional FEW challenges
in energy; current tools derived from physical science, technology, and social
science for addressing these challenges; and identification of needed research
and development.