* 1541937
* 2015 Ecological and Evolutionary Genomics Conference: Using Biodiversity to Explore Biocomplexity; University of New England, Biddeford, ME; July 12-17, 2015
* BIO,DBI
* 05/15/2015,04/30/2016
* Michael Herman, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 04/30/2016
* USD 31,800.00

How organisms and ecosystems respond to changing environments remains an
important question of basic and applied research. This award will provide travel
support for students and faculty to the 2015 Ecological and Evolutionary
Genomics Gordon Research Conference (EEG GRC). EEG is a new but growing field
with central importance to major scientific questions and emerging problems
facing humanity. EEG brings together disparate disciplines and utilizes
biological diversity to understand complex processes. The EEG GRC is the
premiere meeting of this field, and brings together leaders, rising stars,
postdocs, and graduate students in an intimate highly interactive environment,
which is a hallmark of GRC meetings. The theme of this meeting is "Using
Biodiversity to Explore Biocomplexity", which emphasizes how genome science is
being expanded from traditional "model" species to encompass biologically
diverse organisms, and how this can be used to advance our understanding of the
complicated relationships between organisms and the environment. A major goal of
this work is to broaden participation at the EEG GRC. This will be achieved
through recruitment of students and faculty from groups usually underrepresented
in science, providing registration and travel costs for ten individuals that
will increase diversity among the participants. In addition to broadening
participation, the proposal will fund travel and registration costs for speakers
presenting advances in computational and genomic approaches to previously not
well-studied organisms and ecosystems, and funds for students and young
investigators who are driving this research. Results from this EEG GRC will
advance a better understanding of the relationships between biodiversity and
biocomplexity, and will impact society by increasing the understanding of how
organisms adapt to changing environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual
merit of the EEG GRC is to address the unique computational challenges presented
by the genomic analyses of diverse organisms requiring the development of new
tools, databases and algorithms to help the understanding of biodiversity. Funds
will be used to cover the travel costs for seven speakers in two symposia,
"Advances in Computational and Genomic Approaches in Non-Model Organisms", and
"Networks: From Genes to Ecosystems", and support for four individuals to be
selected from submitted abstracts in the "Young Investigators: Advances in
Ecological and Evolutionary Genomics" symposium. The broader impacts include the
major goal of facilitating efforts to broaden participation at the EEG GRC. This
will be achieved through recruitment efforts using a variety of mechanisms that
will seek to bring the EEG GRC to the attention of students and faculty from
groups underrepresented in science and provide registration and travel costs for
ten of these individuals. Funds will also be used to support the participation
of two outstanding High School educators with records in science outreach and
curriculum development who can bring this cutting edge research to the high
school classroom.