* 1541407
* CC*DNI Networking Infrastructure: Campus Research Network - High Bandwidth Private Network Path for Research Data from Experiment to Analysis and Back Again at USF
* CSE,OAC
* 01/01/2016,06/30/2019
* Joseph Walton, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 06/30/2019
* USD 495,645.00

The University of South Florida (USF) is building a Campus Research Network
(CRN) to provide campus research laboratories high-speed connectivity to
centralized USF High Performance Computing (HPC) facilities to facilitate
scientific data-driven experimental work and to enable the analysis of extremely
large data sets. The CRN is a dedicated 100 Gb/s Science DMZ connecting the USF
Health Informatics Institute, the Neurophysiological Laboratory, and the
Auditory &amp; Speech Sciences Laboratory to central USF HPC resources. High
performance data transfer nodes (capable of sustaining over 100 Gb/s read/write
from/to disk throughput) are installed near the HPC resources as well as the
laboratories to facilitate high-speed data transfers, allowing for data
transferred to the cluster for analysis to be immediately available to all
compute nodes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The new CRN promises to accelerate the
development of innovative, data-driven experimental techniques using near real-
time feedback based on the analysis of large experimental data sets to alter
experimental and treatment conditions and/or medical device settings to provide
a better understanding of age-related effects on brain function as well as
enabling the development of brain-controlled sharing devices. The CRN also
advances the understanding of diabetes and rare diseases by providing the
bandwidth required to transfer the extremely large data sets curated by the
Health Informatics Institute to the central USF HPC cluster. This project lays a
foundation for connecting multiple Tampa-area USF campuses to the Florida Lambda
Rail (and Internet2) at 100 Gb/s, allowing for state-wide, national, and
international collaborations.