* 1541176
* Coalition of Hispanic, African and Native Americans for the Next Generation of Engineers and Scientists (CHANGES) Organizational Workshop
* ENG,EEC
* 06/15/2015,07/31/2017
* Ashanti Johnson, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* James Moore
* 07/31/2017
* USD 49,997.00

CHANGES is a Coalition of Hispanic, African and Native Americans for the Next
Generation of Engineers and Scientists. This unique coalition has the potential
to dramatically change the way its constituent organizations function with
respect to national level activities that support broadening participation. With
fifteen current member organizations, CHANGES has brought together many of the
professional societies that target diverse populations to convene a workshop,
hosted by the University of Texas at Arlington, during spring 2015. The workshop
will facilitate the creation of a strategic plan for broadening participation at
the national level, involving the membership of each of the organizations. A
core set of strategic initiatives aimed at leveraging the collective membership
to positively impact the STEM workforce, research, and educational communities
on a national scale. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed activity will advance
our knowledge with respect to how this coalition can advance broadening
participation efforts. While this type of coalition has been attempted in the
past, it failed to gain traction and subsequently disbanded before even really
getting started. The workshop and related efforts will: 1) solidify the
partnership of CHANGES member organizations to maximize the collective influence
for broadening participation in STEM; 2) improve the understanding of partner
organizations' programs in order to better coordinate and complement these
programs (by taking advantage of other strengths and goals of the individual
organizations and enhancing the collective agenda of CHANGES), and 3) identify a
core set of strategic activities aimed at leveraging the collective membership
of CHANGES to broaden participation and inclusivity in the STEM workforce,
research, policy, and educational communities - on a national level. Ultimately,
the project will produce a broader understanding of how professional
organizations that focus on under-represented populations can effectively
collaborate to make a significant impact on the diversity of the STEM national
workforce.