* 1541876
* FEW: A Workshop to Identify Interdisciplinary Data Science Approaches and Challenges to Enhance Understanding of Interactions of Food Systems and Water Systems
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2017
* Shashi Shekhar, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 05/31/2017
* USD 50,000.00

In coming decades, the world population is projected to grow significantly
increasing the demand for food, water, energy, and other resources. Furthermore,
these resource challenges may be amplified due to climate change, urbanization,
and the interdependent and interconnected nature of food, energy, and other
resources. Furthermore, these resource challenges may be amplified due to
environmental changes, urbanization, and the interdependent and interconnected
nature of food, energy and water (FEW) systems, which were traditionally
analyzed and planned independently. Such piece-meal approaches (e.g., bio-fuels)
to solving problems in one system (e.g., energy) have led to unanticipated
problems (e.g., increase in food prices) in other systems. The goal of the nexus
FEW security approach is to reduce such surprises by understanding, appreciating
and visualizing the interconnections and interdependencies in the FEW system of
systems at local, regional and global levels. However, the nexus approach for
sustainable management of global resources faces significant challenges due to
differences in data collection protocols, data representation standards, access
to complete data and data analysis tools. In addition, the FEW system of systems
provides major challenges and opportunities for novel data science research.
Although data science analysis methods extensively applied to large and
complicated systems, such as social networks, data science efforts in complex
physical systems (e.g., system of FEW systems) have been far more meager. Given
FEW systems' rich data-driven history, there is a tremendous opportunity to
systematically integrate novel large-scale data analysis methods with the
physical, experiential, process oriented, and even conceptual knowledge that the
broad climate, water, and energy research communities have developed. In
addition, data science methods need to account for dependence between models,
variables, locations and seasons (of food, energy and water systems) to reduce
the risk of yielding misleading results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is a
tremendous need to significantly advance data science and realize the promise of
the nexus approach to meet societal challenges in the face of population growth,
urbanization and climate change. The proposed workshop will gather thought
leaders from both data science and the relevant areas of system of food, water,
and energy systems. This workshop will use both FEW nexus pull and data science
technology push discussions to identify data science challenges in
understanding, appreciating and visualizing the FEW systems. The first two
successive sessions will explore these opposing directions. The second day will
identify FEW inspired data science grand challenges in a synthesis session.
Specifically, the goal of this workshop will be to create a vision of how data
driven methods could make a significant contribution to understanding
interactions between FEW systems and what research is needed to realize that
vision. This proposal provides a detailed schedule of milestone and tasks
including this team's resume for leading visioning workshops. The proposed
workshop will facilitate and enable interdisciplinary partnerships between data
scientists and FEW nexus researchers from academia, industry and federal
agencies to develop innovative, interdisciplinary research approaches enhancing
the understanding, appreciation, and visualization of the interactions between
FEW systems. It has potential to formulate next generation data science research
agenda towards better understanding, appreciation and visualization of the
interactions and interdependencies among FEW systems. Workshop report will be
included in reading lists of graduate courses on data science in Ph.D. to
integrate the results in education. The report will also be used in professional
graduate data science degrees for workforce training. A key goal will be to
diversify participation across career stages, under-represented groups,
geographies, and disciplines (e.g., machine learning, data mining, geo-spatial
analytics, and nexus of food, water and energy systems).