* 1541057
* EarthCube IA: Collaborative Proposal: Integrated GeoScience Observatory
* GEO,ICER
* 09/01/2015,12/31/2017
* Russell Cosgrove, SRI International
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 12/31/2017
* USD 517,718.00

The habitability of planet Earth depends on a complex interaction between
interior regions, solid surface, oceans, atmosphere, near-earth space
environment, and Sun. Yet, study of this Sun-Earth system is traditionally
broken up into separate geoscience disciplines, so that progress can be made by
scientists working in reasonably-sized communities that share a common language
and base of knowledge. To broach the bigger question of the interaction of the
subsystems studied by the separate communities, it is necessary to overcome the
barriers of communication posed by different observational instruments, software
tools for interpreting data, and modeling methods. In answer to this challenge,
the Integrated Geoscience Observatory is a pilot project that creates an online
platform for integrating data and associated software tools contributed by
separate geoscience research communities, into a unified toolset that brings
them together. The vision is to expand the individual domains of geoscience
research toward study of the whole Sun-Earth system, and in so doing to uncover
the system level effects critical to the habitability of planet Earth.

EarthCube aims to develop a framework for assisting researchers in understanding
the Earth system. This systems science challenge is recognized in the Decadal
Survey in Solar and Space Physics [2012], with the conclusion "Data from diverse
space- and ground-based instruments need to be routinely combined in order to
maximize their multi-scale potential." The Integrated Geoscience Observatory is
a pilot project that explores realization of this vision by focusing on the
limited context of geospace research. The observatory creates an integrated
package of software tools contributed by researchers with specific capabilities,
and designed to enable integration of diverse observational data. Features of
the toolkit include: (A) linking diverse data sets from multiple data
repositories and automatically mapping them to a common user-specified
coordinate grid; (B) implementing the well-known Assimilative Mapping of
Ionospheric Electrodynamics (AMIE) procedure for assimilation of this data to
yield a global picture; and (C) utilization of the EarthCube building blocks
GeoSoft, for communicating ontology, and GeoDataspace, for attributing credit to
contributors through publication of processed data. The toolset can be accessed
and used either through a web-based computing environment, or through download
packages for local installation, with a nearly seamless transition between the
two.