* 1541820
* FEW: EAGER: Biomass-derived Porous Polymers to Remove Organic Pollutants From Agriculture and Wastewater Impacted Water Resources
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* William Dichtel, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 08/31/2018
* USD 250,000.00

With this EAGER award, the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program of the
Division of Chemistry is funding Professors William Dichtel and Damian Helbling
of Cornell University to develop a porous polymer derived from cornstarch that
rapidly removes organic pollutants from water. The first polymer derived from
this approach shows rapid pollutant uptake and can be regenerated and reused
under more mild conditions than activated carbons. The project focuses on
studying the fundamental processes by which contaminants bind to the polymer at
environmentally relevant concentrations as well as further improving the
polymer's properties. In this way, it addresses critical issues associated with
water contamination that represents an important challenge relevant to the food-
energy-water nexus. The broader impacts of the work include the societal benefit
of new water purification technologies as well as a planned effort to remove
pesticides from water sources contaminated by agricultural runoff in a
developing country.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on new porous
polymers based on cyclodextrin monomers. Preliminary experiments demonstrated
the promise of this approach but focused on relatively high concentrations of
target pollutants. The removal of a larger number of organic micropollutants are
being evaluated at environmentally relevant concentrations. Kinetic and
thermodynamic binding parameters for the removal of individual compounds and
compound mixtures by the cyclodextrin polymer are being compared to those of
various activated carbons. These studies inform parallel efforts to change the
polymer structure to vary its uptake properties and improve its surface area and
control particle size. Finally, a sustainability analysis of the monomers and
manufacture of the polymer is underway, so as to evaluate the inputs associated
with manufacturing this material as an additional metric of its potential
utility.