* 1541738
* RAPID: Russia Panel Survey 2015
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2016
* Henry Hale, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 08/31/2016
* USD 199,832.00

This study reinterviews a nationally representative sample of Russian citizens
who were first surveyed in spring 2012 about their political, economic, and
social views in order to understand a very important transformation in Russian
public opinion. Shortly after pro-European Union protesters ousted Russian-
backed Ukrainian President Viktor Yanukovych in February 2014, Russia stunned
the international community by annexing Ukraine's Crimean peninsula and began
backing a fierce insurgency that soon gained control over significant parts of
Ukraine's industrial Donbas region. The Russian public rallied to support
President Vladimir Putin, whose approval ratings skyrocketed and have remained
high. This study will shed new light on three major puzzles: (1) What exactly
underlies the massive "rally-around-the-leader" effect that we observe in
Russia? (2) Why has the economic crisis that followed Crimea's annexation not
led to a significant reduction in this rallying effect? (3) Why have the
battlefield costs of the ongoing Russian-backed insurgency in Ukraine not led to
a decline in Putin's popular support? The results will help policymakers and a
broader public better understand the international behavior of Russia, a country
with which the US has had frequent misunderstandings and one of only a few
countries able to project significant power worldwide. In particular, it will
help us better understand the ways in which Russia's public opinion might
constrain or encourage different kinds of behavior in the international
arena.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Each of these puzzles reflects important questions
for social science that this study will address. The opportunity to reinterview
the very same citizens first interviewed in 2012 will enable us to explore which
categories of people are the most likely to join a rallying effect and which are
not. While rallying effects have been observed in many countries that engage in
international conflict, very few other studies have been able to interview the
same people both before and after. This will facilitate understanding more
precisely what facilitates such rallying effects. The durability of this
rallying effect despite economic crisis will enable us to better understand
conditions under which people are willing to sacrifice economic gain for
national pride or some other value. Prominent prior studies in many countries
(not just Russia) have often found that presidential popularity tracks tightly
with economic performance, making it particularly interesting to investigate why
this pattern has failed to hold in Russia during at least the year since the
Crimea crisis began even though it had held strongly before. The fact that
battlefield costs have not dented presidential popularity since the start of the
crisis will facilitate a better understanding of how people understand their
country's participation in conflict, including what might be important effects
from mass media such as state-controlled media or the Internet.