* 1541242
* CC*DNI Networking Infrastructure: Data Driven Network Infrastructure Upgrade for Lamar University Research
* CSE,OAC
* 02/15/2016,01/31/2018
* Lawrence Osborne, Lamar University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 01/31/2018
* USD 376,917.00

Lamar University is introducing a Science DMZ designed to efficiently achieve
higher levels of performance, reliability and predictability for critical STEM
science research projects and address next generation big data research needs.
The proposed cyber infrastructure provides connectivity to state and national
high performance computing facilities, including those supported through the
NSF/XSEDE program, from multiple research locations across campus. Lamar
University faculty research includes, but is not limited to, biology, chemistry,
environmental science, electronic systems, biomedical diagnostics, natural
disasters, engineering, and high performance computing and data analysis.

The dedicated Science DMZ provides transformative capability for both research
and educational programs by interconnecting research intensive areas on campus
to one another through a 10G fiber backbone while removing obstacles to
efficient data flows between research laboratories and external collaborative
computational and analytical facilities. The new design provides multiple
10Gbps-routed ports, DMZ switches for link consolidation and aggregation, a high
performance data transfer node, and a Perfsonar node for performance monitoring
and testing. In addition, the optical fiber network is upgraded to single-mode
fiber connections for research-intensive areas along with distribution and
access layer switching to provide 10G capacity.

The new network also provides broader impact benefits to graduate and
undergraduate students by incorporating project design and operation into
classroom lecture, student engagement in intensive computational and data driven
research and independent student research efforts.