* 1541330
* CC*DNI Networking Infrastructure: Enabling Multi-Campus, Data-Driven Science and Engineering through a 10Gb FAU DMZ
* CSE,OAC
* 03/15/2016,02/28/2019
* Gregg Fields, Florida Atlantic University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 02/28/2019
* USD 498,006.00

Florida Atlantic University is installing intra- and inter-campus networking
facilities to establish a 10-gigabit regional DMZ for research computing that
supports data-intensive research and education in science and engineering. The
DMZ establishes high-performance data pathways among multiple campuses and
research partners and addresses critical performance bottlenecks on the critical
path to the sustained growth of data-intensive science and engineering at
Florida Atlantic University. The DMZ supports collaborative research and
education activities across Florida Atlantic's campuses, strengthens its
connections to statewide research computing resources, and solidifies new ties
to regional partners. The merit of the project lies in the research and training
activities that the DMZ enables. The benefits of the infrastructure span
disciplines, including computer science, civil engineering, mechanical
engineering, medicine, chemistry, genomics, ocean engineering, and marine
science; in areas that include big data research and training, transportation
logistics, nanomaterials, biomarker analysis, computational chemistry, marine
mammal classification, and undersea communication. The new DMZ enables Florida
Atlantic University to more effectively engage in data-intensive science and
engineering activities that are critical in sustaining the nation's positions of
technological and economic leadership.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The DMZ separates
Florida Atlantic's research network from its academic and administrative
infrastructure to support congestion-free network transfers among researchers
working across multiple campuses in an increasingly data-intensive research
environment. The infrastructure establishes three types of connections: (i) The
DMZ connects three of Florida Atlantic?s campuses, linking its main campus in
Boca Raton to its Jupiter and Harbor Branch Oceanographic campuses in Jupiter
and Fort Pierce, respectively. The infrastructure federates access to data
centers resident at each campus and provides bridge access to those resources.
(ii) The infrastructure extends the science and engineering DMZ to Florida's
Scripps Research Institute and the Max Planck Institute for Neuroscience,
building on new institutional agreements between the two research giants and
Florida Atlantic, focused on collaborations headquartered in Jupiter. (iii)
Finally, the infrastructure links all five sites to computation and storage
capabilities provided through the Sunshine State Education and Research
Computing Alliance (SSERCA) via Florida Atlantic's existing link to the Florida
Lambda Rail. In aggregate, the networking infrastructure provides high-speed
data pathways among distributed research teams, as well as to computational and
storage resources on each campus and the broader community of Sunshine State
Education &amp; Research Computing Alliance (SSERCA) institutions.