* 1541396
* CC*DNI Engineer: Leading the Way for Research Computing at Syracuse University and Beyond
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Duncan Brown, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 08/31/2018
* USD 396,098.00

Investment in campus cyberinfrastructure (CI) is essential to answering many of
the most fundamental questions in science and engineering. Syracuse University
has created a campus CI engineer position to provide the technical expertise and
leadership to realize the potential of existing investments in CI and to guide
strategy for future investments for research and education. Science drivers for
the campus CI engineer come from a diverse range of projects including,
gravitational-wave astronomy, biological physics, theoretical condensed matter
physics, computational fluid dynamics, high-energy physics, Earth sciences, soft
matter physics, and biomedical and chemical engineering. By allowing Syracuse
researchers to better use CI, including research computing clouds, identity
management services, networking, high-throughput computing, and high-performance
computing, both on and off campus, the CI engineer allows Syracuse University
researchers to advance scientific discovery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Syracuse
University's campus cyberinfrastructure serves as an important resource for
education of undergraduate and graduate students. An essential part of the CI
engineer's responsibilities is lowering the barriers to access to CI resources
for beginning researchers. The CI engineer's activities extend beyond engagement
with the Syracuse campus, leading Syracuse University's engagement with the
national cyberinfrastructure community, and collaborating broadly across
campuses on shared goals.