* 1541669
* CAP: Building a Cyberlearning Research Program: An Early Career Symposium; November 3 and 4, 2015; Indianapolis, Indiana
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2015,12/31/2016
* Fei Gao, Bowling Green State University
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 12/31/2016
* USD 26,432.00

The Cyberlearning and Future Learning Technologies Program funds efforts that
will help envision the next generation of learning technologies and advance what
we know about how people learn in technology-rich environments. Capacity-
building (CAP) projects increase the ability of researchers to understand how
such technology should be designed and used in the future and supports new
capacity in allowing researchers to answer questions about how people learn, how
to foster or assess learning, and/or how to design for learning. This project
funds a training and mentorship workshop for doctoral students and early career
faculty in the field of Instructional Design and Technology to learn about
Cyberlearning research community at the main instructional design
conference.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Annual Meeting of the Association for
Education Communications and Technology (AECT) provides a forum for interchange
of ideas around designing technological support for learning and training. Its
Early Career Symposia provide an avenue for early career scholars to receive
mentoring from established researchers. This project supports travel for
advanced graduate students and new faculty from U.S. universities to attend the
Annual Meeting and Early Career Symposium. Sessions during the Symposium are
designed to help collaborators imagine forward-looking and viable technology-
oriented research agendas, identify the types of collaborators who complement
their strengths, and identify the funding agencies and programs that might
support their work. An important goal of the Symposium is to add to the
community of researchers interested in ways that technology can transform
teaching and learning. This activity supports the mission of NSF to train more
advanced professionals in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics
education. This conference is one among many that researchers in the
cyberlearning community regularly attend. Mentors come from the AECT community
as well as from the learning sciences community. The plan for this year's
workshop is informed by feedback from attendees at previous AECT Early Career
Symposia.