* 1541428
* CC*DNI Campus Design: Western New Mexico University's Small Campus Cyberinfrastructure Grant
* CSE,OAC
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2017
* Jose Herrera, Western New Mexico University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 12/31/2017
* USD 349,751.00

Western New Mexico University (WNMU) is constructing a robust, faster and more
contemporary fiber network that supports research and educational initiatives.
The enhanced network allows for 10Gbps speeds between research-intensive network
segments for internal transfers, and provides critical redundant fiber paths for
the WNMU network. The network enhances the regional research capacity and
contributes to improving data sharing capabilities needed by emerging research
initiatives at WNMU. These projects include examining variables that affect
retention of at risk STEM students and helping STEM students participate in
biology and chemistry research projects that require technologically modern
online tools. The network improvements also increase capacity and enable the
network to scale up to meet WNMU's evolving bandwidth needs. By removing old
multimode fiber, WNMU is taking the foundational steps of establishing the
essential infrastructure to competitively contribute to more complex and
scalable projects, such as the Science DMZ.

WNMU has long-standing collaborations with other educational institutions and
these collaborations are leveraged fully in this project; WNMU's partner, CHECS-
Net (New Mexico's multi-institutional collaboration for sharing technology,
expertise, and pricing information), provides guidance and experience. Moreover,
as a rural, open-enrollment, Hispanic Serving Institution (HSI) with a mission
to serve students who are considered "at risk," the network is providing these
students access and practice with contemporary science skills enhanced by
practicing with modern cybertools and cyberinfrastructure. The changes are
providing these students the opportunity for them to effectively contribute to
the scientific capital and workforce needs of the region.