* 1541384
* CC*DNI Integration (Area 4): Application Aware Software-Defined Networks for Secure Cloud Services (SecureCloud)
* CSE,OAC
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2018
* Bill Thirsk, Marist College
* Continuing Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 12/31/2018
* USD 690,730.00

The Application-Aware, Software-Defined Networks for Secure Cloud Services
(SecureCloud) project designs and builds an innovative cyberinfrastructure for
cloud computing networks and enhancing data security without degrading network
performance. SecureCloud is a response to the growth of new, highly
sophisticated cybersecurity threats that have accompanied the emergence of cloud
computing and placed national cybersecurity infrastructure at risk. Cyber
attacks are responsible for a range of recent problems ranging from theft of
personal information and interfering with financial transactions to threatening
national security and government operations.

SecureCloud is studying 1) how to minimize the impact of multi-component malware
infiltration and 2) how to improve threat visibility and response time. The
project develops, tests, and deploys a fully automated security system that is
implemented throughout the cloud infrastructure. The system is prototyped in a
software-defined networking (SDN) test bed at Marist College, and first deployed
into production across regional and New York State-wide networks. SecureCloud
uses SDN to dynamically re-provision network resources in response to impending
attacks. The infrastructure includes control of virtual network functions such
as virtual router/firewall combinations, traffic flow segregation in
metropolitan area networks, and integration of threat intelligence from other
data sources using network traffic analytics. The overarching goals are to 1)
enable new network functionality to protect networks from malware and denial of
service attacks; 2) improve visibility and response time to security threats, 3)
quarantine infected computers, and 4) contribute new open source software to the
community for integration with a wide range of applications.