* 1541939
* Workshop: Building Better Futures-Junior Scholar Support for the 2015 Annual Meeting of The Society for the Study of Nanoscience and Emerging Technologies (October 18-21, 2015)
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2015,12/31/2015
* Diana Bowman, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 12/31/2015
* USD 24,895.00

General Audience Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is to support a
workshop, the seventh annual meeting of the Society for the Study of Nanoscience
and Emerging Technologies (S.NET). The meeting will take place in Montréal,
Québec, Canada, on 18-21 October 2015. It will be held in conjunction with the
Knowledge Network on the Ethical, Environmental, Economic, Legal and Social
issues regarding Nanotechnology Network. The funds will be used to enable
participation of students, postdoctoral researchers, junior scholars and
independent scholars who have minimal travel and lodging funds to attend, and
fully participate in, the 2015 S.NET meeting in Montréal.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;S.NET is an
international scholarly organization devoted to furthering critical and diverse
analyses of technoscientific research and development in various fields. It
includes a wide range of academic and professional communities, and strives to
incorporate a correspondingly broad spectrum of disciplinary perspectives and
methodologies into its scholarly activities. The award will support the
professional development of junior science and technology studies scholars, as
well as students and researchers from underrepresented groups. More generally,
it will encourage the production of scholarship of significant and practical
value to multiple important societal activities, including the critical
advancement of a wide range of scientific and technological inquiries,
innovative approaches to product development and sustainable marketization, and,
consequently, insurance of the near-term well-being and longer-term survival and
enrichment of humanity.