* 1541215
* CC*DNI DIBBs: Data Analysis and Management Building Blocks for Multi-Campus Cyberinfrastructure through Cloud Federation
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2021
* Richard Wolski, Cornell University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Amy Walton
* 09/30/2021
* USD 8,229,079.00

The ability to aggregate, share, and analyze important large data sets while
optimizing time-to-science is essential to support multi-disciplinary and multi-
institutional data-driven discovery. This project is deploying a federated cloud
computing system in New York State and California comprised of data
infrastructure building blocks designed to support scientists requiring flexible
workflows and analysis tools for large-scale data sets. Data challenges from
seven different communities-earth and atmospheric sciences, finance, chemistry,
astronomy, civil engineering, genomics, and food science-are being addressed
using a rich set of open source software, optimized frameworks, and cloud usage
modalities. The federated cloud is operating at Cornell University (project
lead) and at partner sites at the University at Buffalo and the University of
California, Santa Barbara. The project team is supporting multi-disciplinary
research groups with over forty global collaborators and documenting science use
cases. The broader goal of this project is to develop a federated cloud model
that encourages and rewards institutions for sharing large-scale data analysis
resources that can be expanded internally with common, incremental building
blocks and externally through meaningful collaborations with other institutions,
public clouds, and NSF cloud resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project
documentation and webinars feature best practices and include how to create
Virtual Machine instances, run at federated sites, burst to Amazon Web Services,
and access, move, and store large-scale data. A new tool for cloud metrics is
being built into Open XDMoD (XD Net Metrics on Demand) that features QBETS
(Queue Bounds Estimation from Time Series) statistics to enable users to make
online forecasts of future performance and allocation level availability as well
as to predict when to burst from federation resources. A new allocations and
accounting model allows institutional administrators to track utilization across
federated sites and use this data as an exchange mechanism. These tools provide
a better understanding of how the sharing of data infrastructure building block
capacity across institutional boundaries can create wider science and
engineering collaborations and increase data sharing in a scalable and
sustainable way.