* 1541353
* CC*DNI Instrument: High-Bandwidth Network Connectivity for Remote Sensing Research
* CSE,OAC
* 11/01/2015,10/31/2019
* Michael Zink, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 10/31/2019
* USD 163,028.00

Scientific instruments can produce vast amounts of data. Besides capturing and
storing data, it is important to give the global research community fast access
to this data. In the case of remote sensing instruments like Doppler weather
radar the challenges such instruments face in terms of connecting them to high-
bandwidth networks is the fact that they have to be placed outside the lab at
locations that are well suited for their sensing tasks, which are often not
close to high-bandwidth networking infrastructure. For example, a radar is
ideally placed at a location that is free of any obstructions such that it can
scan the atmosphere with as little interference as possible.

The overarching goal of this project is to improve research that focuses on
remote sensing by providing researchers the ability to transmit high-bandwidth
time-series or spectral data, and analog signals via radio over fiber, in real
time from sensors to remote storage and computing. The project improves
connectivity from an on-campus tower hosting radar and other atmospheric sensors
to the UMass Amherst computer network. A fiber connection is established between
the tower and the main campus network with local storage capacity increases to 8
TB at the tower. This integration permits several new modes of real time data
analysis for weather system research and allows for both more data to be
captured and for more timely access to data.

Improving atmospheric observations has significant impacts on weather modeling
in general and weather warning and prediction in particular. Thus this project
has the potential to support applications that increase the safety and security
of US communities and the nation as a whole. In addition, this campus network
infrastructure opens new opportunities for students. For example, students can
obtain live analog or high-bandwidth time series radar data to experiment with.