* 1541401
* CC*DNI Network Infrastructure: Indiana University Regional Campus Network Infrastructure to Support Scientific Research and Education
* CSE,OAC
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2018
* Jerry Hinnefeld, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 12/31/2018
* USD 450,468.00

Indiana University's regional campuses enroll over 30,000 students each year,
addressing the need to provide higher education opportunities to citizens of
Indiana who for various reasons are unable to enroll at IU's core campuses in
Bloomington and Indianapolis. These students are often non-traditional and/or
first generation college students. The resources needed to provide high-quality
scientific research and educational opportunities are concentrated at IUís
Bloomington and Indianapolis core campuses. High-performance and high-speed data
networks are required to support transfer of large data sets and access to
national scientific resource for each of IU's regional campuses. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This project improves the campus cyberinfrastructure at Indiana
Universityís five regional campuses and one center in three areas to support
unmet research needs: 1) it increases IU regional campusesí connection to
Internet2 and other national research networks from 1Gbps to 10Gbps via
Indiana's regional network provider, I-Light; 2) it increases the connection
speed from IUís network core to the IU regional campuses to 10Gbps; and 3) the
installed Data Transfer Nodes at the five larger regional campuses ensures
unimpeded 10Gbps-capable high-performance data transfer for researchers across
the regional and national research networks. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;These
infrastructure improvements significantly benefit all researchers and students
in STEM disciplines at Indiana University regional campuses. They address
immediate research needs for projects in physics, geology, chemistry,
biochemistry, and biology, including work at the National Superconducting
Cyclotron Laboratory (NSCL). &lt;br/&gt;Further, they enable future regional
research projects heretofore impossible due to slow data transfer rates, thereby
forwarding the advancement of science.