* 1541844
* FEW: Conference on Environmental Change, Migration, and the Resilience of Regional Food, Water, and Energy Systems
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2015,12/31/2018
* Elena Irwin, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 12/31/2018
* USD 97,496.00

The interdependence among regional-scale food, energy, and water (FEW) systems
has gained increasing attention, especially in light of recent natural disasters
that have revealed hidden vulnerabilities in the infrastructures and resources
supporting basic community needs. Much scientific effort has been focused on
understanding and improving the resilience of FEW systems in particularly
vulnerable regions, such as arid regions or areas of extreme poverty.
Significantly less work has been done to understand the resilience of FEW
systems in areas of water abundance, such as the U.S. Midwest, a highly
productive agricultural region. As extreme weather events, coastal flooding, and
droughts occur more frequently, less vulnerable regions like the U.S. Midwest
will likely experience increases in population driven in part by the in-
migration of environmentally displaced people. Such migration will increase
stresses on regional FEW systems by altering the socio-economic distribution of
residents and the industrial mix of the region, increasing competition among
various land uses, and exacerbating impacts on water quality and other ecosystem
services. Given the importance of FEW systems in water-abundant regions,
understanding the interactions between direct (local climate variability) and
indirect (in-migration) effects of climate change on such regions is
critical.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ohio State University will host a two-day
conference to investigate the implications of the direct and indirect effects of
climate and environmental change on the resilience of regional FEW systems in
non-coastal, water-abundant regions such as the U.S. Midwest. The conference
will focus on identifying the basic science and theory that are needed to
further understanding of regional FEW systems with an emphasis on the dynamic
coupling among biophysical, economic, and social systems. The objective of the
conference is to identify priorities for interdisciplinary research that will
help to enhance the resilience and adaptive capacity of regions where existing
FEW system infrastructures and resources may experience significant pressures
due to such migrations coupled with the direct effects of increasing temperature
and climate variability. Sessions are planned to examine (a) migration as an
adaptive response to climate change; (b) natural and built capital for ecosystem
services and resilience; (c) technology and innovation for resource resilience;
(d) social and cultural aspects of community resilience; and (e) models and data
for regional sustainability and resilience assessment. The conference will
engage approximately 50 prominent researchers and representatives of local,
state, and federal government agencies, in a series of facilitated, interactive
sessions to discuss the current state of knowledge and the needs of decision-
makers who are grappling with the challenges of capacity-building under
increasing constraints. The results of the conference will be synthesized into a
roadmap for the research needed to develop resilient and sustainable FEW systems
in regions that may become critically important to a growing and shifting human
population.