* 1541335
* CC*DNI DIBBs: Multi-Institutional Open Storage Research InfraStructure (MI-OSiRIS)
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2021
* Douglas Swany, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Cooperative Agreement
* Amy Walton
* 08/31/2021
* USD 4,958,411.00

Every field of science generates and utilizes data in various forms: programs,
instrument outputs, papers, notes, applications, simulations, video and audio
recordings, etc. The continuing and evolving challenge for scientists is how to
store, access, transform, manage and curate the variety of data required to
effectively conduct their research, and transparently share it with other
researchers across campus or at other institutions. The MI-OSiRIS project is
addressing that challenge by combining an object-based software-defined storage
technology with a monitored, managed network infrastructure to give scientists a
distributed storage system which allows them to directly access their data from
resources at any of the participating institutions. Furthermore, MI-OSiRIS
utilizes each institution's existing authentication infrastructure to allow
scientists to provide controlled access to their data across all participating
institutions. By documenting and publishing designs, code, and operational
experiences, the MI-OSiRIS project serves as a replicable model for supporting
data-intensive, multi-institutional science
collaborations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;MI-OSiRIS implements a Ceph-based petabyte-
scale distributed data system by deploying object storage servers at each
participating institution, connecting them via a managed high speed network, and
distributing data based on the specific requirements of each science research
domain. Ceph, an open source storage platform, supports multiple data access
methods (traditional file, native object, and block), and allows configuration
of access, replication, distribution, and integrity on a per-research-domain
basis. MI-OSiRIS is built on low-cost, commodity hardware and can deliver
gigabytes per second of I/O bandwidth per node. The system monitors and manages
the network paths between its partner institutions, science users and Ceph
storage components by strategically deploying perfSONAR instances which have
been augmented with a network discovery, monitoring, and management platform
(Network Management Abstraction Layer). Globus Online servers provide access to
data from outside MI-OSiRIS. In addition, MI-OSiRIS leverages Ceph's software
defined storage aspects to automate some data-lifecycle management tasks.