* 1541009
* EarthCube IA: Magnetosphere-Ionosphere-Atmosphere Coupling
* GEO,RISE
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2018
* Gary Bust, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 08/31/2018
* USD 697,809.00

The scientific work proposed here will carry out the research and development
necessary to create a new, unique set of high-latitude electro-dynamic,
ionospheric-thermospheric-­&amp;#8208;magnetospheric cyberbased tools and
products that will be available to the entire geosciences community. In
combination, the data products from this project will allow the derivation of a
first principle electromagnetic solution for the auroral ionosphere. Project
will develop a new set of data resources for the geoscience community in the
form of a complete electromagnetic solution of the auroral ionosphere and will
focus on developing the ?Data Infrastructure for Communities? component of the
EarthCube Integrative Activities. The project will thus allow access to not only
the desired derived products, but also provide support for other modeling
efforts by allowing access to the database of input data and intermediary
products. The system will also be designed to be extensible, allowing additional
data products and models to be integrated into the system. The system will fully
support existing standards that are used in the broader geosciences community
such as the Data Access Protocol (DAP).The research undertaken in this proposal
will enable transformative research in two otherwise separated fields:
magnetosphere-­&amp;#8208;ionosphere and neutral atmosphere.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The MIAC project addresses the complete electromagnetic
solution of the auroral ionosphere, through an implementation that matches the
goals of the EarthCube program. The intent is to develop a series of
interlocking web services that provide access to the underlying MIAC datasets
(AMPERE, SuperDARN and SuperMAG), that apply the science algorithms to derive
the desired electro-­ dynamic products, and provide data translation and
visualization services. This mesh of services will be open to the community and
will allow users to access any individual service. The research undertaken in
this project will enable transformative research in two otherwise separated
fields: magnetosphere-­&amp;#8208;ionosphere and neutral atmosphere through a)
the high-­&amp;#8208;latitude electro-­&amp;#8208;dynamics couple to the
incoming solar wind and magnetosphere along magnetic field lines; b) the changes
in the ionosphere and thermosphere at high latitudes provide changes to the
conductivities throughout the polar region, which then effect the dynamics in
the magnetosphere; c) the electrodynamic energy and momentum inputs get
deposited in the upper atmosphere and launch neutral winds that then couple to
ion velocities and transport compositional changes to the mid and low latitudes;
d) the winds and composition couple to waves impinging from the lower
atmosphere.