* 1541469
* CC*DNI Networking Infrastructure: Research and Innovation Network for Portland State University
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Heejun Chang, Portland State University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 08/31/2018
* USD 500,000.00

Modern research in biological, physical, earth, and environmental sciences is
dependent on computational methodologies that require high-speed data transfer
within and between research institutions. This award provides critical upgrades
to the Portland State University (PSU) network infrastructure required to
support big-data projects. PSU is committed to conducting cutting-edge
scientific research and to offering research opportunities for minorities and
underrepresented groups in the STEM disciplines through programs such as the
Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation, the McNair Scholars Program,
and a BUILD grant from the NIH. Students from these programs are placed directly
into active research labs. This project provides researchers opportunities to
conduct data-driven research with cutting edge network technology and
strengthens the diverse portfolio of research conducted at
PSU.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award implements the PSU campus Research And
Innovation Network (RAIN) infrastructure and the creation of a Science DMZ.
These upgrades eliminate current bottlenecks, provide the architecture required
to support future upgrades to 40Gbps and 100Gbps, and provide Software Defined
Networking (SDN) capability to support dynamic data workflows. RAIN provides
high bandwidth networking between research facilities in the Science Research
and Teaching Building, Cramer Hall, Engineering Building, and the Collaborative
Life Sciences Building shared with Oregon Health Sciences University and Oregon
State University research groups. The Science DMZ provides a friction-free path
to Oregon GigaPop and Internet2, as well as allowing broader use of Shibboleth
to support campus-bridging efforts to improve resource sharing between
researchers at PSU and their collaborators.