* 1541825
* Conference on Cross-Border Governance and Protection of Food-Energy-Water Systems Supported by International Watersheds
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2015,03/31/2016
* Robert Richardson, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 03/31/2016
* USD 90,971.00

The interdependent nature of food, energy, and water systems for social and
economic development pose an array of challenges, particularly under conditions
of varying abundance or scarcity of water. While water scarcity can place
tremendous stress on agricultural and energy production, conditions of water
abundance pose a different, but equally important, set of challenges. When water
resources are abundant, the lack of incentive for conservation can rapidly lead
to the degradation of the water or conflicts over competing uses. Most research
tends to focus on water scarce areas. This has resulted in an unintended
oversight of what may be happening in water abundant regions, where water
resources may not be valued, priced, or managed to ensure long-term
availability. The challenges of abundance become more even more difficult when
watersheds share multiple national borders and different systems of governance.
Each country may have unique policies that are country-based, driven by local
perceptions, and often disconnected from the logic of the ecosystem's structure
and function. These cross-border challenges are also linked to the food-energy-
water nexus, where food and energy production can simultaneously threaten water
sustainability and be threatened by degrading water resources.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding and addressing these challenges requires
synthesis, cross-national and cross-disciplinary approaches, and integrative
scientific approaches. Michigan State University will host a conference that
brings together scholars with expertise in the water-food-energy nexus
challenges faced by water abundant regions requiring cross-national agreements
and information sharing. This conference will bring together scientists,
researchers and policy-makers from three regions of the world characterized by
recent pressures on what have been, until recently, abundant and relatively
unpolluted water resources: North America's Great Lakes (the largest freshwater
system on Earth, facing increasing pressure from agricultural runoff and
invasive species and by demands from drier regions of the U.S. and Canada); East
Africa's Great Lakes region (the largest lakes in Africa, facing rapid
eutrophication and diminishing productivity of its inland fisheries); and South
America's Amazon River (the largest river system on Earth, facing increasing
pressure from hydroelectric development and fisheries collapse). Participants
will explore stresses on the food-energy-water systems of these regions and
identify gaps in knowledge about cross-border governance of these systems. This
conference will specifically examine the connections between water resources and
energy production, contamination of water from food, fish, and energy
production, and the depletion of fresh water stocks resultant from human-
environment interactions related to food (e.g. irrigation) and energy production
(e.g. hydroelectric power).