* 1541025
* CRISP Type 2: Collaborative Research: Simulation-Based Hypothesis Testing of Socio-Technical Community Resilience Using Distributed Optimization and Natural Language Processing
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2015,02/28/2021
* Noah Smith, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 02/28/2021
* USD 1,224,929.00

Critical infrastructures, such as electric, manufacturing, and financial
systems, are key to the functioning of society and the health of communities.
The new knowledge from this project will improve the design and management of
critical infrastructure to build resilience in the face of minor disruptions and
large disasters. The project focuses on the social and technical links between
different types of critical infrastructure. The research provides insights into
the influence of social forces on critical infrastructure and the roles of
critical infrastructure in promoting a community's identity and well-being. The
knowledge and tools generated from this research inform strategies to improve
the functioning and operation of critical infrastructure in order to achieve
socially defined goals. Houston and Seattle area experts and decision makers
contribute to and evaluate project outcomes to ensure that resulting tools are
relevant to stakeholders concerned with increasing community resilience
capacity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research methods from civil engineering,
computer science, and social science combine to achieve the goals of the
project. Three primary goals of the research are to 1) systematically rethink
critical infrastructure as a web of social and technical systems, 2) build
computer simulation models to explore critical infrastructure performance after
major and minor disruptions, and 3) test hypotheses to appreciate how critical
infrastructure can improve resilience and support the diverse needs of
communities. The research team integrates qualitative and quantitative data to
construct the project's simulation models. The scholars compile and analyze
qualitative data about past critical infrastructure disruptions and disasters
from many text sources, such as social media, news stories, government
documents, and industry reports. They use new natural language processing (NLP)
methods analyze the text data in order to identify key variables describing
critical infrastructure and community resilience, as well as the relationships
among them. They collect quantitative and geographic data describing related
variables from existing sources, such as government and academic databases. They
elicit quantitative data also from experts using customized survey techniques
during facilitated workshops. They then use the results of the data analysis to
specify computer models that simulate the many events, resource exchanges, and
decisions that occur across multiple geographic scales after critical
infrastructure disruptions and disasters. Finally, the team devises techniques
to integrate and optimize the constructed computer models. This permits
efficient testing of hypotheses about the relationships between critical
infrastructure performance and community resilience.