* 1541655
* Conference on Balancing Technological and Institutional Solutions within Food-Energy-Water Systems
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2015,02/29/2016
* Stephanie Hampton, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 02/29/2016
* USD 44,953.00

Rapid human development has placed increasing stress on water, energy and
agricultural resources. This growing stress has strengthened interdependencies
between these sectors and intensified management complexity. A deeper
understanding of the integrated nature of food-energy-water (FEW) systems has
led to an increased awareness of how technological and institutional changes,
directed at increasing productivity or efficiency in one system, can impact the
economic, political and environmental security of the whole FEW system. The
introduction of inexpensive pumping technology, for example, can lead to short-
term gains in agricultural productivity but may quickly deplete groundwater
resources, especially in the absence of strong governance of groundwater
withdrawals, and undermine the security of the whole system. FEW management
issues also emerge from the complexity of managing the system to address
multiple interrelated and competing needs. Appropriate application of both
technological and institutional solutions to FEW system challenges is critical
to the successful management of each sector and across the system as a whole.
FEW system managers must know when and how technological innovations need to be
balanced with appropriate institutional change and vice versa. However, the
relationships between technological and institutional approaches to addressing
FEW system challenges and the ramifications of solution implementation across
all sectors are poorly understood.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Washington State
University will host a three day conference to examine technological and
institutional innovation within FEW system contexts and identify specific
knowledge gaps requiring further scientific study. This workshop will move
beyond understanding only the physical interdependencies within FEW systems;
instead it will seek to 1) identify factors driving both technological and
institutional innovations and their adoption, within and across FEW systems, and
2) characterize the implications of these interactions for policy and broader
institutional design. Participants will be drawn from academia, industry, and
government and will represent a diversity of disciplines, professions, and areas
of FEW expertise. The diversity of experts in this workshop will be one of its
primary strengths, fostering a synthesis of knowledge by creating an environment
where specialized perspectives and insights from individuals can be integrated
to better understand the couplings between technology and institutions across
FEW systems in general. To facilitate such an endeavor, best practices learned
from the National Center for Ecological Analysis and Synthesis and other
successful interdisciplinary synthesis efforts will be employed.