* 1541471
* CC*DNI Instrument:  High Performance Reliable Network Access to Mauna Loa Observatory Science Instruments
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Gwen Jacobs, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 08/31/2018
* USD 398,207.00

The project, "CC*DNI Instrument: High Performance Reliable Network Access to MLO
Science Instruments", addresses the problem of network limitations at the Mauna
Loa Observatory (MLO) located on the island of Hawaii in the Pacific ocean. The
site is owned and operated by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration, Earth System Research Laboratory Global Monitoring Division and
cooperatively used by the National Center for Atmospheric Research's High
Altitude Observatory and the Institute for Astronomy, a research organization of
the University of Hawaii (UH). A wide range of important science observation
data is produced by the various instruments located at MLO. Among this data is a
widely-used, 50+ year continuous record of atmospheric carbon dioxide levels at
Mauna Loa. Less well known are data that measure ozone levels in the upper
atmosphere, solar activity such as solar flares and coronal mass ejections,
young variable stars and mid-size, potentially hazardous asteroids. This data is
of national and global significance for policy and public safety and welfare
decisions in areas related to measuring and predicting global warming,
forecasting disruptions to communications and navigation caused by solar
transient events and detecting and predicting Earth impacts of mid-sized
asteroids.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Improvements to telescopes and instruments cause
volumes of science data produced to increase exponentially over time. Commercial
grade, licensed-spectrum wireless radio point-to-point network links are used to
solve the critical "last mile" problem of connecting the science instruments
located at MLO to the robust University of Hawaii (UH) network for transmission
to researchers in Hawaii, the United States and across the globe. The MLO
network supports a rapidly growing volume of data (&gt;1.5TB/day) originating
from instruments such as COSMO K- Coronagraph (KCor), Coronal Multi-channel
Polarimeter (CoMP), Precision Solar Photometric Telescope (PSPT), Very Young
Stellar Objects Survey (VYSOS), Asteroid Terrestrial-Impact Last Alert System
(ATLAS) and COSMO Chromospheric Magnetometer (ChroMag). Expected science results
made possible by these MLO network improvements include follow up observations
of Near Earth Objects, supernovae, gamma ray bursts, and young variable stars;
solar observations in real time for space weather forecasts and real-time
atmospheric monitoring. The broader impact of the science enabled is to build
and support global awareness of environmental and astronomy research, to enable
collaborative research with global partners and support the dissemination of
unique data sets of immense value to research communities, policy and decision
makers and the lay public.