* 1541663
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award: The Effect Of Culture Contact On Household And Community Organization
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2015,09/30/2017
* Ashley Schubert, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 09/30/2017
* USD 20,538.00

Under the guidance of Dr. Robin Beck, Ashley Schubert will investigate the
influence of cultural interaction on ancestral Cherokee communities in the
Appalachian Summit of North Carolina. It takes advantage of long term
archaeological data to examine a process of interactional caused change which
continues today in many parts of the world. The project will examine Native
American life during the late prehistoric period when some Appalachian
communities underwent a process of cultural transformation identified by
archaeologists as Mississippianization. The long process of Mississippianization
(AD 900-1500) that unfolded in many Native American communities across the
midwestern and southeastern United States is identified archaeologically by
similarities in artifact styles and community practices. How, then, did mountain
communities respond to Mississippian practices that they encountered? How does
the process of social integration or resistance play out in household activities
and in public contexts? Is change expressed differently at sites that experience
differing degrees of contact? Using recent excavations at a Pisgah village site
(the Cane River site) and analysis of previously excavated collections from this
site and from a mound and village center (the Garden Creek site), this research
will compare the archaeological assemblages and spatial organization of both
household and community activities across the central Appalachian Summit during
a time of major cultural transformation. The goals of this project are (1) to
investigate the extent to which Mississippian contact and exchange influenced
major Pisgah settlements and (2) to evaluate how these changes affected
community practice within the ecology of the Appalachian Summit. This research
has the potential to generate a more comprehensive picture of early
Mississippian emergence and interaction across a peripheral geopolitical region.
This will inform Mississippian studies across the Eastern Woodlands, as well as
provide greater insights into early complex pre-state formations at multiple
scales of social interaction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research on Pisgah
communities will have broader impacts on local community education, broader
collaboration among regional archaeologists, and participation and involvement
with descendant communities. Excavations behind a local middle school
facilitated an investment of the project into community education and
stewardship. By utilizing educational opportunities during excavation and making
use of existing archaeological collections, this project preserves the in situ
archaeological record while simultaneously acknowledging the collections curated
in nearby universities. This project has engaged other stakeholders, including
archaeologists from the Pisgah National Forest and the Eastern Band of the
Cherokee Indians, and facilitates a more robust understanding of the
archaeological record in western North Carolina while ensuring that results and
findings are shared with descendent communities. Results and data will be shared
through peer-reviewed publications and the online digital archive for
archaeological data, the Digital Archaeological Record (tDAR). Public outreach
will include instillation of a local museum exhibit and lectures given at local
museums and conferences.