* 1541814
* Interdisciplinary Antarctic Science Meeting; Loveland, CO; September 2015
* GEO,OPP
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2019
* Kathy Licht, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Michael E. Jackson
* 06/30/2019
* USD 51,279.00

This proposal will fund a three day workshop focused on the most recent
Antarctic research, with an emphasis on interdisciplinary Earth Sciences. The
workshop will be held September 20-22, 2015, which will be ideal timing for
Antarctic researchers to attend. In addition, it will immediately follow the
regular workshop for West Antarctic Ice Sheet researchers, held in the same
venue, thus allowing interdisciplinary interactions, and potentially minimizing
travel costs for participants. The timing might coincide with the release of the
upcoming NRC report on future Antarctic research priorities. The single-session
meeting will be guided by a seven-member interdisciplinary organizing committee
that will identify unifying session themes based on their knowledge of recent
research, and community interest. The scientific program will include invited
presentations by established and early career scientists, contributed
presentations, daily poster sessions and dedicated discussion time to promote
exchange of ideas. One longer term goal is to establish a regular forum for U.S.
Antarctic scientists to disseminate research results and engage in
interdisciplinary discussions. In advance of the anticipated Shackleton Glacier
logistics hub, the meeting would include a dedicated session to discuss
logistics in the overall context of NSF Polar Programs, and will inform the
community on the latest information from NSF and Antarctic Support Contract
staff.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The meeting will include a focus on basic Antarctic
Earth Science research, along with critical questions about Antarctica?s role in
the global environment that impact human welfare. The long term history of the
Antarctic ice sheets is crucial to understanding the controls on sea level and
global biogeochemical cycles. To facilitate more effective translation of
research findings, the meeting will also include a session on effective science
communication to help all researchers improve their engagement with the public.