* 1541508
* MATH:Conference:Translating Education Research into Classroom Practice
* EHR,DUE
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2016
* Lewis Ludwig, University of Colorado at Denver-Downtown Campus
* Standard Grant
* teri murphy
* 06/30/2016
* USD 49,999.00

A strong background in mathematics is expected of college graduates so that they
can thrive in the workforce as science, technology, engineering, mathematics
(STEM) professionals, and professionals in other technical and non-technical
fields, as well as citizens able to navigate the variety of information
available through the media and other sources. To this end, there have been
efforts in the mathematical sciences to improve the learning and teaching of
undergraduate mathematics. A body of research on learning and teaching now
exists that provides evidence pointing to effective strategies for teaching of
mathematics to college students. This project will host a workshop to bring
together experts in mathematics and mathematics education research to identify
and prioritize the most pressing evidence toward translating that research into
teaching practice and develop a guide to research-based pedagogical practices in
undergraduate mathematics teaching.

The Mathematical Association of America (MAA) is the largest professional
organization focused on undergraduate mathematics and is the leading source for
mathematics faculty professional development as well as resources for teaching
and learning undergraduate mathematics. Thus, the MAA is the natural and optimal
lead organization to produce a resource intended to infuse research-based
pedagogies into the teaching of undergraduate mathematics. The proposed workshop
will enable the MAA's Committee on Teaching Undergraduate Mathematics to bring
together experts from multiple communities into an immersive environment in
which they can focus on the work of identifying priority areas for the
envisioned guide. Outcomes of the workshop will include: (1) ascertaining
optimal pathway(s) for mathematicians and researchers in undergraduate
mathematics education to translate the education research into teaching
practice; (2) producing a document that describes, clarifies, and guides the
pathway(s) determined in the aforementioned outcome (1); and (3) identifying
gaps in the education research knowledge base and prioritizing those gaps into
future research agendas.