* 1541296
* CC*DNI Engineer: Enabling Research by Optimizing Cyberinfrastructure at NMSU and Beyond
* CSE,OAC
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2018
* Brook Milligan, New Mexico State University
* Continuing Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 12/31/2018
* USD 398,692.00

The Cyber Infrastructure Engineer (CI Engineer) is a new role at NMSU. This role
accelerates scientific discovery by bridging the gap between researchers, other
CI professionals, and institutional leadership. This role helps researchers
overcome technical barriers in areas like data acquisition, network throughput,
computational analysis, software management, and the storage/retrieval of
research data. To create sustainable and scalable solutions, the CI Engineer
leverages two central IT divisions (Networking and Computer Systems), and also
partners with faculty and graduate students within the various research
projects. These partnerships increase scientific computing skills across campus.
The CI Engineer role reports directly to the Chief Information Officer who has
established a greater priority for CI to support research at NMSU. Additionally
this new role is also uniquely positioned to give voice to research priorities
within the broader University IT Governance process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NMSU's
Cyber Infrastructure Engineer role is expected to expand and improve CI
solutions for faculty researchers, graduate students, and undergraduates. This
includes greater access to high performance computing, open science grid
computing, high throughput networks, and better data storage/retrieval systems.
CI solutions both on and off campus will be used to accelerate scientific
discovery. Moreover, the University expects the CI Engineer to help broaden the
general understanding of best practices for research-focused cyber
infrastructure by participating in the growing community of CI engineers at
universities throughout the country, and sharing CI solutions with other
education institutions in New Mexico.