* 1541364
* CC*DNI Networking Infrastructure: Washington University Research Network (WURN)
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2017
* Roch Guerin, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 09/30/2017
* USD 475,590.00

New discoveries in science and engineering research in the 21st century arise
from the creation, analysis and communication of staggering amounts of data.
Researchers at Washington University in St. Louis (WUSTL) are at the forefront
of Big Data research and thus continually pushing the university's network
infrastructure. The creation of the Washington University Research Network is a
critical step forward in providing the necessary hardware and software
capabilities to enable Petabytes of data to move into and out of university
systems. However, the capability of genomics, imaging and planetary science (to
name a few) instruments to generate new data is increasing exponentially and can
quickly outpace the capacity of any network. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
creates a Software Defined Network (SDN) based distributed Science DMZ network
on the WUSTL campus across three existing data centers linked to each other and
research and education wide area network connections via dedicated 40Gbps
hardware in the existing campus core. The key contribution of this project is to
deploy new techniques in SDN that optimize the way existing and future capacity
is utilized, while also ensuring the necessary monitoring oversight needed for
predictable and secure operation. By scheduling large data transfers and
intelligently partitioning and sharing network capacity, the project's goal is
to ensure near optimal utilization of resources and provide a cost effective
solution. Network programmability is also leveraged to dynamically instantiate
monitoring resources that oversee the security of those transfers.