* 1541136
* CRISP Type 1/Collaborative Research: Population-Infrastructure Nexus: A Heterogeneous Flow-based Approach for Responding to Disruptions in Interdependent Infrastructure Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2018
* Guangqing Chi, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Chen
* 12/31/2018
* USD 150,000.00

Reducing the instability and vulnerability of our nation's critical and complex
population-infrastructure system is essential for a more efficient, resilient,
and vital society. Recent catastrophic events, such as the Northeast Blackout of
2003 and Hurricane Sandy in 2012, shut down or interrupted essential and
interdependent components of our national infrastructure, such as electric
networks, fuel supplies, and transportation systems. This vulnerability is
exacerbated by changing population dynamics. Those dynamics impose serious
challenges to the capacity of the individual components of our infrastructure
system to efficiently respond to both moderate disturbances and extreme events.
The ultimate goal of this Critical Resilient Interdependent Infrastructure
Systems and Processes (CRISP) collaborative research project is to increase the
resilience of the interdependent population-infrastructure system during
disturbances of various magnitudes (including operational uncertainties and
disastrous disruptions). This research will benefit infrastructure system
planning and operations by developing "smart communities/cities" where multiple
stakeholders can work together to promote mutual interests. This research will
also develop innovative educational and training modules to give future
generations and practitioners a vision of efficient, resilient and socially
vital built environments and means to approach it. Overall, the outcome of this
interdisciplinary research will benefit society through energy savings and
economic enhancement by means of better infrastructure design and communication
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The purpose of this interdisciplinary research is
to develop a distributed heterogeneous flow-based modeling framework to quantify
the critical and complex interdependence of multiple infrastructure systems and
population groups. The framework will also assist in analyzing short-term
mobility behaviors and long-term social and demographic evolution of the
critical connection between population and infrastructure. These objectives will
be achieved by: 1) quantifying the interactions of different demographic groups
with multiple infrastructures, 2) characterizing infrastructure facilities in
several interconnected yet diverse systems, 3) modeling and optimizing the
interdependent population-infrastructure system in a self-organized distributed
system in which various infrastructure and population agents communicate on a
cyber-platform, and 4) analyzing the important theoretical properties of this
integrated model (e.g., system equilibrium and stability). This research makes
three key intellectual contributions. First, a heterogeneous-flow-based network
modeling method will define the dynamics and equilibria of several
interdependent infrastructure systems. Second, the infrastructure model in a
nexus with population characteristics allows examination of the two-way
interactions between heterogeneous infrastructure facilities and different
population groups. Third, this model will be integrated with a distributed
cyber-communication platform based on self-organized "swarm intelligence" to
create a realistic system in which multiple parties behave autonomously by
communicating their respective available information.