* 1541088
* EarthCube IA:  Digital Rocks Portal: a Sustainable Platform for Sharing, Translation, and Analysis of Volumetric Data of Porous Media
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Maria Esteva, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 08/31/2018
* USD 629,065.00

Recent advances in high-resolution imaging techniques have provided a wealth of
3D datasets that reveal the microstructure of rocks and soil. It is now possible
to conduct numerical experiments and construct detailed models to simulate
phenomena such as fluid flow or mechanical deformation in the pore spaces of
these materials. Popularly called digital rock physics, this research framework
can inform important decisions in environmental, civil and petroleum
engineering, as well as address key geological questions. Examples include:
containing the spread of toxins or harmful bacteria in watersheds; designing
safe dams; improving recovery of hydrocarbons, and understanding the history of
rock formation. Researchers, however, have trouble storing and sharing these
datasets due to their large sizes and the lack of standards to characterize
image types and associated information about them. This impedes scientific
cross-validation of the simulation approaches, and limits the development of
studies that span length scales from a micrometer (a millionth of a meter, the
size of individual pores and grains making up a rock) to a kilometer (the level
of a geological basin or aquifer). Studies spanning length scales are important
to characterize rock and flow properties at the kilometer scale that often
depend on complex processes on the micrometer scale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will continue the development of a sustainable, open and easy-to-use
repository called the Digital Rocks Portal (https://pep.tacc.utexas.edu/). The
portal will: a) organize the images and related experimental measurements of
diverse porous materials; b) improve access to porous media analysis results for
a wider community of geoscience and engineering researchers not necessarily
trained in computer science or data analysis; and c) enhance productivity,
scientific inquiry, and engineering decisions founded on a data-driven basis.
The portal will incorporate software tools and pipelines that make it easier for
researchers from EarthCube and beyond to organize, publish and reuse data, and
for educators to quickly visualize and illustrate concepts for a wide audience.
For data sustainability and continuous access, the portal is implemented within
the reliable High Performance Computing Infrastructure deployed and maintained
at the Texas Advanced Computing Center (TACC) at The University of Texas at
Austin, which is supported by The University of Texas System Research
Cyberinfrastructure (UTRC) initiative. We will coordinate development and data
integration with the High-Resolution X-ray Computed Tomography Facility at The
University of Texas at Austin (UTCT), one of the largest academic imaging
facilities in the nation. Finally, an important contribution will be the
development of a business model for sustaining long-term preservation of
important datasets obtained from research investments.