* 1541562
* RAPID:  The Impact of Racially Traumatic Stressful Events on African Americans' Psychological, Physiological and Political Responses
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2018
* Byron Orey, Jackson State University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 04/30/2018
* USD 170,880.00

General: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The purpose of this research is to investigate
the effect of intra-racial differences among blacks on their physiological,
psychological and political responses to Racially Traumatic Stressful Events
(RTSEs). RTSEs are based on analogues consisting of visual imagery of the
killings of unarmed blacks by police. The PI creates national model for
understanding the effects of black intra-racial attitudes on the political
attitudes and behaviors of African Americans. The PI creates two competing
frameworks to better explain the impact of traumatic events on physiological
responses by controlling for racial solidarity and negative racial attitudes and
beliefs. The research diminishes the biases associated with social desirability
responses found in explicit measures of the political responses of African
Americans. The research uses elite interviews, focus groups, a national survey
and a lab experiment to test the contention that the effects of racially
traumatic stressful events on political behavior are conditioned by in-group
racial and or ethnic attitudes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The purpose of
this research is to investigate the effect of intra-racial differences among
blacks on their physiological, psychological and political responses to Racially
Traumatic Stressful Events (RTSEs). RTSEs are based on analogues consisting of
visual imagery of the killings of unarmed blacks by police. A triangulation
method is employed to collect qualitative, survey and physiological data. The PI
creates two competing frameworks to better explain the impact of traumatic
events on physiological responses by controlling for racial solidarity and
negative racial attitudes and beliefs (linked fate versus intra-racial
difference). The research diminishes the biases associated with social
desirability responses found in explicit measures of the political responses of
African Americans. The research uses elite interviews, focus groups, a national
survey and a lab experiment to test the contention that the effects of racially
traumatic stressful events on political behavior are conditioned by in-group
racial and or ethnic attitudes. The specific aims are to: 1) explore whether the
response to RTSE are episodic or foundations of social and political movements;
2) collect elite interview and survey data to examine the impact of RTSEs on
psychological and political attitudes; 3) determine the impact of RTSEs on
physiological responses using an experimental research design and 4) explore
whether positive-and-negative explicit-and-implicit racial attitudes help to
mitigate or exacerbate the political attitudes and political behaviors of
African Americans.