* 1541272
* Systems of Lines: Applications of Algebraic Combinatorics
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* William Martin, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 05/31/2016
* USD 25,000.00

This NSF award supports a mathematical research workshop entitled "Systems of
Lines: Applications of Algebraic Combinatorics" to be held at Worcester
Polytechnic Institute from August 10, 2015 to August 14, 2015. This workshop
will bring together experts from around the world who study three subjects that
are not obviously related but have deep connections between them. The organizers
aim to foster cross-collaboration among mathematicians, computer scientists and
physicists in order to identify common problems, tools and techniques among
seemingly disparate applications of mathematics. Experts in algebraic
combinatorics apply tools from algebra, graph theory and optimization to study
error-correcting codes, spherical codes and highly regular designs for use in
statistics and computer science. Quantum information theorists face problems of
measuring and (approximately) replicating finite-dimensional quantum systems in
their work on quantum algorithms, quantum cryptography and quantum state
tomography. Signal processing experts employ compressive sensing to efficiently
reconstruct a sparse signal through undersampling in a carefully designed
manner. Data scientists now use ideas from compressive sensing for dimension
reduction and the efficient handling of very large data sets. The URL for this
workshop is http://users.wpi.edu/~martin/MEETINGS/WPILinesWorkshop.html&lt;br/&g
t;&lt;br/&gt;Beginning with the breakthrough work of Candes, Tao and Donoho in
2004, significant advances have been made over the past decade or so in the
reconstruction of sparse signals while sampling below the Nyquist-Shannon limit.
Beyond signal processing applications such as MRI, this theory has found new
utility in the handling of big data. Matrices with the restricted isometry
property (RIP) and random projections now enable effective dimension reduction
which greatly enhances our ability to make useful inferences from large-scale
data sets. Meanwhile, systems of lines play an important role in quantum
information theory where mutually unbiased bases (MUBs) and symmetric
informationally complete positive operator-valued measures (SIC-POVMs) promise
to provide optimal measurements for finite-dimensional quantum states.
Unfortunately, very little is known about how to construct these objects. All of
these applications can be couched in the language of algebraic combinatorics
where spherical codes and Grassmannian packings naturally arise in the theory of
association schemes, in algebraic coding theory and the study of graph
eigenvalues. By bringing people together from compressive sensing, quantum
information theory, and algebraic combinatorics, this workshop will enable the
application of tools and results from each area to the other and help identify
the outstanding problems common to all three subdisciplines.