* 1541472
* Workshop: Data and Imagery Analytics for Precision Medicine and Outreach of NSF Industry/University Cooperative Research Centers
* O/D,OISE
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2017
* Tajana Lucic, NOA Inc
* Standard Grant
* Anne Emig
* 08/31/2017
* USD 80,000.00

This workshop will provide a valuable opportunity for U.S. and Israeli experts
in the fields of clinical data mining, data analytics and precision medicine to
meet to discuss their respective research efforts and the potential for
partnerships. The goal of the workshop is to create mutually beneficial research
collaborations that will improve research efforts in computing for precision
medicine applications. The research collaborations that are formed will
potentially result in improvements in personalized medicine that can lead to
better medical outcomes for people in the U.S. and around the world. Connecting
top U.S. researchers in the academic and private sector with their counterparts
in Israel has strong potential to improve data analytics for precision medicine
applications, resulting in better analyses, more accurate diagnoses, more
effective treatments and improved therapeutic success rates.

The NSF has funded several Industry/University Cooperative Research Centers
(I/UCRCs) with focus on this area, notably the Center for Advanced Knowledge
Enablement (CAKE) and the Center for Hybrid Multicore Productivity Research
(CHMPR) whose members and affiliates will contribute the majority of the U.S.
participants to this meeting. Israeli participants will include primarily
researchers from the Technion (Israel Institute of Technology), Tel Aviv
University and representatives from Israeli businesses working in data analytics
and precision medicine applications, as well as Israeli government personnel
interested in encouraging pre-competitive, industry-supported research and
partnership with US researchers in these areas.

This meeting is timely and of strategic value because of the noted expertise of
Israeli researchers in the academic and industrial sector in both data analytics
and personalized medicine and because of the investments that Israel is making
in industry-relevant basic research. This meeting provides a tremendous
opportunity for new collaborations to be initiated which are likely to be of
tremendous value to advancing U.S. research efforts on information technologies
for precision medicine. In addition, new international partners may be recruited
to join U.S. I/UCRCs and new market opportunities will be discovered by the U.S.
I/UCRC members.