* 1541031
* EarthCube IA: Advancing netCDF-CF  for the Geoscience Community
* GEO,ICER
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Charles Zender, University Corporation For Atmospheric Res
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 08/31/2020
* USD 1,091,266.00

For a collection of scientific data to be useful to multiple independent
research groups, the collection must contain auxiliary information that
describes where and how the data were collected, the units of measurement used,
and other similar details. This auxiliary information, known as "metadata," is
crucial to allowing scientists to understand the physical and derived quantities
captured by the data. The Climate and Forecast (CF) metadata conventions for
netCDF (netCDF-CF) are currently used widely by weather forecasters, climate
scientists, and remote-sensing researchers to include metadata along with
scientific data, and numerous open source and commercial software tools have
been developed to explore and analyze data sets that use the conventions. This
project will work to extend the existing metadata conventions in ways that will
broaden the range of earth science domains whose data can be represented. By
broadening the applicability of an established convention, this effort seeks to
extend its benefits to related earth science domains and reduce the amount of
effort scientists must expend decoding and reformatting datasets created by
other research groups. This, in turn, will leave researchers more time for
analysis, leading to a better understanding of the physical processes the data
describe.

NetCDF-CF is a community-developed standard first released in 2003. Originally
designed to represent climate and forecast model output encoded in the netCDF
binary format, with the specific goal of facilitating comparison of output from
different models, the standard is now widely accepted in the climate, weather,
and remote-sensing research communities, but less so in other earth science
domains. This project will extend the standard to better represent a data set's
spatial extents, and to encompass earth science data sets not currently covered
by the conventions, including radar and more complex satellite data.
Additionally, the project will work to make netCDF-CF compatible with data
stored in modern data structures developed since the original creation of the
conventions. Since netCDF-CF is a community-based standard, the approach will be
to bring stakeholders from the existing CF community together with experts from
domains into which CF can logically be extended so they can work together to
design and prototype a series of enhancements, which will be submitted to the
larger community for consideration. The envisioned improvements will help
diverse research groups use the conventions to faithfully represent their data
in formats accessible using standard, widely-available software tools. This type
of cross-domain data interoperability has the potential to give rise to more
effective, integrated decisionmaking tools for a wide range of communities.