* 1541089
* CRISP Type 2/Collaborative Research: Probabilistic Resilience Assessment of Interdependent Systems (PRAISys)
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Diana Mitsova-Boneva, Florida Atlantic University
* Standard Grant
* Yueyue Fan
* 08/31/2020
* USD 354,793.00

After a disruptive extreme event, such as an earthquake or severe storm, the
socio-economic recovery of the affected region depends on the recovery of its
infrastructure systems. Lifelines, such as power and water distribution systems,
transportation networks, communication systems, and critical buildings have a
primary role in disaster response, management, and long-term recovery. The
failure to rapidly restore the services required for personal, social, and
commercial activities leads to continued socio-economic losses and progressive
depopulation. This collaborative project brings together scholars in Civil
Engineering, Systems Engineering, Computer Science, Economics, Urban Planning,
and Policy Making. Its purpose is to establish and demonstrate a comprehensive
framework that combines models of individual infrastructure systems with models
of their interdependencies for the assessment of interdependent infrastructure
system resilience for extreme events under uncertainty. The "PRAISys" platform
(Probabilistic Resilience Assessment of Interdependent Systems) will emphasize a
probabilistic approach that permeates all aspects of the models, including the
interdependencies. Some types of uncertainties that were not considered before
(e.g., the possibility of using contingency plans that provide services without
functioning infrastructure) will be classified; while mathematical and
computational tools will be devised to capture their characteristics. PRAISys
will enable better management and design of next generation infrastructure, more
resilient to extreme events and to component failures under normal conditions.
This will reduce the likelihood of extreme events becoming catastrophic in terms
of casualties and injuries, long-lasting socio-economic losses, and
environmental impact. The results of the research will be disseminated to the
public in various forms: through series of seminars for professionals and
administrators; by participating in Lehigh University's STAR academy program for
disadvantaged middle and high school students; through scientific publications
and presentation; and by curriculum development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
development, calibration, and validation of PRAISys will enable research on
stochastic interdependencies among infrastructure systems in the wake of an
extreme event. This requires advancements in several disciplines. For instance,
a new hybrid reliability model, which combines graph theory for network analysis
and classic system reliability to model the probabilistic dependencies among
infrastructures will be studied. The new concept of "uncertain dependencies,"
which are rigorously modeled and include "contingency plans" will be introduced.
Advancements in stochastic network optimization will be sought, to predict the
optimal strategies and to inform the disaster management. Social network data
will be used as an additional source of information on the recovery of a region,
in real time, mining public posts. A comprehensive decision framework will
combine the results of the simulation platform with expert opinions and surveys
to identify the importance of various aspects of recovery. Finally, new
techniques for the collection of large sets of data from utility companies,
local government and other authorities will be studied.