* 1541918
* EAGER: Manufacturing Interface Dominated Microstructures in Bulk Metal-Metal Composites for Ultra-High Strength and Formability
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/15/2015,02/28/2018
* Marko Knezevic, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Alexis Lewis
* 02/28/2018
* USD 139,747.00

Nanostructured multilayers - materials comprised of alternating layers of metal
with thicknesses of just a few nanometers - are a class of engineering materials
with unique properties. Fabricating these multilayers in bulk form has
significant processing challenges. Traditionally multilayer metallic multilayers
have been synthesized using techniques which can limit the total film thickness
to sub-millimeter levels, but recent research has demonstrated that bulk
quantities of nanostructured metallic multilayers can be manufactured by an
alternate process known as accumulative roll bonding. This EArly-concept Grants
for Exploratory Research (EAGER) award supports the fundamental research needed
for synthesis of magnesium-based nanostructured multilayers in bulk form through
the roll bonding process. These materials have many applications as lightweight
structural materials. Because magnesium alloys are 35 percent lighter than
aluminum alloys and 78 percent lighter than steel, the potential societal impact
and pay-offs of this research can be tremendous. Improvements in fuel efficiency
for transportation industry means lower operating temperatures, longer-lasting
components, and reduced greenhouse gas emissions. Driven by environmental
programs across the consumer electronics industry, magnesium meets the design
challenges that are instrumental to consumer electronics becoming lighter,
thinner, and more mobile.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The specific objectives of this
combined modeling and experimental research are to: a) fabricate new nano-
grained and phase interfaces-rich metal-metal (hexagonal close-packed magnesium
- body-centered cubic niobium or vanadium) composites in bulk form, b) establish
a fundamental understanding of the interface driven microstructure development
and microstructure-property relationships, and c) formulate and validate a set
of physics based models that enable fundamental understanding and can predict
behavior of such materials. Upon successful completion of this research, proof
of concept ability to process magnesium alloy nano-lamellar composite will be
demonstrated and the fundamental science behind refining the composite to nano-
scale and associated strength and formability enhancements will be determined.