* 1541489
* Collaborative Research: Contentious Land Change in the Eastern Amazon
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2014,12/31/2016
* Cynthia Simmons, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 12/31/2016
* USD 3,559.00

Land-change research has identified a number of factors that influence
deforestation and forest fragmentation, including fiscal incentives,
infrastructure development, migration, and household processes. This research
project will expand the explanatory power of land-change research by considering
a factor that has not been adequately studied, namely social processes stemming
from unequal access to land resources. The project's investigators will broaden
the concept of land-change agency or responsibility, often deployed uncritically
in land-change research, by considering social actions and reactions occurring
over decadal time periods and by actors who do not always behave in economically
"rational" ways. The researchers will develop a comprehensive perspective on
land change for southeastern Para state of northern Brazil, a laboratory and
battleground for myriad Amazonian development initiatives. To characterize land
change between 1984 and 2010, including deforestation, reforestation, and forest
patch dynamics, the researchers will employ remote sensing and landscape ecology
techniques. To examine the social process aspects of land change, especially
contention over land, they will conduct a thorough news media analysis covering
more than 5,000 news accounts of conflict. They will complement this archival
research with field interviews and intensive case-studies involving at least
five landowners and many local key informants. By mixing field interviews with
remote sensing and landscape ecology, the researchers will treat Amazonian land
change as an integrated system of processes, not just a singular process of
deforestation driven by "rational" economic decisions. The investigators expect
to find that properties that play host to contention displayed greater overall
deforestation and increased (or different) forest fragmentation patterns than
for properties that were not contested. The researchers will seek to ascertain
whether contention has led to a forest structure shift, creating a more complex
forest landscape with negative implications for the region's ecology.

This project will reframe land change in the study area as a process occurring
within a context of social contention, and it will shed light on how social
processes and multiple, sometimes simultaneous, land managers affect land
change. The project will help extend accepted theories and perspectives in land-
change science, specifically responding to recent calls for opening behavior-
based explanations of land change to the influences of social processes and
power relations. By evaluating the environmental implications of land conflict,
the project will shed light on how conflict could affect the contribution of
tropical deforestation to global climate change. It will provide new
perspectives for evaluating initiatives to reduce deforestation via the UN's
REDD program and have policy relevance in many other nations. By adopting an
active learning paradigm, students will study complex issues of societal import
in all their "real world" messiness in undergraduate courses in the U.S. and
Brazil.