* 1541631
* SOCIETY OF WETLAND SCIENTISTS DIVERSITY PROGRAM: UNDERGRADUATE MENTORING AT THE ANNUAL MEETING
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2015,07/31/2021
* Vanessa Lougheed, Society of Wetland Scientists
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Blood
* 07/31/2021
* USD 93,500.00

The Society of Wetland Scientists (SWS) Diversity Mentoring Program for
Undergraduates is in its twelfth year. This new award will support the
participation in the program of seven undergraduate students from
underrepresented groups each year for the next five years. It will also continue
a productive and synergistic collaboration between the much larger minority
undergraduate mentoring program of the Ecological Society of America (ESA
SEEDS); two participants from SWS are invited to attend the annual ESA SEEDS
leadership meeting and bring their experiences back to the SWS annual meeting.
SWS recognizes the need to reach out to underrepresented groups to provide
intellectual opportunities for personal growth and development. Attendance at
scientific meetings can often provide the intellectual spark, along with the
opportunities to make contacts for the future, that encourage undergraduate
students to continue their professional education beyond the Bachelors level. A
major goal of the program is to open doors for these students. Diversification
of ecologically oriented professionals is expected to promote better science and
science applications as a result of the melding of more diverse perspectives. A
summary of participant survey results will be published in the SWS bulletin,
Wetland Science and Practice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Attendance of a select group
of undergraduate students from underrepresented groups at an annual scientific
meeting provides each student with a perspective on and exposure to the breadth
and depth of wetland science and personal contacts that cannot be obtained at a
single academic home institution. Because SWS spans academic, government, and
private consulting sectors, students are able to tailor their daily activities
to their personal interests in wetland science. A variety of strategies (social
events, field trips, mentoring, career development workshops, leadership
training through ESA SEEDS) will provide guidance and boost self-assurance for
award recipients that will lead to greater ethnic and racial diversification of
the ecological sciences. By pairing undergraduate students with graduate student
or faculty mentors at both the SWS and ESA annual meetings and by providing
workshops and symposia oriented toward career development, SWS is fostering
active participation and discussion, key components of advancing science and
promoting the intellectual development of undergraduate students.