* 1541079
* RII Track-1: Louisiana Consortium for Innovation in Manufacturing and Materials (CIMM)
* O/D,OIA
* 08/01/2015,06/30/2021
* Michael Khonsari, Louisiana Board of Regents
* Cooperative Agreement
* Jeanne Small
* 06/30/2021
* USD 20,000,000.00

Non-technical Description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Louisiana Consortium for
Innovation in Manufacturing and Materials (CIMM) will leverage existing and new
statewide investments in experimental facilities, computational resources, and
intellectual assets toward advanced manufacturing research, education, and
workforce development. The project will yield technological advances in
manufacturing by designing and maturing multiscale metal forming and feature
replication technologies. CIMM will foster the design, fabrication, and
marketing of new structures, devices, and systems. The program will improve
education, training, and opportunities for industry in LA. The research is
integrated with education and training to enhance Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM) workforce development for the advanced
manufacturing industry. CIMM is aligned with the National Materials Genome
Initiative (NMGI) and will establish partnerships with hubs in the National
Network for Manufacturing Innovation (NNMI). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CIMM research will accelerate advanced
manufacturing innovation with a focus on metal forming and replication and
three-dimensional (3D) metal printing on multiple scales. Metal-forming
processes that will be investigated include coating-substrate interfacial
failures and mechanical size effects. Experimental results will be used to
validate plasticity and interfacial fracture models and simulation tools to
accelerate manufacturing innovation. The project will lead to improved
understanding of how thermo-physical properties of metal and metal alloy liquids
affect powder synthesis and selective laser melting (SLM) printing processes as
well as improved microstructural advancement. Evolution in laser 3D printed
metal structures will be advanced and hierarchical models and simulation tools
for SLM processes will be created.