* 1541807
* FEW: Workshop to Identify Opportunities and Challenges for Nanotechnology to Optimize and Unify Food, Energy and Water Systems
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2016
* Mark Wiesner, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* William Cooper
* 06/30/2016
* USD 58,358.00

1541807&lt;br/&gt;Lowry&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With ever increasing global demands
for food, water, and energy, there is a critical need in the U.S. to identify
sustainable solutions for simultaneously achieving energy, water, and food
security. Agriculture accounts for approximately 70 % of all freshwater use, and
10 % of energy consumption, globally. Therefore, the agroecosystem lies at the
heart of the energy-water-food nexus, and systems-level improvements in
performance offers one of the greatest opportunities towards energy, water, and
food security. Recent advances in nanoscale science and engineering offer
unprecedented opportunity to reduce the energy and water inputs for food
production, and to provide cost-effective, water and energy conservative
technologies for reducing the environmental footprint of
agriculture.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs propose to convene a multidisciplinary
group of faculty, students, and researchers from the USDA and the nanotechnology
and agrochemical industries in a 2-day workshop in Pittsburgh, PA to identify
the most promising groundbreaking opportunities for nanotechnology to increase
sustainability at the food-water-energy nexus, and to identify the most pressing
scientific, engineering, and social challenges that must be overcome to realize
those benefits. Nanotechnology now offers unprecedented capabilities to clean
and recycle water and wastewater, harness solar energy, create novel
miniaturized chemical sensors and integrated sensor networks, improve food
preservation, and provide targeted delivery of pesticides and nutrients. These
advances can provide the tools needed for data-driven precision agriculture, can
substantially improve resource utilization, and can lower the environmental
footprint of food production. However, realizing this goal will require improved
understanding of the complex relationships between food, water, energy, and
society. This pioneering workshop will bring together leading scientists and
engineers from a range of research fields comprising the food-energy-water nexus
to identify the most promising opportunities for nanotechnologies to improve
overall agroecosystem performance, and to identify the scientific and
engineering challenges currently inhibiting widespread applications of
nanotechnology in food production. The PIs will apply the pseudo-nominal group
technique during the workshop to develop a prioritized list of the most
promising emerging opportunities for nanotechnology at the food-energy-water
nexus, and to elaborate on how these opportunities should direct research
efforts toward the most critical research needs, and potential impacts, in the
next five to ten years. This workshop experience will foster dialogue among
diverse participants around the most pressing scientific obstacles to
implementing nanotechnology for sustainable solutions at the food-energy-water
nexus, while also drawing on understanding of the myriad economic,
infrastructural, and social constraints that also define the boundaries of both
challenges and potential opportunities for within the food-energy-water nexus