* 1541252
* CC*DNI Networking Infrastructure: Montana State University's Bridger-A Science-Driven Networking Cyberinfrastructure
* CSE,OAC
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2018
* Mark Young, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 12/31/2018
* USD 470,552.00

Dedicated research networks form the crucial foundations for data-intensive
science. These networks help researchers share data, create knowledge, and
communicate scientific discoveries. This project from Montana State University
deploys a dedicated research network in the form of a science demilitarized zone
(DMZ) network across the Bozeman campus. The enhancements include: a new 40Gb/s
core; 10 Gb/s connections to data-intensive scientific instruments; and 1Gb/s
connections to individual big data labs and
workstations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Bridger creates a dedicated "data lane" for
scientific research, allowing more efficient and effective data sharing to the
national community for NSF-funded science drivers at Montana State. This network
supports prior investments made by NSF in a major research instrument, a
statewide EPSCOR environmental network, and projects in biology, chemistry, and
physics. The project's broader impact is focused on the reuse of created data in
data science curricula and formal existing NSF-funded outreach programs,
including Montana Girls STEM Collaborative and the Nanoscale Informal Science
Education Network. The Bridger project demonstrates an easily replicated
solution that other state universities may copy to address the profound impact
that data-intensive science is having on campus networks.