* 1541126
* Program on Large-N Limit Problems in KÃ¤hler Geometry
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Semyon Klevtsov, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 05/31/2016
* USD 10,000.00

The project provides partial support for participation in the program "Large-N
Methods in Kaehler Geometry" held at the Simons Center for Geometry and Physics
(Stony Brook University) from April 20 to June 19, 2015. The large N limit of
the project title refers to 1/h where h is Planck's constant, a very small
physical constant that measures the importance of quantum mechanical effects in
a physical process. Quantum effects are important at the atomic level, but not
for macroscopic objects such as cars, whose motion is described by classical
mechanics (Newton's laws). As h tends to 0, or N = 1/h tends to infinity,
quantum mechanical models tend to classical counterparts. Analogous situations
arise in many areas of mathematics and physics whenever there is a large
parameter N so that the N tends to infinity limit shares the principal features
of the limit as quantum mechanics tends to classical mechanics. In geometry, N
represents the degree of a polynomial. In Kaehler geometry, there are special
metrics known as Bergman metrics that are analogous to polynomials of degree N.
Any metric may be approximated by the polynomial-like Bergman metrics of degree
N. The conference is devoted to the many uses of this approximation in geometry
and physics, ranging from quantum gravity to the quantum Hall effect.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In Kaehler geometry, the geometric quantization of a
Kaehler manifold is the space of holomorphic sections of the Nth power of a
positive Hermitian line bundle L over a Kaehler manifold whose curvature form is
the Kaehler form. In the Tian-Yau-Donaldson program of relating stability to
extremal metrics, a central role is played by the approximation of general
Kaehler metrics in the class by Bergman metrics of degree N. The Bergman metrics
of degree N are special Kaehler metrics induced by holomorphic embeddings of M
into complex projective space of dimension by bases of holomorphic sections of
the Nth power of L. The holomorphic embedding is essentially the map z -&gt;
B(N, w, z) where B is the Bergman kernel, i.e., the orthogonal projection onto
the space of holomorphic sections of the Nth power of L. Bergman kernels and
metrics arise in physics as well as geometry. For instance, the Laughlin wave
function of the fractional quantum Hall effect on a curved surface is intimately
related to the Bergman kernel, with N given by the number of electrons on the
surface. Bergman kernels and metrics also give a new approach to defining
probability measures on the space of all Kaehler metrics, which is expected to
be related to quantum gravity. This program focuses on holomorphic stochastic
geometry and mathematical physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Conference web site: &lt
;br/&gt;scgp.stonybrook.edu/scientific/programs/fall-2014-spring-2015-program-
details/large-n-limit-problems-in-kahler-geometry