* 1541278
* EAGER: A New Model for Undergraduate Training: a Virtual Community of Researchers in Computational Biomolecular Structure & Design
* BIO,DBI
* 05/15/2015,04/30/2017
* Jeffrey Gray, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 04/30/2017
* USD 224,396.00

This EAGER award to Johns Hopkins University will test the efficacy of a
distributed model of student training that uses virtual technologies for
collaboration. The grant will support the training of 8 students for 10 weeks
during the summers of 2015- 2016. Students will be trained in biomolecular
structure and design, using the Rosetta software. Students attend a boot camp in
Week 1 to learn how to use the software, including use of Python and C++
languages. Students then go to an assigned lab where they do research at the
intersection of chemistry, biology, computer science and engineering. In Week
10, the students gather for presentation of their results and to exchange ideas.
At the end of 10 weeks, students will have learned how research is conducted and
will have presented the results of their work at a scientific conference. Upon
completing the program, the students will have a greater understanding of
research in the area of computational biomolecular design and structure
prediction, and they will have learned the use of the Rosetta software.
Assessment of the effectiveness of the training will be done thru the SALG URSSA
survey instrument (available online at www.bioreu.org).

Mentors come from the Rosetta Commons network, and students can choose from a
variety of projects such as designing proteins that can produce fuels in
microbes, writing algorithms for vaccine design, developing models of protein
glycosylation in abnormal cells, and others. Students participate in virtual
seminars/workshops scheduled every week, and they interact daily with students
thru virtual technologies such as Skype, Google chat, etc. Training in ethics
and the responsible conduct of research is included as well as exposure to
various careers in STEM. Students will be tracked after the program thru an
automatic email sent via the NSF reporting system. More information is available
by visiting http://rosettacommons.org/intern, or by contacting the PI (Dr.
Jeffrey Gray at jgray@jhu.edu) or the Program Manager (Gregg Nass at
gnass@jhu.edu). This award is supported by the Division of Biological
Infrastructure (DBI) in the Directorate for Biological Sciences (BIO), the
Division of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure (ACI) in the Directorate for Computer
and Information Science & Engineering (CISE), and the Division of Chemistry
(CHE) in the Directorate for Mathematical and Physical Sciences (MPS).