* 1541790
* FEW: Coupling Economic Models with Agronomic, Hydrologic, and Bioenergy Models for Sustainable Food, Energy, and Water Systems
* SBE,SES
* 06/15/2015,05/31/2016
* Raymond Arritt, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 05/31/2016
* USD 45,922.00

New challenges to maintaining sustainable food, energy, and water quality and
quantity are clearly on the horizon as projections from climate models suggest
that some regions with highly productive agricultural lands will increasingly
face both drought and flood conditions. Population growth and rapid land use
change also threaten productive agricultural land. Policies aimed at adapting to
and mitigating the effects of these changes will be needed to reduce the
impacts. However, it has become clear that food, energy, and water (FEW) systems
are integrally interdependent. Treating these systems as a uni-directional
coupling of land, water, and energy to food production omits critical feedback
loops and fundamental tradeoffs. Modeling the economic and policy linkages
across these systems will be an important means of understanding the
interactions across the FEW system. Failure to understand the feedbacks between
the relevant biophysical and economic systems can lead to significant
undesirable and unintended consequences. Integrating economic and biophysical
models is a much needed advancement and could provide valuable tools to support
sound policy design.

In order to begin to develop the needed integration of biophysical and economics
models, Iowa State University will host a two day conference to bring leading
economists and statisticians together with crop scientists, hydrologists,
climate scientists, and other biophysical modelers to identify the key
scientific, engineering and data challenges associated with understanding the
FEW system. The specific goals of the conference are to: (1) identify the key
gaps in modeling capabilities and scientific understanding within the individual
behavioral, biological, and natural systems that comprise the FEW system, (2)
identify key challenges in model linkages across the behavioral, biological, and
natural systems that comprise the FEW system, (3) identify the major statistical
and econometric challenges in estimating the accuracy of these individual and
linked models when they are used for forecasting and for predicting the outcomes
of policy decisions, (4) identify the key data and cyberinfrastructure
challenges required to develop the needed modeling capabilities within
individual components of the system and to achieve linkages across the modeling
components of the FEW system, and (5) identify key challenges in adapting and
using these models to incorporate climate change.