* 1541338
* CC*DNI Networking Infrastructure: A Campus Research Network and Distributed Science DMZ
* CSE,OAC
* 02/15/2016,01/31/2019
* William Dougherty, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 01/31/2019
* USD 498,519.00

This project leads to a significant expansion and upgrade of the Virginia Tech
campus network by extending high-data rate 10-gigabit per second connections and
Science DMZ connectivity to strategic locations on campus. The new network
connections enable the incorporation of Big Data concepts in classes; support
funded research requiring the transfer of large data sets; and reduce barriers
for independent, curiosity-driven research. The network accelerates discovery
for researchers in several departments and multidisciplinary areas. Data kiosks
in the Newman Library and Torgersen Hall provide high data rate connectivity for
other researchers. The network is tightly integrated with local high-performance
computing and storage systems and national cyberinfrastructure, enabling large-
scale collaborative research and sharing of computational and data
resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The expansion of the university's network to
create a campus research network provides multiple 10-gigabit per second ports
in classrooms and laboratories in eight buildings across the Virginia Tech
campus in Blacksburg. The expansion is accomplished by deploying 48-port
10-gigabit per second Ethernet switches. Each of these switches has a 10- or
40-gigabit per second uplink. The core aggregation router connects to the campus
100-gigabit per second backbone network with multiple links for redundancy. The
network provides at least a ten-fold increase in end-to-end network
connectivity, making sustained high data rate connections ubiquitous between
local and national computational and data resources, research laboratories,
instruments, and selected classrooms.