* 1541545
* Collaborative Research: Building a Comprehensive Evolutionary History of Flagellate Plants
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2020
* Eve Gaus, Field Museum of Natural History
* Standard Grant
* Katharina Dittmar
* 12/31/2020
* USD 64,721.00

For the first ~300 million years of plant life on land, Earth's flora consisted
entirely of flagellate plants, which today include approximately 30,000 species
of bryophytes, lycophytes, ferns, and gymnosperms. Numerous major innovations,
including stomata, vascular tissue, roots and leaves, woody stems, and seeds,
evolved first in flagellate plant ancestors. The flagellate plants not only
provide a window to the early evolution of these critical features, but are
represented today by vibrant and diverse lineages that contribute substantially
to global ecology, particularly via contributions to global carbon and nitrogen
cycles and offering critical habitats for biodiversity. This research project
will analyze molecular genetic variation among the 18,000 available flagellate
plant species in order to create a species-level phylogeny (evolutionary tree of
species relationships) for the entire group. Phylogenetic trees generated will
be linked to fossil data, a comprehensive dataset of plant traits, and available
data on species occurrence on the planet. The results of this project will
inform investigations into the origins of features characteristic of flowering
plants and provide a platform for student training and
outreach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will improve our understanding of
the history and relationships of the flagellate plants by using new sequencing
technologies to examine 500 nuclear loci and to produce a species-level
phylogeny for these taxa that is linked to and integrated with an immense and
varied amount of data on fossils, phenomic characters, and geospatial
distributions. Phenotypic datasets will utilize a natural language processing
tool which will be enhanced and tested to handle large datasets and the
geospatial data will allow exploration of world-wide patterns of diversity and
endemism. All data will be fully integrated into ongoing projects such as Open
Tree of Life and Next Generation Phenomics. Education experts will develop an
online educational tool for training the next generation of biodiversity
scientists by providing an accessible framework for using the project data in
university classrooms while promoting evidence-based teaching practices. A
MicroPlants citizen science project will promote scientific literacy and plant
awareness in the general public, through museums and schools.