* 1541934
* Collaborative Research: Student & Early Career Scientist Travel Support for the  2015 First Order Reversal Curve (FORC) Magnetism Workshop
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2016
* John Wiley, University of New Orleans
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 06/30/2016
* USD 1,000.00

This award will provide travel support for a minimum of 25 U.S. graduate
students and early career scientists to attend the 2015 First Order Reversal
Curve (FORC) Workshop in Minneapolis at the University of Minnesota. First order
reversal curves are elegant, nondestructive tools for characterizing the
detailed magnetic behavior of carefully engineered materials as well as natural
samples, and the goals of this two-day workshop are to (1) provide expert
instruction on the fundamental physics that underlie this tool and (2) provide
hands-on training for how to optimize the acquisition and processing of FORC
data. This FORC Workshop is designed specifically for graduate students and
early career researchers studying magnetism and related areas in the fields of
engineering, physics, material sciences, and Earth sciences. It will consist of
lectures by international experts who have helped push this technique forward
and will include poster presentations by participating graduate students. The
program will cover the fundamental physics that underlie the FORC technique as
well as recent developments and applications. We anticipate that the workshop
will attract ~80 participants, and will be a unique opportunity for young
scientists to meet leaders in their field in a relaxed and collegial atmosphere
and to begin establishing a network of colleagues in the research community.

The FORC Workshop will provide training for graduate students and early career
scientists to learn about a new and powerful magnetic characterization tool.
Participants will learn how to optimize the collection of FORC data and gain the
practical skills to process their own data using advanced open-source software.
In addition to formal lectures, each participating student will be required to
present a poster about their current research. These topics will be discussed
amongst the students and lecturers during poster sessions. All participants are
encouraged to submit short papers to IEEE Magnetics Letters for peer-reviewed
publication.