* 1541310
* CC*DNI Networking Infrastructure: A Dedicated High-Speed Campus Research Network
* CSE,OAC
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2017
* Purushotham Bangalore, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 12/31/2017
* USD 498,443.00

In order to accommodate the ever-increasing demand for transferring large
amounts of data generated by various instruments and computational simulations,
the focus of this project is to develop a dedicated high-speed research network
at the University of Alabama at Birmingham (UAB). This networking infrastructure
provides researchers at UAB with 10 Gigabits per second (Gbps) connections from
selected computers to the shared computational facility. It accelerates campus
data transfers at least 10-fold and provides access to 10 Gbps data transfer
rates for researchers downloading/uploading large datasets from external data
repositories and national computational resources such as XSEDE and Open Science
Grid through the campus Internet2 connection. Network performance is monitored
using perfSONAR and high-speed data transfer is supported through the use of
dedicated data transfer nodes. This infrastructure is also used to explore
Software-Defined Networking (SDN) technologies.

This high-speed research network provides researchers and their graduate
students with faster access to state-of-the-art cyberinfrastructure, thereby
accelerating their research and improving their research productivity. Several
important research activities in Biology, Physics, Material Science, Image
Analysis, Cloud Computing, and Biomedical Engineering are enabled by this
infrastructure and each project offers significant societal impacts in their
respective areas of science and engineering. Underlying these efforts are UAB's
strong commitments to a diverse student body and faculty, and long-term
commitments by individual faculty involved in this project to training,
mentoring, and recruiting women and underrepresented groups into science and
engineering.