* 1541868
* FEW Workshop:  Water- and Energy-efficient Food Production:   Solutions for America's Bread Basket
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2016
* Mary Rezac, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* William Cooper
* 06/30/2016
* USD 49,998.00

1541868&lt;br/&gt;Rezac&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Central Great Plains is an
agricultural powerhouse fueled in part by the great tracks of aquifer water that
provide irrigation in the otherwise semi-arid region. As the temperature in the
region rises, rainfall declines or holds steady, and the aquifer resources are
depleted, it will be necessary to develop new crop varietals, water and
fertilizer technologies, and policies to ensure the continued production of food
in this changing environment. Kansas State University has a strong history of
research excellence in questions relating to the food/water and energy/water
intersections. The objective of this project is to host a workshop that will
develop research priorities related to water- and energy-efficient food
production in the Central Great Plains.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Kansas State has
partnered with researchers from industry and national laboratories to organize a
workshop to examine the food/energy/water trilemma. The workshop will prioritize
the research tasks to be completed to ensure food availability in the future and
it will create opportunities to strengthen research team development to respond
to these challenges. The workshop will address the following topical areas
deemed critical for system success: (1) models to predict water availability and
how it is utilized in crop growth; (2) technologies and practices that maximize
residential, agricultural, and commercial water quality and utilization
efficiency; (3) energy-efficient fertilizer production and application
techniques; (4) technology for the recovery of nitrogen and phosphorous from
swine and beef operations while producing clean water and/or energy; (5) genetic
understanding for the development of drought tolerant crops; and, (6) socio-
economic factors influencing consumer behavior. The workshop will be attended by
researchers, government agencies, producer groups, consumers, and policy makers.
Research leaders from other institutions inside and outside the Central Great
Plains and other stakeholders will be invited to attend the conference and
contribute to the development of the research priority statements. The project
seeks funding to support the travel for 20 key researchers and the meeting costs
for 70 total participants. The meeting will be held in Manhattan, Kansas and
timed to complement the existing Kansas Governor's Conference on the Future of
Water.