* 1541818
* US-Japan Materials Genome (MG) Workshop to be held at the International Congress Center "Epochal Tsukuba" 2-20-3, Takezono, Tsukuba, Ibaraki, 305-0032, Japan; June 23-24, 2015
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/15/2015,11/30/2016
* Robert Chang, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Alexis Lewis
* 11/30/2016
* USD 19,999.00

This award supports a workshop to facilitate the development of long-term,
sustainable collaboration between US and Japan in the area of advanced
structural and infrastructure materials. The workshop, entitled 'The US-Japan
Materials Genome (MG) Workshop,' will promote the aims of the US Materials
Genome Initiative, an initiative announced by President Obama in 2011, which
aims to double the speed of discovery and deployment of new materials, at a
fraction of the cost. The initiative has already had a wide impact on society
and on the materials research community, spurring new collaborations and
innovations resulting from integrated use of experimental and computational
materials research approaches, and open access to materials data. This workshop
will further these aims by establishing collaborations with materials
researchers in Japan, to jointly address some of the key issues facing
researchers who wish to manage, maintain, and share large amounts of materials
data. Anticipated outcomes include the creation and implementation of a long
term, sustainable, bilateral collaborative program, and a joint platform for
materials informatics and databases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Structural materials
play a central role in national physical infrastructure development, and both
the US and Japan have substantial efforts in developing structural materials for
applications in maintaining, and improving their large-scale physical
infrastructure. In addition, both nations have efforts to discover, design, and
deploy advanced structural materials for dynamic applications such as the
automotive, aerospace, and power generation industries. These are major
undertakings that require a concerted, coordinated effort in all aspects,
ranging from fundamental materials science research, to the acquisition,
curation, and maintenance of high-quality data, and, ultimately, to
manufacturing products that are energy efficient, environmentally sustainable,
and durable. The goals of this and subsequent workshops is to bring together a
diverse group of researchers from the US and Japan to discuss ways to use
predictive theory and modeling, combined with machine learning, data mining, and
rapid-acquisition of experimental data to produce highly efficient and low-cost
manufactured products, and to accelerate materials design, discovery, and
deployment through the open sharing of materials data.