* 1541289
* Meeting: 19th International Congress on Nitrogen Fixation to be held in Pacific Grove, California from October 4-9, 2015
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2016
* Stephen Cramer, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* carlos vallejos
* 06/30/2016
* USD 18,000.00

The 19th International Congress on Nitrogen Fixation (ICNF-19) that will be held
at the Asilomar Conference in Pacific Grove, California from October 4-9, 2015
is a scientific meeting that provides outstanding opportunities for graduate
students and postdoctoral scientists to interact with scientists from academia
and industry on a global scale. The meeting actively emphasizes and supports the
training of students and postdocs in developing their communication and
interpersonal skills. Detailed efforts are planned to broaden the participation
of women and members of groups under-represented in the sciences. The funding
provided by NSF will broaden participation and help defray the costs of
participation of students, postdoctoral associates and early-career
investigators from the U.S. scientific community.

Since 1974, the ICNF has brought together previously insular research
communities to stimulate international dialogue on the critical issues relating
to biological nitrogen fixation. The conference presents perspectives on the
state of knowledge and covers diverse topics on nitrogen fixation. The 2015
conference will have an outstanding program consisting of five plenary speakers:
Peter Vitousek (Stanford University), Dennis Dean (Virginia Tech), Claire Gough
(INRA, France), Jens Stougaard (Aarhus University, Denmark) and Mariangela
Hungria (EMBRAPA, Brazil) along with closing remarks by Hauke Hennecke (ETH,
Zurich). The core program includes poster sessions as well as 12 sessions
consisting of oral talks on the Biochemistry of Nitrogen Fixation, the Chemistry
& Theory of Nitrogen, Technology & Business Aspects, Regulation & Physiology,
Molecular Genetics & Genomics of Legume Symbioses, Nodule Development &
Physiology, Global Aspects, the Evolution, & Ecology, Genetics & Genomics of
Legume Symbiosis, Real World & Food Security Issues, Microbiology & Synthetic
Biology, and Non-Legume Systems. The content of the meeting will be disseminated
by providing access to abstracts through the conference web site. In addition,
like many previous ICNF meetings, the plan is to publish a book volume
summarizing the presentations for ICNF-19.