* 1541694
* FEW:  River FEWs: Workshop to explore the nexus between food, energy and water in a large international river system ; University of Washington; September, 2015
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2015,12/31/2016
* John Felkner, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 12/31/2016
* USD 98,367.00

This project will convene a three-day workshop to explore natural and social
science linkages between food, energy, and water (FEW) systems in large river
ecosystems. This workshop will bring together 30-50 persons with scientific
and/or policy expertise within one or more elements of the FEWS nexus with the
goal of identifying key drivers and linkages, emergent properties, and critical
research needs within the context of ecological sustainability. The participants
will focus on the Mekong River Basin as an archetypal FEW coupled social-
ecological system. More than 60 million people living in the Mekong are highly
dependent on the river for food and livelihoods. Wild-caught fish and rice are
the primary sources of nutrition, with the productivity of both fisheries and
rice agriculture dependent on the natural flood-pulse hydrologic regime. The
river is facing potentially large changes to the flood-pulse from mainstream and
tributary hydropower development, rapid land use change and climate change. The
economic benefits of new energy are expected to be substantial, but the social
and environmental impacts are at present poorly understood.
Fisheries/agriculture, hydrologic dynamics, and hydropower therefore form the
food, water, and energy trilemma in the Mekong and are linked in both space and
time. The results of this workshop will create a foundation for understanding
the interconnected and interdependent nature of FEW dynamics in the Mekong and
other river ecosystems. The project will support both education and diversity by
enhancing the scientific capacity of Mekong scientists and underrepresented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Large river ecosystems provide numerous and dynamic
ecosystem goods and services to people. Despite a general understanding of the
types of goods and services derived from rivers and a widespread recognition of
their social and economic benefit, there is a distinct lack of conceptual and
quantitative frameworks for evaluating the physical, biological, and social
dynamics that create ecosystem services and livelihoods. As such, there is
limited ability to understand impacts from ecosystem change and to evaluate
tradeoffs. This workshop will begin to address these limitations by: 1)
developing a conceptual model of how multiple physical, social, and ecological
processes connect and structure FEW systems in large rivers; 2) within this
framework identify key linkages and flows for maintaining sustainability; 3)
evaluate currently available data and capacity for quantifying these processes;
and 4) identify key future research needs for addressing research conceptual and
data gaps. The principal investigators have identified an initial set of 60
potential invitees, including international representation from a range of
institutions active in the Mekong region. These include academic, governmental
(US and Mekong), intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations. The
investigators intend to invite 50-70 participants expecting 30-35 to attend with
greater than 40% participation by women and underrepresented minorities.
Specific products will include a white paper and journal article describing the
current status and frontier of Food Water Energy research in rivers, as well as
digital archiving. Development of new collaborations to address critical
research questions is a specific goal of the workshop and is strongly
anticipated. The broader impacts will include direct engagement of Mekong
scientists and policy stakeholders from governmental and non-governmental
institutions in all aspect of the workshop to ensure that outcomes are relevant
to stakeholder needs and available for uptake in the decision making process.
All products from the workshop will be made feely available via the project
website, the Mekong portal at the University of Washington, mekong.uw.edu, and
through the Florida State University Mekong portal at coss.fsu.edu/mekong. This
research will contribute to improved scientific capacity in the region through
participation of Mekong scientists in the workshop planning, execution, and
publication of workshop outputs.