* 1541332
* CC*DNI Network Infrastructure: The Gopher Science Network - A Dedicated Science Network for the University of Minnesota
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Paul Morin, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 08/31/2018
* USD 499,454.00

The University of Minnesota (UMN) is building a dedicated campus research
network (Gopher Science Network or GSN) to connect its world-class physical and
intellectual resources with its state, regional, national and global research
and education partners. The new network connectivity accelerates the transition
of the UMN campus from an enclave within which research is conducted to the
nerve center of a widespread, interactive research ecosystem: less an ivory
tower than an organic web. On a national scale, the GSN not only benefits NSF-
funded research, but also strengthens existing partnerships with other agencies
(e.g. NASA, NIH, DOE, DOD, USGS) and universities nationwide by facilitating
bidirectional access to facilities, data, and intellectual
resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The GSN bridges high speed links to Minnesota's
regional optical network with a dedicated 100 Gbps campus research network
linking two NSF funded centers located on UMN Twin Cities campus, several core
campus research facilities, and advanced research in dynamic networks and high
performance computing. The GSN is accelerating discoveries in genomics,
proteomics, advanced networking, high resolution satellite imagery,
demographics, magnetic resonance, and advanced computational research and
infrastructures by removing the network as a barrier to advanced data intensive
research and complex analysis workflows. With a governance structure that
encourages broad participation from researchers, educators, and central IT
specialists, UMN is able to magnify the broader impacts efforts of research and
education projects that use the GSN.