* 1541285
* Finding the Missing Geomagnetic Dipole Signal in Global Pleointensity Data: Revisiting the High Southerly Latitudes
* GEO,OPP
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2020
* Lisa Tauxe, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Michael E. Jackson
* 05/31/2020
* USD 416,287.00

The geomagnetic field is decreasing rapidly, leading some to propose that it
will undergo collapse followed by a return to its usual strength but in the
opposite direction, a phenomenon known as a "polarity reversal" which happened
last approximately 800,000 years ago. Such a collapse would have a potentially
devastating effect on the ability of the magnetic field to shield us from cosmic
ray bombardment, placing our electrical grid at grave risk, among other things.
The probability of such a drastic event happening depends on the average
strength of the magnetic field. If the average is approximately equal to the
present field (as many researchers assume), then the fact that the field is
dropping rapidly would be more alarming than if the magnetic field is quite a
bit higher than average, as implied by the current data for the ancient magnetic
field from Antarctica. The argument over the average field strength stems from
the difficulty of its estimation. The new approach advocated for in this
proposal will allow researchers to obtain a robust data set for high southerly
latitudes which will greatly enhance confidence in estimates of the average
ancient field strength, contributing to our ability to assess the likelihood of
catastrophic collapse of the geomagnetic field. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
difficulty in estimating the average magnetic field strength over the past five
million years is apparent when one examines data for ancient field strength as a
function of latitude. Directions of the geomagnetic field have been well
approximated by an axial dipole (bar magnetic) at the center of the Earth that
is aligned with the spin axis. But the signal of such an axial geomagnetic
dipole, whereby the field strength doubles from the equator to the poles, is not
readily apparent in the database of field strength estimates from the last five
million years. There are several possible explanations for this troubling
failure: 1) combining data from different ages with possibly different average
intensities leads to an inappropriate comparison of field states, 2) there is a
depression of field strength at high latitude, perhaps reflecting the role of
the `tangent cylinder?, or 3) there is noise and/or bias introduced by poor
selection criteria or poor experimental design. The latter is a likely
explanation as published data from the 1960 lava flow on Hawaii display the
entire range of intensity values observed on the Earth's surface today, yet
samples from this lava flow should all have one distinct value. This proposal
benefits from the development of new experimental methods, better field
strategies and a new approach to data selection that will allow accurate
estimation of the ancient field strength through a comprehensive field campaign
to collect lava flow samples from previously studied outcrops targeting the most
promising material. These will be analyzed using the most robust experimental
protocol and subjected to rigorous selection criteria proven to reject
inaccurate results, leading to both accurate and precise estimates of ancient
field strength.