* 1541106
* CRISP Type 2: Interdependent Electric and Cloud Servies for Sustainable, Reliable, and  Open Smart Grids
* CSE,OAC
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2019
* Rafael Rodriguez Solis, University of Puerto Rico Mayaguez
* Standard Grant
* William Miller
* 08/31/2019
* USD 1,499,988.00

Electric energy networks are the cornerstone of the civil infrastructure of our
society. These networks provide the energy essential to carrying out daily
operations in education, health care, commerce, entertainment, defense, and
government. However, electric energy markets, due to their vertical integration,
often exclude customers from the processes associated with energy production,
pricing, transmission and distribution. Smart grids and distributed generation
schemes have been proposed as mechanisms to modernize energy grids and balance
the current power structures in electric markets. In a smart grid, computers and
communications networks are attached to the power generation, transmission,
distribution and load elements, establishing a mechanism to gather information,
control generation, control demand, diagnose problems, bid for prices in energy
markets, and forecast energy consumption. However, a smart grid creates
interdependencies between the energy network and the computer network since the
energy network powers the computers that in turn control the operation of the
energy grid. In this project, a team from the University of Puerto Rico,
Mayaguez (UPRM) will study smart grids and the interdependency between the
energy grid and the IT infrastructure that is setup to manage it. This project
champions a transformation of the electric grid, moving it away from being
centered on centralized utilities that supply most, if not all, power services.
Instead, the grid becomes a marketplace of third-party power-service suppliers,
who compete to sell their electric services over the Internet. These services
include energy block purchases, storage, billing, weather forecasting, energy
demand forecasting, and other ancillary services. This brings in an important
societal element - it empowers common citizens, whose homes are now renewable
energy generation systems, to become suppliers and key actors in the energy
market. This project is thus aimed at designing and developing the basic science
and technology for an Open Access Smart Grid in order to create truly
sustainable energy markets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, the smart grid
is modelled as a collection of interdependent electric and cloud services, whose
collaborative interactions help manage the smart grid. All the electric services
(e.g., energy, storage, billing) are exposed to users as REST-based cloud
services, enabling the development of algorithms and applications for customers,
power producers, and other users to consume or subscribe to these electric
services, collect operational data and customer feedback, and support analytics
to predict electric energy demands. Microgrids and renewable energy systems will
be important components in this framework, as they enable modularization of the
grid into autonomous or semi-autonomous subsystems. The research team will
develop methods to map reliable power microgrids into electric services that can
be rapidly brought online to compensate for lost generation capacity or to
obtain more affordable energy. A major challenge with microgrid systems is
activating them without introduction major power disturbances in the system.
Another challenge is forecasting the availability of renewable energy, which
will be addressed this by developing rain-cell tracking frameworks for solar and
wind output estimation services, and the determination of local sensors
requirements to improve short-term forecasts services. Finally, the team will
apply the social acceptance model to the development, implementation, management
and assessment of the Open Access Smart Grid with the purpose of identifying the
institutional change necessary for the integration of all stakeholders and the
effective democratization of electric services.