* 1541279
* CC*DNI Networking Infrastructure: UCLA Research Data Center Network Science DMZ Enablement
* CSE,OAC
* 11/01/2015,06/30/2018
* Scott Friedman, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 06/30/2018
* USD 500,000.00

This project further enables UCLA's computational research community by fusing
the campus' Institute for Digital Research and Education (IDRE) Research Data
Center with its second generation Science DMZ network. UCLA has maintained an
innovative campus backbone network through implementation of a Science DMZ for
over a decade. This approach has enabled high performance networking across
campus and provides individual schools, departments, centers and laboratories to
choose the level of connectivity that serves their specific needs and resources.
This approach has ignited researcher demand for continuously increasing cyber
infrastructure (CI) capability in compute, storage, visualization and both
internal and external collaborative tools. In response, UCLA has designed and
implemented its second generation, software defined networking capable (SDN),
40/100 gigabit Science DMZ network.

This project directly integrates the second generation Science DMZ with the IDRE
Research Data Center, home of shared high performance research computing and
storage on campus. Direct high capacity connectivity between researchers, local
research instruments, the computational resources of the IDRE Research Data
Center and external national and international resources and collaborators is
integral to the next generation of research at UCLA. The set of UCLA research
projects enabled by this work includes: molecular biologists manipulating raw
sequencing data; genetics researchers sharing and archiving large data sets; and
physicists running plasma simulations some of the country's largest
supercomputers.

This connectivity is achieved via a high performance 40/100 gigabit layer 2
switching infrastructure. High performance Layer 2 network connectivity allows
researchers to take full direct advantage of the network?s capacity while
pushing slower elements like routing and security to the larger Science DMZ
edge, where it is available, but only when needed.