* 1541799
* FEW Workshop - Planned Migration as a Strategy to Sustain Agricultural Production
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2018
* Maurice Estes, University of Alabama in Huntsville
* Standard Grant
* Holly Barnard
* 06/30/2018
* USD 56,335.00

Researchers from the University of Alabama-Huntsville and their NCAR
collaborators will convene a workshop in Boulder Colorado to define issues and
to share research and ideas relevant to the role that migration of agriculture
might play in sustaining production and how the geography of sustainable
production might be defined in terms of food, energy, and water nexus systems.
The primary outcome from the workshop will be a short report that summarizes
primary research needs and potential approaches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
geography of agricultural production in the U.S. changed dramatically in the
last century with substantial food and fiber shifting to the arid west under
irrigation and grain production becoming concentrated in the upper Midwest. The
question is whether this paradigm of the last century is sustainable and
reliable for the future. Can some portion of the production in the West now
under water stress be migrated back to the East under irrigation? Can some
production in the Southwest migrate to the Northwest where water is more
plentiful? Can grain production be more geographically distributed to avoid the
environmental issues (e.g. nutrient run-off) and vulnerability to small regional
droughts that the present concentration of production entails? This geography of
agricultural production has also changed energy consumption through electrical
energy used to move surface water in the West and to pump water in the High
Plains. It has created the need for transportation energy to move refrigerated
food from the West to the East and grains from the Midwest to the Southeast for
consumption by poultry and swine. On the other hand, a new migration of
agriculture back to the Southeast may see competition for water for cooling in
thermoelectric generation and hydroelectric losses. This workshop will bring
together hydrologists, agronomists, economists, climatologists, ecologists,
energy experts, and water resource planners to discuss the vulnerabilities of
the present geography of agriculture and discuss whether a new migration of
agriculture might sustain production in the coming century.