* 1541275
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant; Exploring Changing Social Organization In The Emergence Of Complex Societies
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2017
* Anne Underhill, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2017
* USD 13,898.00

Analysis of social networks at different spatial scales, both egalitarian and
hierarchical in nature, is useful for understanding the organization of
societies in the past as well as the present. The discipline of archaeology is
well suited to investigation of social change over millennia and to identifying
significant variation in human lifeways. Andrew Womack of Yale University and
his colleagues in China will investigate different networks formed during the
late Neolithic and early Bronze Age periods (c. 2600-1900 BC) in Gansu province
of northwest China, an area with tremendous potential for revealing a different
form of social organization in the past than those known for well-studied areas
to the east in China and elsewhere. The project will investigate whether people
in early Gansu, thought to be a cross-roads for interaction with peoples to the
west in Eurasia, developed a different kind of organizational system in which
there was resistance to social hierarchies on the basis of wealth. Several new
methods of data collection and analysis will be employed, providing useful
training for local archaeologists. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Womack and Chinese
colleagues will identify different kinds of social networks created through
activities such as craft production and mortuary rites in the Tao River valley
of southern Gansu Province. As other anthropological research has established,
mortuary goods can be a key indicator of both status and the nature of social
networks. The team will identify patterns of interaction as identified from
specific production methods of ceramics at different spatial scales and infer
how social networks expanded over time through coalescence of populations at
funerals for important individuals. It also will investigate why, around 2000
BC, elaborate funerals were abandoned in the region. The team also will use
effective methods to identify specific signs of use on vessels, to identify raw
materials used for production, and to infer degree of standardization across
space and time. These data will then be used to infer the character of social
networks through the production, circulation, and consumption of pottery vessels
and how they changed over time.