* 1541352
* CC*DNI Campus Design: Northern's Network Expansion for Large Science and Engineering Data Flows
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2017
* Ivan Lopez-Hurtado, Northern New Mexico College
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 09/30/2017
* USD 350,000.00

Northern New Mexico College (Northern) is establishing a dedicated research
network fabric and Science DMZ that is: 1) connecting multiple teaching and
research laboratories serving biology, chemistry, environmental science, and
engineering; and 2) improving the capacity and efficiency of moving Terabytes
(TBs) of data sets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed network upgrades are
permitting faculty and students to engage in high-throughput data analysis
research. High-speed switches are allowing TBs of data transfers from storage
nodes to multiple labs, including solar energy variables needed to analyze
irradiance and solar power generation patterns; data sets of 3-D convection
simulation computed by Northern's Aguila parallel Supercomputer; and TBs of
ribonucleic acid (RNA) sequencing needed to understand the role of Cajal Bodies
in the biogenesis of non-coding RNA in land
plants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Northern serves a 72% Hispanic and 11% Native
American student population. Northern?s recent development of Engineering,
Biology, and Environmental Science programs has greatly increased access to
four-year STEM degrees for northern New Mexicans. This CC*DNI project represents
the next step in closing the STEM education gap that prevents Hispanics, the
fastest growing ethnic group in the nation's labor force, and Native Americans
from entering STEM professions. The remote experimental control features to lab
equipment are also addressing the geographic challenge of campus access for
students living in remote mountain villages, especially during winter months,
and is allowing for the development of remote undergraduate research experiences
known to support the success of minority populations studying STEM.