* 1541840
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award: The Development Of Ritual And Social Solidarity
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2017
* Benjamin Nigra, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2017
* USD 11,340.00

Dr. Charles Stanish and Mr. Benjamin Nigra of the University of California, Los
Angeles, along with Peruvian colleagues, will investigate the role of scheduled
political events in the emergence of early complex societies. Prior research
suggests that intensified interaction between independent communities is key to
the establishment of early political hierarchies and regional economic
cooperation. Scheduled economic events, mediated through ritual in which
disparate communities gather together at regular intervals at recognized
locations, serve as public forums in which strangers exchange, communicate
norms, build novel economic relationships, and vie for social status. As small
communities become unified into regional polities, ceremonial events often lose
their public character and become restricted to specific social classes such as
elites or specialists. This investigation asks: under what material and social
conditions do ritual events become exclusive? Why do some events remain open to
the general public while participation in others becomes strictly guarded? What
are the regional economic impacts of massive public gatherings, and how do these
impacts change with emerging social inequality? Archaeology is uniquely suited
to address this question by accessing long-term data on the pre-modern economics
and long-term social processes. "Ritualized' economic events are not restricted
to the ancient world, but remain ever present in the modern day United States.
These events, all highly ritualized and involving representatives from
independent (and often competing) groups, have notable economic and political
consequences for how segments of modern society form larger cooperative
communities.

Stanish and Nigra will examine the specific modes of economic investment that
independent communities made in the construction, upkeep and participation in
massive, monumental ceremonial structures among the Paracas peoples of the
Peruvian south coast (800 BCE - 200 CE). They will focus on several sites in the
Chincha Valley, where cooperative labor between independent Paracas communities
was used to construct at least a dozen platform structures containing deep
sunken courts. The researchers will radiocarbon date non-local offerings
recovered from one of these monuments, Huaca Soto, to determine when it was
constructed, for how long it was used for ceremonial purposes, and the date of
its eventual decommissioning. By combining these dates with stratigraphic
excavations focused on the depositions of long-distance trade goods as ritual
offerings, architectural renovations over time that restricted public access,
and the establishment of early urban communities around the base of the
structure, they will reconstruct the early economic networks and intercommunity
dynamics that led to the establishment of strong political hierarchies and
social inequality by the beginning of first millennium CE. All aspects of the
proposed research will be conducted as part of field training for American
undergraduates and will expose students to field excavation, survey, specialist
data analyses, and conservation of archaeological sites and remains.