* 1541838
* FEW Workshop:  "Scaling Up" Urban Agriculture to Mitigate Food-Energy-Water Impacts; October 5-6, 2015; University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2016
* John Vandermeer, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* William Cooper
* 06/30/2016
* USD 69,242.00

1541838&lt;br/&gt;Newell&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the majority of the worlds
population now living in urban settings, cities have become dominant drivers in
global food-energy-water (FEW) cycles. Globalization processes have intertwined
cities with distant geographies through system interactions that include the
exchange of food, energy, water, materials, and capital. Through food
consumption, city and hinterland have become highly interconnected and
interdependent. Growing awareness of the myriad impacts associated with this
food production-consumption nexus has sparked an urban agricultural
renaissance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs propose an interdisciplinary urban FEW
workshop to understand the potential ramifications of scaling-up urban
agriculture on: 1) food supply and security; 2) water quality and re-use; 3)
energy use; 4) ecosystem health; and, 5) equity and governance. Prior to the
workshop, five working groups will prepare summaries regarding the state of
knowledge, level of implementation, and interactions with other FEW systems. A
sixth working group will evaluate the potential of an interdisciplinary urban
metabolism modeling framework to assess urban FEW system interactions. These
summaries will be presented at the workshop, where participants will further
delineate scaling-up benefits, challenges, and transition pathways. To uncover
linkages between physical, social, economic, and ecological systems, the project
team and workshop participants include geographers, engineers, ecologists,
biologists, earth systems analysts, complexity modelers, planners, computer
scientists, public health policy experts, and others. Emphasis will be on
identifying tipping points that can enable urban agricultural system
transitions. Outputs from the workshop include a white paper and journal
article, both of which will identify the fundamental research necessary for
transitioning urban food-energy-water systems so that they are more integrated,
sustainable, resilient, and equitable. FEW scholarship on urban agriculture is
relatively well-developed but exists as largely disciplinary-bound research
streams. Consequently, urban FEW system interactions are not well understood.
Scaling-up urban agriculture will significantly reshape food, energy, and water
flows both within the urban consumption boundary and beyond to more distal
production geographies in highly complex ways. An integrative, holistic
conceptual framework based on urban metabolism theory will enable the multiple
disciplines involved with this challenge to evaluate the potential for scaling-
up, identify factors that affect system performance, and contextualize complex,
dynamic urban-rural FEW interactions. The PIs envision applying this adaptive
framework through scenarios of changing condition, such as climate change
mitigation and adaptation, resource dematerialization, and localization. Using
an urban metabolism framework, the workshop will produce an articulated set of
research needs that, if addressed, will shape the future of urban agriculture
and enhance the sustainability and resilience of cities.