* 1541265
* GP-EXTRA: Bridge to the Geosciences for Community College Students
* GEO,RISE
* 12/15/2015,11/30/2019
* Marianne Smith, Citrus Community College District
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 11/30/2019
* USD 406,321.00

Advancements in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) are the
engine that drives U.S. innovation, economic development, prosperity and
security. The STEM enterprise is strengthened by engaging multiple perspectives
and utilizing the full talent pool available throughout the nation. Efforts to
broaden participation of traditionally underrepresented minority students in the
STEM disciplines thus contributes to a vibrant, creative, and impactful STEM
workforce for the future. With more than half of STEM undergraduate degree
recipients now beginning their educational pathway in a community college, it is
essential that effective strategies for supporting students interested in STEM
disciplines as they make the transition between two-year and four-year
institutions be identified, in order to sustain the recruitment and retention of
students in the STEM pipeline. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Citrus College, in
collaboration with the Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL), the University
Corporation for Atmospheric Research (UCAR), the Center for Dark Energy
Biosphere Investigations (C-DEBI) at the University of Southern California, and
the Oak Crest Institute of Science, is implementing a cohort-based program to
engage 20 minority undergraduate students per year (60 students total) in
immersive experiences that will increase their interest in, and preparation for,
continuing along geoscience education pathways. Students at Citrus College, a
Hispanic Serving Institution, will engage in geomodules organized around the
subfields of planetary, atmospheric, ocean, and environmental sciences. These
geomodules will include research activities with scientists at the collaborating
research institutions. A capstone 10-day mini-internship at UCAR will provide
immersive atmospheric research, training, and fieldwork. Professional
development, mentoring, science communication development, and cohort-
development is woven across all four geomodules. Through these catalytic
experiences, participating students are expected to deepen their interest in and
knowledge of the geosciences, to better understand the multiple entry points
into the field, and to build valuable professional skills and networks. Engaging
underserved populations through this project is expected to both increase the
number of diverse students transferring to baccalaureate programs in the
geosciences and create a more diverse population of science-literate citizens to
address current and future geoscience-related challenges.