* 1541959
* NNCI: The Center for Nanoscale System (CNS) at Harvard University
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2023
* William Wilson, Harvard University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Richard Nash
* 08/31/2023
* USD 5,000,000.00

The goal of the Center for Nanoscale Systems (CNS) at Harvard University is to
provide outstanding facilities and expertise to make, image, and understand
nanoscale structures and systems. CNS provides a collaborative, multi-
disciplinary research environment that allows researchers from academia and
industry to study and develop new structures, devices, systems, and technologies
in fields ranging from biomedicine to nanoscale electronics and photonics. CNS
offers tools for nanofabrication, electron microscopy, and characterization of
nanoscale systems, with technical expertise and assistance provided by its
staff. CNS is one of the most active nanofabrication and imaging facilities in
the world with more than 1500 users, and it is an important part of the high-
technology boom in the Northeast. With its diverse user base, well-established
infrastructure, and outstanding facilities, CNS is well placed to continue as a
technology leader. In addition, CNS plays a key role training the nation's next
generation of scientists and engineers. It has an established Research
Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) program, as well as an annual summer
nanotechnology seminar series. A new CNS Scholars Program will bring in
underrepresented researchers, and an internship program will train U.S. veterans
in nanotechnology. As part of the NNCI, CNS will help make the transition from
research on nanoscale devices to complex nanosystems
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Since its creation in 2001, CNS has become a
key nanotechnology resource for the nation. As part of the previous NNIN, CNS
developed diverse and versatile facilities including multi-length-scale optical
and electron-beam lithography, focused ion beam (FIB) and reactive ion etch
(RIE) systems to shape structures, and soft lithography expertise to enable
fabrication of a wide variety of microfluidic systems. These tools allow users
to push the frontiers of nanoscale electronics and photonics using
nontraditional materials, and they enable the development of sensor systems for
biomedicine. CNS researchers pursue advanced topics including plasmonics,
diamond photonics, nanoscale sensors, and atomic-layer devices. CNS has an
outstanding suite of imaging and characterization tools including an aberration-
corrected STEM, a high resolution TEM, a CryoTEM, and an Atom Probe for 3D
tomography, as well as scanned probe microscopes, and linear and non-linear
optical microscopes. Its characterization tools permit detailed analysis and
assessment of materials, components, and systems, providing researchers with a
comprehensive platform for nanotechnology research. CNS focuses on the core
missions of the National Nanotechnology Initiative (NNI): advancing world-class
nanotechnology research, fostering the transfer of new technologies into
products for commercial and public benefit, developing and sustaining
educational resources to develop a skilled nanotechnology workforce, and
supporting the evolving infrastructure and advanced tools needed to support
excellence in nanotechnology research and development.