* 1541998
* Collaborative Research: Heterogeneous Ice Nucleation in Clouds: A Synergistic Experimental and Simulation Approach
* GEO,AGS
* 03/15/2016,02/28/2021
* Will Cantrell, Michigan Technological University
* Continuing Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 02/28/2021
* USD 263,283.00

Understanding the molecular behavior of frozen water is essential for predicting
the future of our planet. Frozen water is present in the atmosphere -- in clouds
-- where foreign particles such as mineral dust promote ice nucleation.
Consequently, surface-assisted ice nucleation, i.e. heterogeneous ice
nucleation, has a significant effect on cloud microphysics. This implies that it
is important to accurately describe heterogeneous ice nucleation in order to be
able to accurately model the weather and climate. Though theoretical and
empirical descriptions have been developed, there is still no complete
description of the requirements of the heterogeneous ice nucleation process, and
no framework to know a priori if a given surface will be a good ice nucleating
agent.

Through the synergistic experimental and simulation efforts, the foundation for
molecular level understanding of heterogeneous ice nucleation will be built. The
focus of this research will be to relate the effects of surface charge and
lattice match to heterogeneous nucleation of ice with an emphasis on the free
energy of formation and the nucleation rate. Straightforward molecular dynamics
(MD) simulations will provide detailed insights into water behavior near mica
surfaces and will be compared with experimental findings. In addition, the
kinetics and thermodynamics of ice nucleation will be calculated from
simulations. The research will provide the basis for building predictive models
of heterogeneous ice nucleation that can be incorporated into larger scale
models relevant to atmospheric chemistry and weather prediction.

The simulation tools developed and results of this research will provide the
basis to answer several of the top 10 questions related to molecular behavior of
frozen water as listed by Bartels-Rausch (Nature, 2013), which are essential for
predicting the future of our planet. Phase transitions assisted by surfaces in
aqueous systems are relevant to a wide variety of fields and processes including
biological assemblies, surfactants, nanotoxicology, semiconductor industry, food
industry and others. Also, the research presents several learning opportunities
for graduate and undergraduate students in different forms. The collaborative
nature of this research and the exchange program between the two scientist
groups will expose the students to a multitude of tools used to study
challenging problems in atmospheric chemistry.

The simulations will be used to develop informative videos to be used as
educational tools as well as for recruitment of students into science and
engineering. User-friendly modules that enable students to perform some simple
molecular simulations, which can be used as supplements for class lectures to
illustrate concepts in thermodynamics, kinetics and materials will be developed.
These will be available to the scientific community free-of-charge. The results
from the research will be published in peer-reviewed journals and will be
presented in various national and international meetings.