* 1541380
* CC*DNI Networking Infrastructure: An Software Defined Networking-Enabled Research Infrastructure
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2018
* James Griffioen, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 09/30/2018
* USD 486,572.00

For a growing number of data-intensive research projects spanning a wide range
of disciplines, high-speed network access to computation and storage -- located
either locally in the campus or in the cloud (e.g., at national labs) -- has
become critical to the research. While old, slow, campus network infrastructure
is a key contributor to poor performance, an equally important contributor is
the problem of bottlenecks that arise at security and network management policy
enforcement points in the network.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to
dramatically improve network performance for a wide range of researchers across
the campus by removing many of the bottlenecks inherent in the traditional
network infrastructure. By replacing the existing network with modern software
defined network (SDN) infrastructure, researchers will benefit from both the
increased speed of the underlying network hardware and also from the ability to
utilize SDN paths that avoid traditional policy enforcement bottlenecks. As a
result, researchers across the campus will see significantly faster data
transfers, enabling them to more effectively carry out their
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project builds on and extends a successful
initial SDN deployment at the University of Kentucky, adding SDN switches to ten
research buildings and connecting each of them to the existing SDN research
network core with 40G uplinks. To ensure high-speed access to the
Internet/Cloud, the research core network is being linked through a new 100 Gbps
link to Internet2. Research traffic in the enabled buildings is automatically
routed onto the SDN research network where SDN flow rules allow research traffic
to bypass legacy network infrastructure designed to police normal traffic. By
extending the SDN network capabilities to several new buildings on campus, a
wide range of researchers are able to archive significantly higher network
throughput for their research data.