* 1541227
* GASP: Geolocated Allergen Sensing Platform
* CSE,CNS
* 06/15/2015,05/31/2018
* David Lary, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 05/31/2018
* USD 149,984.00

A wide range of health outcomes is affected by air pollution. In March 2014 the
World Health Organization (WHO) released a report that in 2012 alone, a
staggering 7 million people died as a result of air pollution exposure, one in
eight of total global deaths. A major component of this pollution is airborne
particulate matter, with approximately 50 million Americans have allergic
diseases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop and field the first
integrated IoT in-situ sensor package tracking pollution and pollen to provide
airborne particulate mapping for Chattanooga. Longer term it is hoped that the
data collection approach and initial visualization tools developed in
Chattanooga can be used to support a nationwide, open access dissemination
platform on the order of Google's StreetView, but called PollutionView. Such
scaling of the project's pilot results through a PollutionView tool will
contribute significantly to a transformation of the Environmental Public Health
field in the United States. The project involves real-time big data analysis at
a fine-grain geographic level. This will involve trades with sensing and
computing especially if the sensor package is to be deployed at scale. The
project will help determine if real-time allergen collection and visualization
can improve health and wellness. Thus, this project will combine Cyber Physical
Systems (CPS) and gigabit networks to address major health concerns due to air
pollution. A working demonstration of this project will be presented during the
Global City Teams meeting in June 2015 with an update in June 2016.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Airborne particulate matter particularly affects the
citizens of Chattanooga, TN. The objectives of this project are twofold: first,
to develop and deploy an array of Internet of Things (IoT) in-situ sensors
within Chattanooga capable of comprehensively characterizing air quality in real
time, including location, temperature, pressure, humidity, the abundance of 6
criterion pollutants (O3, CO, NO, NO2, SO2, and H2S), and the abundance of
airborne particulates (10-40 µm), both pollen-sized and smaller PM2.5 (&lt;2.5
µm) particles; and second, to have a pollen validation campaign by deploying an
in-situ pollen air sampler in Chattanooga to identify specific pollen types.