* 1541002
* EarthCube IA: Collaborative Proposal: Building Interoperable Cyberinfrastructure (CI) at the Interface between Paleogeoinformatics and Bioinformatics
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Simon Goring, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 08/31/2018
* USD 228,770.00

Paleontologists provide data about the past distribution and diversity of life.
These data are useful both to geologists, because they can help determine the
age of rocks, reconstruct past environments, and constrain models of the Earth
system; and to biologists interested in the evolutionary history of organisms
and the behavior of ecological systems during past global changes. Currently,
data about fossils are dispersed across thousands of scientific publications,
and dozens of small to large databases, only some of which are publicly
available via the Internet. Even publicly available databases can be difficult
to access because each stores different kinds of data with different
conventions, requiring researchers to individually harmonize searches and their
outputs. This project brings together six paleobiological databases so that they
share a single set of Internet-based commands by which researchers and the
public can easily access fossil records from all of Earth history. By
coordinating with other emerging efforts in geological and biological data
sharing, best practices, and protocols, we ensure that data will be freely
available to all, enabling new scientific syntheses and discovery, more powerful
educational opportunities, and general exploration of the history of life on
Earth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The paleobiological sciences sit at the nexus
between geosciences and the biosciences, with close interdependencies in both
domains. Within the geosciences, information about the past spatiotemporal
distribution of organisms, species, and assemblages of species is essential to a
wide array of allied disciplines: to sedimentologists and economic geologists
studying facies relationships and employing biostratigraphic controls for
correlating rock strata, to structural geologists and geophysicists seeking
biogeographic constraints on reconstructions of former tectonic plate positions,
to paleoclimatologists extracting paleoclimatic signals from paleoecological
data, and to earth system modelers seeking to understand how biospheric dynamics
have shaped, and continue to shape, the history of the Earth-Life system. Within
the biosciences, the fossil record is essential for understanding how
contemporary ecological systems are shaped by historical legacies of slow-acting
processes, for testing climate-driven models of species distribution and
diversity that are being used to project the impacts of 21st century climate
change, for constraining phylogenetic models of species divergence and rates of
evolution, and for understanding the fundamental drivers of biodiversity (i.e.
species extinctions and originations). In an era of global change, when
stewarding biodiversity is an urgent societal concern, conservation biologists,
global change ecologists, and earth system scientists are all looking to the
past to study the behavior of the Earth-Life system during rapid transitions.
Paleobiological data are currently served by a wide array of databases that vary
in structure, composition, temporal scales, types of data and metadata. To
conduct ?global? or holistic analyses of the paleobiological record it is
necessary to retrieve data from a variety of these databases - requiring queries
of each database to retrieve the types of data needed. The purpose of this
project is to make six different paleobiological databases interoperable so that
they can be accessed via a common Application Programming Interface (API) to
query the data from these and other databases. Towards that end, five key
records of North American Pleistocene lakes will be uploaded and become
available through this integrative project. This project also will increase the
interoperability between these paleobiological resources and contemporary
databases of species distributions and diversity, enabling continuous time-
series analyses (e.g., of biodiversity) from the beginning of life on earth to
today. Integration of the paleobiological databases with databases of the
stratigraphic record (Macrostrat) will enhance the value of both types of data.
New R packages will facilitate retrieval and analysis of data from all of the
databases. Finally, this proposal establishes a Paleobiological Data Consortium,
consisting of leaders of cyberinfrastructure resources in the paleobiosciences
and allied disciplines, with the goal of sharing best practices and protocols
among the geoinformatic and bioinformatic communities.