* 1541324
* Conference: Infrastructure and ecosystem adaptations in the face of global climate change; Baltimore, Maryland, August, 2015
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2016
* Kristina Hill, Ecological Society of America
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Blood
* 06/30/2016
* USD 45,000.00

In August 2015, the Ecological Society of America (ESA) celebrates its
centennial year with a major conference in Baltimore, MD. The meeting theme,
Ecological Science at the Frontier, reflects back 100 years on ESA as a
scientific society, as well as into the uncharted future of the planet. This
award will provide partial support for one of the main products of that meeting,
a centennial special issue of the ESA membership journal, Frontiers in Ecology
and the Environment, that looks forward to the next 100 years of life on Earth.
Future generations will have to increasingly deal with the impacts of a changing
climate in a wide range of practical ways. Many countries are already
constructing or evaluating a range of new infrastructure prototypes, with the
aim of supporting ecosystems and ecosystem services, and protecting human lives
and property. It is critical that scientists are engaged in this discussion as
investments are projected to increase dramatically over the next century.
Therefore, ESA invited the authors to showcase the most interesting innovations
around the world that address predicted future trajectories of change in
ecosystems as climates change, and how humans might respond to those changes.
Because all special issues of Frontiers are gold open access on the ESA website,
this publication will be fully accessible to all interested readers. Authors are
also welcome to post copies of their papers to their own personal or
institutional websites, further increasing accessibility. Since Frontiers is
designed to be understandable to a very broad audience, one way that scientists
use it is as explanatory material when meeting with non-scientists, particularly
resource managers and policy makers. As the planet changes, both the scientists
and their stakeholder communities will benefit from having information on these
infrastructural developments in one understandable package. Finally, this
special issue will provide scientists with an early opportunity to develop
related research agendas for addressing the challenges presented, the results of
which will be critical to public policy as most regions of the world prepare to
invest in adaptation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specific topics for this special
issue of Frontiers include how infrastructure systems will respond to increased
temperatures in cities, accelerating rates of sea level rise, long-term
droughts, increased flooding, and species movements towards northern latitudes
and higher elevations. Other topics focus on the changes in scientific
understanding required for tracking and predicting major changes in ecosystems,
in the form of both new statistical analyses and integrated models that cross
scales from local populations of organisms to continents. Finally, this issue
will also describe key modeling efforts that may influence our thinking about
ecosystems in a changing climate and catalyze the development of new ideas
related to coastal ecosystems, river and watershed dynamics, continental-scale
biogeographic responses to climate change, and urban heat island effects related
to human health.