* 1541988
* Workshop on the Implications of Declining Net Energy for Complex Food/Energy/Water Systems
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2015,04/30/2016
* Thomas Love, Linfield College
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 04/30/2016
* USD 49,788.00

Industrial agriculture is heavily dependent on affordable fossil fuels to power
every step of the food supply chain - to move water, produce and apply critical
inputs (fertilizer, pesticides), cultivate, harvest, process and distribute food
and fiber from a diverse array of crops, and finally to power all the steps
around preparing and consuming these materials and manageing the resultant waste
streams. However, a transition from fossil fuels to other energy sources (e.g.
biofuels, solar) may be needed to modify key drivers of climate change. This
transition may have serious implications for net energy availability in food-
energy-water (FEW) systems. Net energy is the energy that remains after the
energy costs of procuring and processing or refining an energy resource are
subtracted. There has been insufficient attention to the potentially enormous
implications for society of a decline in the net energy available to power
systems within the FEW nexus. Additionally, while there may be substitutes for
energy-dense fossil fuels, substitutes for water do not exist. Since FEW
economic development strategies hinge on water availability, a key focus of
research ahead will need to be aimed at understanding how net energy decline may
impact water needs in industrial agriculture, especially in the U.S. Effective
measures to address these bottlenecks in and enhance sustainability of FEW
systems will need to link larger social, political, and economic processes with
net energy realities. There is great need to bring social, behavioral, and
economic disciplines squarely into research on net energy implications for the
FEW system. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Linfield College will host a two and half day
conference to examine net energy challenges facing FEW systems and the social,
political, and economic dimensions of net energy in the context of FEW systems.
Specifically, this workshop will discuss two key elements of the FEW nexus: 1)
implications of trends in the net energy available to power food and water
systems, and 2) societal challenges stemming from declining net energy working
through food systems. This workshop will also identify gaps in current FEW
system knowledge, particularly those that emerge from systemic and exogenous
factors relating to declining net energy. Workshop participants will include
scientists with net energy and complex systems expertise drawn from the social
and physical sciences, including: economists, anthropologists, sociologists,
political scientists, physicists, chemists, and engineers. This workshop will
also include practitioners with applied FEW nexus experience from the US and
other countries.