* 1541800
* Flyover Country, a mobile app for geoscience education
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2015,10/31/2016
* Amy Myrbo, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 10/31/2016
* USD 146,910.00

This award will develop a mobile app, Flyover Country (FC), that will bring
information about relevant points of interest (POI) and map data to the user
mid-flight, without the need for in-flight Wi-Fi, by downloading a strip of data
based on the flightpath before the user boards the plane. GPS (Global
Positioning System), which functions in airplane mode, allows precise flight
tracking, making prompts for POI viewing timely and relevant. With around 4.5
million people flying every day, the potential audience for FC is huge, as is
its potential for geoscience outreach. The app will directly feed high-quality
geoscience information to the user at the very point when curiosity is
stimulated, and could thus improve public science literacy as well as inspiring
and supporting the development of a generation of geoscientists. FC could also
readily be adapted for use in STEM education, and will be structured so as to
provide a platform for the exposure of all types of geospatial geoscience data,
forming new infrastructure for education and research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Visualization of geoscience through combining map views,
articles, audio, visual aids, and the bird's eye view from a plane window will
allow for new questions, ideas, relationships, and inspiration to be cultivated
by scientists and the public alike. In addition, FC may improve the current
state of data accessibility and the potential for dataset integration while
simultaneously increasing the incentives for improving data discovery in the
geosciences and beyond. Development of the app will be split into two main
tasks: (1) the geospatial acquisition of maps and POI, which may be accomplished
off the device (server-side), and (2) an on-device user interface that requests,
downloads, and displays the gathered data. FC will be available for both iOS and
Android devices. In addition to supporting informal learning from the airplane
window, this system has great potential to be adapted for ground level use.
Similar in content and scope to the popular Roadside Geology book series, a
mobile app could present relevant geoscience information on road trips or hikes,
and do so even where connectivity is absent.