* 1541270
* CC*DNI Engineer: Extending the UC Cyberinfrastructure through Innovation in Engineering
* CSE,OAC
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2018
* Mary Doyle, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 12/31/2018
* USD 399,991.00

Building on the University of California - Santa Cruz (UCSC) "100 Gb/s Science
DMZ" project, the CyberInfrastructure (CI) Engineer coordinates the development
of research CI (on-campus and in regional and national forums), and works with
the CI community to disseminate new CI tools, techniques and models. The CI
Engineer works directly with researchers to facilitate their use of CI, and with
campus IT engineers in the design and development of new CI capabilities. The CI
Engineer works on research projects involving the development of new CI-related
technology, including the Pacific Research Platform project. The CI Engineer
coordinates a continuous technology assessment for use in planning the
development of campus CI, and the evolution of the campus CI plan while advising
campus leadership on technology with potential impact on faculty and their
research.

The CI Engineer participates in regional, state and national level
organizations, including California's Research and Education Network (CENIC),
Internet2, and the OpenStack Foundation, sharing lessons learned at UCSC and to
hear of new developments. These lessons are also disseminated via the web for
access by the broader CI community. Through research projects or independent
studies, the CI Engineer engages science and engineering students in the use and
development of campus CI.