* 1541074
* CRISP Type 1:  Multi-Scale Modeling Framework for the Assessment and Control of Resilient Interdependent Critical Infrastructure Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Calton Pu, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 08/31/2019
* USD 499,920.00

This project will create a novel modeling framework to assess and control
interdependent critical infrastructure systems (ICIs). Infrastructure systems
are critical to the functioning of our society, and the services they deliver
form the backbone of the health, safety, and security of our nation. These
systems are complex, comprised of many interdependent components. Further, these
systems are interdependent, with the performance of one system dependent on the
performance of one or more of the others. This leaves ICIs vulnerable to a
variety of hazards, both natural and manmade. This project will study how to
improve the resilience of these systems, with the recognition that achieving
resilience will be a shared responsibility among stakeholders. At the same time,
more and more data is becoming available to assess the states of ICIs both under
normal conditions and over time.

This project will take a multidisciplinary approach, integrating across
engineering, computation, and policy to create a powerful stakeholder-driven
framework that models ICIs across scales and utilizes data across sources to
evaluate the current status of infrastructures and make predictions on their
performance and reliability. The researchers will study three ICIs in
particular: transportation, power, and communications infrastructure, applying
the framework to the study of these ICIs in two specific communities, one urban
and one rural. The framework will be created in conjunction with the development
of new processes to achieve stakeholder buy-in and policy adoption to support
integration of the new technology with policy. With fast algorithms to solve the
models of the framework and real-time (or near-real-time) data collection
capabilities, a powerful resilient infrastructure management system that can
react, adapt, and even proactively take precautionary actions in anticipation of
impending disasters is envisioned.

The results of this project will also be integrated into extensive classroom and
educational research activities, training the next generation of scientists,
engineers, and policymakers on the importance of critical infrastructure
resilience and in the development of new multi-disciplinary methods and tools to
achieve resilience.