* 1541890
* FEW: Towards Food, Energy and Water Security in California under Changing Conditions: the Nexus Perspective
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Mekonnen Gebremichael, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Torgersen
* 05/31/2016
* USD 49,680.00

UCLA will host a workshop that will discuss, debate and define the scientific,
engineering and data challenges and opportunities in understanding the coupled
food-energy-water (FEW) systems in California. The workshop will cover multiple
aspects of the FEW systems, including resource demand and availability under
variable climates, land use change, population and economic growth, practical
applications/implications from stakeholders perspective, and innovative
solutions and best practices. The workshop will bring together relevant
scientists, managers and stakeholders, and provide a platform to increase the
understanding and problem definition of the FEW nexus issues among all
stakeholders. The workshop gives students and early-career researchers a unique
exposure to the FEW nexus approach from multiple
perspectives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This workshop seeks to advance the nexus
approach to addressing the food- energy-water (FEW) system and its impact on
security problems in California. The overall objective is to create a platform
for interdisciplinary research communities and multisectoral industrial
practitioners so that concepts, issues, opportunities and resilient solutions of
the intricately coupled FEW systems are thoroughly discussed, debated and
culminated into research questions and sustainable partnerships. Specifically,
the workshop seeks to 1) foster a holistic understanding of the risks and
opportunities of the complex and dynamically interconnected regional FEW systems
under the changing conditions; 2) identify research, technological and
governance gaps and needs for effective and robust implementation of the food-
energy-water system nexus approach; 3) forge partnerships among
interdisciplinary researchers and practitioners from relevant stakeholders; and
4) create an interactive platform to further consolidate and follow-up on the
workshop outcomes and recommendations. The workshop will take place over three
days through panel discussions, breakout working-group sessions and invited and
contributed presentations. The deliberation and findings of the workshop will be
available to researchers, educators and practitioners through publications and
online materials. The workshop results are transferable to other semiarid
regions characterized by water scarcity and rapid population and industrial
growth.