* 1541816
* Coupled Production-Consumption Systems for Climate Change Mitigation: Designing Equitable Food, Energy, and Water Conservation Strategies
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2015,01/31/2016
* Jose Fuentes, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 01/31/2016
* USD 47,200.00

1541816 (Watkins). This workshop will bring together experts from a broad range
of disciplines to identify climate change mitigation strategies based on
improved understanding and management of coupled food, energy and water (FEW)
production-consumption systems. The focus is on climate change mitigation based
on FEW conservation strategies, with the following overarching research
question: How can we best design FEW conservation strategies that will reduce
greenhouse gas emissions, avoid unintended consequences to individual FEW
sectors and the environment, be financially viable for FEW producers, and be
acceptable to FEW consumers? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;On the FEW production side,
data and models are needed to quantify and predict resource use, greenhouse gas
emissions, and costs associated with alternatives for meeting FEW security
goals. However, there is also a need to recognize that these goals are not
defined ex ante, but rather are based on human goals and behaviors which are
complex, heterogeneous, and continuously evolve as new information and
alternatives become available. While the state of the art in analyzing
sustainability of socio-ecological systems continues to advance (e.g.,
resiliency), these concepts have not been brought to bear on the FEW nexus. To
add this important dimension to the FEW nexus dialogue, this workshop will focus
on reducing consumption and developing integrated climate change mitigation-
adaptation strategies accounting for endogenous socio-economic feedbacks. An
integrated mitigation-adaptation approach is needed because land, energy, and
water management strategies for climate change mitigation must account for
changes that will already occur given current greenhouse gas levels.
Furthermore, moving towards sustainable consumption will require understanding
of how FEW production systems may be affected. Workshop outcomes will be widely
disseminated through a white paper and Eos article identifying critical research
frontiers for FEW conservation strategies based on a coupled production-
consumption systems approach.