* 1541500
* Collaborative Research: ButterflyNet--an integrative framework for comparative biology
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2021
* Robert Guralnick, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 12/31/2021
* USD 1,282,409.00

The world is crawling with insects, many of which play crucial roles as
pollinators, prey, mutualists, and critical components of ecosystem health.
Despite their significance, insects remain understudied, imposing major
limitations on our understanding of the patterns and processes in insect ecology
and evolution. Butterflies are the exception, however, thanks to the efforts of
centuries of collectors and enthusiasts who have appreciated their beauty and
fascinating biology. More is known about their morphology, species
distributions, behavior, and larval resources than any other insect group.
However, this information needs to be synthesized, placed in an evolutionary
context, and made available for research. This project will achieve these two
goals by reconstructing the evolutionary history of the approximately 18,800
described species and assembling a database of biological information about each
species using field guides, social media, collections, and other sources. All of
this information will be made available to the public via a website with the
goal of catalyzing synthetic research and comparative studies. In addition to
public outreach and education, the members of the research team will train
graduate students and postdoctoral researchers in systematics and
bioinformatics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will produce a set of online
tools and databases for comparative studies of butterflies. At the heart of the
project is the assembly of a molecular phylogeny incorporating all known
butterfly species. A hierarchical approach will be used to reconstruct butterfly
relationships. To create a robust backbone phylogeny, approximately 500 loci
will be captured from a single exemplar species from within each of the ~1,800
genera using anchored enrichment prior to sequencing. Genetic data from public
databases and from our own sequencing efforts will then be collected to include
remaining known species and complete the phylogeny. Model-based inference will
examine the complexity of speciation, extinction, biogeography, and trait
evolution. Existing locality data will be assembled from museum collections,
inventories, citizen science monitoring networks, and expert knowledge to model
species distributions using the integrative Map of Life framework. Species trait
data have already been assembled for some groups and regions, but this project
will create a consistent, harmonized trait database while also closing major
gaps to create a globally comprehensive compilation of trait data on species
life history, interactions, ecology, and distributions. All of these data layers
will be made available through the Map of Life online platform, thus delivering
community vetted and curated data and tools to catalyze comparative research.