* 1541421
* CC*DNI Region: Campus Cyberinfrastructure/Operating Innovative Networks (CC*OIN)
* CSE,OAC
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2017
* Jon-Paul Herron, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 12/31/2017
* USD 149,136.00

The project develops and hosts hands-on advanced technology workshops for campus
network engineering staff in the US. Each CC-OIN workshop is being hosted in
partnership with regional networks and tailored to their region's needs.
Participants gain the practical understanding they need to support data-
intensive science projects on their campuses, and learn how to improve science
performance using state-of-the-art network technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CC-
OIN builds on past work with similar workshops and is open to participants
around the country and abroad. Over the previous three years, collaborators have
shared detailed technical content on the Science DMZ paradigm, the perfSONAR
network performance measurement system, and the use of open Software Defined
Networking (SDN) technologies. The project also broadens and updates content
related to emerging areas of need for supporting science on campuses. New topics
include advanced cybersecurity, new SDN methods, orchestration of networks with
scientific cloud applications, and an SDN-based Science DMZ for increased
performance and security. Finally, the project explores ways to broaden the
reach of the workshops through alternative delivery methods like videos and
cloud-based, hands-on exercises.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CC-OIN project
advances the expertise large and small campuses in every region of the country
needs, supports technical staff to become regional resources supporting science,
and brings each region's community together to collaborate on improving network
capabilities for better science outcomes.