* 1541588
* Acquisition of New Thermal Analysis Instrumentation for Increased Capacity of Characterization of Organic Matter in Soils and Sediments
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2018
* Alain Plante, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 07/31/2018
* USD 100,072.00

1541588 Plante

This Division of Earth Science Instrumentation and Facilities Program grant
supports acquisition of a Netzsch simultaneous Thermal Analyzer for analysis of
soil and sediment organic carbon. The requested instrument includes the
capabilities for automated operation. The instrument will support studies that
investigate the character, stability and content of organic matter in soils,
sediments, composts, biochars, and other environmental samples and will allow
for high throughput, unattended analysis in support of large-scale soil
ecosystem studies. The instrument will support undergraduate and graduate
research training. This support is congruent with NSFs mission of promoting the
progress of science and advancing the national health, prosperity and welfare
given the importance of training the next generation scientific workforce in
modern techniques of geochemical oanalysis and research methods and the societal
importance of understanding the impacts of changing climate and land use,
including agricultural practices, on soil carbon reservoirs.

Research using the instrument will allow exploration of the stability and
composition of soil organic matter and complement techniques to identify
specific soil minerals (XRD), the structure of organic carbon bearing compounds
(NMR), and the age of organic carbon pools (AMS radiocarbon dating). The
instrument will support studies of a range of soil ecosystems through use on
samples from numerous NSF/EAR supported Critical Zone Observatories to better
understand the impacts of climate and land use change on soil carbon across
space and time.