* 1541642
* FEW:   Development and Application of Analytical Tools in Support of  Food-Energy-Water Nexus Planning
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/2015,05/31/2017
* Fernando Miralles-Wilhelm, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 05/31/2017
* USD 99,980.00

1541642 (Miralles-Wilhelm). This workshop will focus on development of
principles, algorithms and model formulations for understanding and evaluating
the potential of implementing approaches, developed through research, to
handling food-energy-water (FEW) nexus challenges. The workshop will take a
broad systems perspective, linking application of tools and areas of
disciplinary expertise to optimization of engineered FEW systems. An objective
is to address shared needs of FEW stakeholders, providing an interactive
environment to explore trade-offs, explore potential synergies and evaluate
alternatives among a broad list of FEW options and objectives including
flexibility to facilitate tailored analyses over different geographical regions
and scales.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the workshop is to contribute to
sustainable management and development of the food, energy and water sectors by
increasing awareness and capacity of interdisciplinary modeling towards
integrated planning and identifying/evaluating trade-offs and synergies. The
focus of the workshop will be on exchanging insights, experiences and research
results on innovative approaches and evidence-based operational tools to assess
the economic and social tradeoffs of constraints in food, energy and water
security. Designed tools may focus on upstream sector planning in order to
identify primary opportunities and constraints to water, energy and food
development, as well as evaluating opportunities to curb demand growth without
compromising quality of service, thus indicating priorities for more detailed
analysis as well as providing characterization of alternative scenarios of
investment in each sector. This will also be an important step toward improved
understanding of economic and social tradeoffs among competing uses (i.e., water
for energy conversion versus food production, industrial and municipal uses, and
environmental benefits of in situ water). The results of this exchange on
research ideas and approaches thus aims at supporting decision-making in
integrated food-energy-water planning and prioritization of research
investments.