* 1541312
* EAGER: The impact of selection and temperate-tropical transitions on the evolution of New World bird diversity
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2020
* Frederick Barker, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Katharina Dittmar
* 07/31/2020
* USD 148,881.00

Many fundamental patterns of biological diversity have been observed, but
explaining these patterns has proven challenging. In particular, the tropics
(the area ~23.5Â° north and south of the equator) harbor many more species than
the temperate zones, and many of these tropical species are significantly
differentiated in their physiology, behavior, and body morphology. Some of these
differences have been proposed as evolutionary drivers of species numbers; for
instance, species in which females can choose from many competing males may
fragment into multiple species more easily as female preferences can quickly
change. Testing this and related hypotheses requires comprehensive databases of
hard-to-quantify species characteristics, including social group sizes and
breeding system. This project will produce the first publicly available large-
scale data set that includes a metric of the importance of female choice, male
testis size. These data will be compiled for a large sample of New World birds,
and used to test for relationships among latitude, breeding system, social
system, and the rate of speciation. Understanding these relationships is
fundamental to explaining broad-scale diversity patterns, which informs
conservation planning and policy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project tests the
hypothesis that temperate-tropical biogeographic transitions affect the
evolution of mating and social systems in New World oscine passerine birds, and
ultimately that these behavioral characteristics in turn may have affected
diversification rates. Specifically, this work will focus on compilation of a
data set of combined testis mass for all New World oscines based on museum
specimen data, uniformly analyzed in a fashion unbiased with regard to breeding
latitude. Due to the correlation of testis size with the degree of sperm
competition, these data can be used as a proxy for breeding system, to test the
hypothesis that tropical habitats select for genetic monogamy, favoring the
evolution of sociality (in particular, cooperative breeding). New World oscines
are ideal for addressing these issues as they are diverse, have transitioned
between the tropics and temperate zone many times, are well-represented in
museum collections, and nearly all have been included in species-level
phylogenies (with the exception of wrens, for which this project will generate
the first phylogeny). These data and analyses will form the basis for broader
tests of the relationship among latitude, species traits, and diversification
rates in New World birds.