* 1541457
* CC*DNI Engineer:Integrating Campus Cyberinfrastructure and Research Computing at Northwestern University
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2019
* Joseph Walsh, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 09/30/2019
* USD 399,018.00

The growing complexity of research requires increasingly sophisticated tools,
technologies, data options and solutions. Moreover, scientific inquiry is
increasingly reliant on the ability to access a diversity of resources, on and
off campus, based on comprehensive technology and infrastructure solutions along
with capable networks that facilitate the sharing, management and analysis of
data. However, to fully support scientific research it is not enough to simply
provide cyberinfrastructure (CI). Expertise in matching resources to research
requirements is essential.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The two-year project sustains
the activities of a Campus Cyberinfrastructure Engineer (CIE) dedicated to
supporting research inquiry. The CIE leads the provisioning and integration of
local and remote resources, including those that are sited around the world,
that meet the research and training needs of faculty and students while actively
advocating for domain scientists' differing CI needs. This project identifies
and addresses gaps in CI services and infrastructure, and incorporates new
technologies and practices into the existing service portfolio and team skill
set, allowing the broader CI team to better support research and
training.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project provides enabling and integrative
capabilities across multiple disciplines and bridges activities between internal
and external communities of practice through: (1) researcher support in pursuit
and execution of research activities; (2) design, development, and integration
advancement of core cyberinfrastructure services; (3) engagement of local,
regional, and national partners in the development of communities of practice;
(4) growth and expanded usage of the University's Science DMZ network; and (5)
core CI services training.