* 1541368
* CC*DNI Networking Infrastructure: Custom Science DMZ Per Research Lab with a Secure Invitation to Opt-In
* CSE,OAC
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2018
* Deniz Gurkan, University of Houston
* Continuing Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 12/31/2018
* USD 499,681.00

Science data transfers originating from various research labs to other
collaborating labs and cloud resources have long been enabled by significant
investments in research infrastructure at the university level. However, when a
research lab transfers large scientific data sets, many hurdles still exist for
research and Information Technology (IT) communities to work together in
creating secure topologies for research collaboration. The University of
Houston's vision is to enable the abstraction of circuit setup, traffic
steering, and leveraging of network functionality for end-users to opt-in to
connect their data with researcher labs in a customized fashion with relevant
data sharing policies enforced on the topology. This project: (1) deploys
network function instantiation (NFI) within main distribution frame (MDF)
components at strategic buildings with research labs on university campuses; (2)
implements an interdisciplinary data sharing isolated network customized for an
air quality and healthcare research use case; and (3) deploys the NFI capability
as a pilot on LEARN (Lonestar Education and Research Network) for future support
of science data flows.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work has a broad impact across
many dimensions: isolated networks per research lab creates an environment for
accelerated innovation, free of operational constraints. The proposed prototype
research topology supports researchers in eliminating the data sharing problems,
with concepts that extend to all research collaborations.