* 1541831
* Probing into the Role of Regulatory RNA, DNA Methylation and Associated Network Rewiring in Transgressive Segregation for Stress Tolerance in Rice
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2015,01/31/2016
* Benildo de los Reyes, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* thomas okita
* 01/31/2016
* USD 299,049.00

To ensure the safety of the world's food supply given the threats of rapid
population growth and declining arable land and water resources, innovative
strategies for breeding the next generation of high-yield potential and climate-
resilient crops will have to be implemented. New research strategies should
create novel crop traits that have not yet been achieved in order to
substantially enhance yield potential under marginal environments. How can this
enormous goal be attained? It is now fully appreciated that any further
improvements in genetic potential for yield, stress tolerance and water and
nutrient use efficiency will have to rely on the ability to create complex
genomic configurations that lead to novel biochemical and physiological traits.
This project represents the use of contemporary research tools to solve an old
puzzle. It represents a closer look and more strategic examination of one of the
most enigmatic and relatively unexploited concepts in plant genetics, the
phenomenon of transgressive variation. Transgressive variation is observed when
progeny derived from two divergent parents are superior (or inferior) to both
parents. Using rice to test the concept, this project will determine which DNA
segments or RNA molecules cause transgressive traits for salinity and low
temperature stress tolerance.

This project will test the hypothesis that transgressive stress tolerance
phenotypes in biparental cross combinations of rice are the consequences of
ideal shuffling and complementation effects between two divergent parental
genomes leading to genetic network rewiring. New paradigms built upon the power
of regulon restructuring, regulatory non-coding RNAs (ncRNAs), and DNA
methylation will be explored to understand the intricate mechanisms by which
novel gene expression patterns mediate transgression from parental phenotypes.
By integrated use of various next-generation DNA sequencing applications such as
genome-Seq, mRNA-Seq, ncRNA-Seq, and bisulfite-Seq, this project will: 1)
discover stress-regulated miRNAs/siRNAs that are transgressively expressed in
intraspecific recombinants with novel salt tolerance phenotypes, and those that
are transgressively expressed in interspecific recombinants with novel low
temperature or other stress tolerance attributes; 2) establish meaningful
correlations between mRNA and miRNA/siRNA transcriptome signatures among
recombinants and their respective parents to evelop hypotheses on how global
gene expression is altered in transgressive segregants; and 3) establish
meaningful correlations between transcriptome signatures and genome methylation
profiles between recombinants and their parents to develop hypotheses on how
epigenomic changes alter gene regulation in transgressive segregants. The
approach will address the possibilities that: a) stress tolerance phenotypic
transgression is due to regulatory genes that acquired optimal function because
of compatible regulatory clusters in their new genetic background, i.e., regulon
restructuring; b) network reconfiguration in recombinants is due to coupling or
uncoupling of trans-acting ncRNAs and their target regulatory genes or genomic
loci from either parents; and c) genome shuffling alters the methylation
profiles in recombinants leading to novel gene expression signatures. Outcomes
will advance our understanding of the intricacies of genetic and epigenetic
networks towards applications to stress tolerance breeding in rice and other
major cereal crops. The genomics datasets to be generated will be made available
to the broader scientific community through public data repositories including
the Sequence Read Archive of NCBI and DDBJ. The rice genetic stocks to be
characterized will be made available to other researchers through the USDA rice
genetic stock maintenance and distribution center.