* 1541442
* CC*DNI Integration: Innovating Network Cyberinfrastructure through Openflow and Content Centric Networking in Nebraska
* CSE,OAC
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2018
* David Swanson, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Continuing Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 12/31/2018
* USD 572,112.00

Research and Education networks (R&amp;E) networks are undergoing a major
transformation. At the campus level, implementations must balance performance,
security, and the flexibility to handle innovative network applications
research. Without adequate performance, the core application stakeholders would
quickly leave; without security, the university networks would not allow
integration of new approaches; without innovations, future leadership is at
stake. The Holland Computing Center (HCC) at the University of Nebraska-Lincoln
(UNL) campus has identified the need to increase the flexibility of UNL's
network to support scientific users and network researchers; UNL addresses this
by deploying a production software-defined network (SDN) using
OpenFlow.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This deployment enhances UNL's HCC network
through SDN, in three focused areas. First, it enhances resource management for
GridFTP transfers by having the applications communicate with an SDN controller
to set up paths and path properties for large transfers. By enabling
communication between the applications and the network controller, we allow for
application-driven bandwidth provisioning. Second, it integrates security with
SDN-based dynamic routing so that only flows that require specific middleboxes
be routed through them. This increases the scalability of the network by
reducing the load on middleboxes and enabling automated reaction to security
alerts raised by these devices. Third, it uses Content-Centric Networking (CCN)
to provide access to the Compact Muon Solenoid (CMS) experiment data. CCN
provides in-network caching and content-based routing. UNL leverages these
techniques to efficiently deliver experiment data to scientific applications
without always requiring access to the server where the data is stored.