* 1541155
* CRISP Type 2/Collaborative Research: Resilience Analytics: A Data-Driven Approach for Enhanced Interdependent Network Resilience
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/15/2015,02/28/2022
* Andrea Tapia, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Jacqueline Meszaros
* 02/28/2022
* USD 927,171.00

Recent natural disasters have challenged our traditional approaches of planning
for and managing disruptive events. Today, social media provides an opportunity
to make use of community-driven data to help us understand the resilience, or
lack thereof, of community networks (e.g., friends, neighborhoods) physical
infrastructure networks (e.g., transportation, electric power) and networks of
service providers (e.g., emergency responders, restoration crews). This Critical
Resilient Interdependent Infrastructure Systems and Processes (CRISP)
collaborative research integrates multiple disciplinary perspectives in
engineering, computer science, and social science to address how community-
driven data can help (i) understand the behavior of these interdependent
networks before, during, and after disruptions, and (ii) more effectively reduce
their vulnerability to and enhance their recovery after a disruption. The
results will significantly improve our understanding and management of
infrastructure recovery from natural disasters. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two
research components comprise this effort in resilience analytics. The first
component creates a network model of the interdependence of infrastructure
networks, the community networks that they serve, and the service networks
engaged to respond after a disruption. This component will explore the
functional relationships between community resilience and infrastructure network
performance. Model results will enable decision makers to understand the balance
of resilience across the several networks and regions. The second component
integrates the interdependent network model with community-sourced data to
develop a framework of data analytics to better understand and plan for
resilience. This component builds on research in the field of socio-technical
systems relating to the analysis of social media data monitored after a
disruption. The methods will assess the value of information provided by crowd-
sourced data with expertise of community social scientists. This project draws
upon multiple methods across several disciplines. The multidisciplinary methods
explored in this project are essential for a breakthrough in resilience
analytics. This project aims at taking a significant step forward in our
understanding of how real-time data from social media and other sources can
describe, predict, and prescribe practices to manage interdependent networks in
crises.