* 1541883
* FEW: Food-Energy-Water Nexus Workshop to Develop System Approaches and Sustainability Metrics for Evaluation
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2015,01/31/2016
* Kevin Chin, American Institute of Chemical Engineers
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 01/31/2016
* USD 94,929.00

1541883 (Schuster). This workshop will develop the systems framework and
associated metrics for evaluation of the nexus of food, energy and water (FEW)
along key processing areas of the food supply chain. The workship is being
jointly funded by the CBET Division in the ENG Directorate and the CHE Division
in the MPS Directorate at NSF. In order for the FEW nexus to be understood along
with the associated tradeoffs among food, energy, and water, the workshop will
bring together experts in systems analysis and metrics with the aim of
developing a roadmap of needed research, education, and application of
sustainability metrics and systems thinking for the assessment of the food-
energy-water nexus. The workshop will help to define the roles of professional
societies and how they can foster collaborations between government, industry,
and academia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop will address the difficult
research aspects of complex systems analysis coupled with sustainability metrics
frameworks. Assessment of current approaches to measure tradeoffs in complex
systems will be summarized along with identification of the additional research
needs when studying the nexus of food, energy and water along the various key
processing areas along the food supply chain. How to qualify and quantify the
complex impacts and interplay of energy and water on the food supply chain will
have research as well as educational ramifications that should be addressed by a
robust and coordinated research program. This work will begin to set the stage
for continued needed work hoping to identify a common framework for analysis of
such systems. Lifecycle, Sustainability ROI, P-Graphs, Eco-efficiency, and the
more recently used FAO approach for multiple metric assessments will be
addressed and commonalities and differences and needed enhancements for
application to the nexus analysis will be identified. The outcome of the
workshop will be both the evaluation and summary of various ways to measure such
systems. Lifecycle, Sustainability ROI, P-Graphs, Eco-efficiency, and the more
recently used FAO approach for multiple metric assessments will be addressed and
commonalities and differences and needed enhancements for application to the
nexus analysis will be identified. A focus will be on the food supply chains
dealing with food production: from agriculture, to processing, to
transportation, and to end use. Special attention will also be paid to the issue
of food waste and its associated impacts on energy and water. Engineers from the
private sector from chemical, civil, electrical, environmental and mechanical
perspectives along with sociologists studying food systems will be engaged and a
virtual network will be sustained by AIChE to enable continued collaboration.