* 1541286
* CC*DNI Networking Infrastructure: Campus Network Enhancement to Support Data Intensive Research at the University of Alabama in Huntsville
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2017
* Michael Turner, University of Alabama in Huntsville
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 09/30/2017
* USD 499,115.00

This project, "CC*DNI Networking Infrastructure: Campus Network Enhancement to
Support Data Intensive Research at the University of Alabama in Huntsville",
establishes a high-performance campus network dedicated to the University of
Alabama in Huntsville (UAH) scientific research community. Implementation of
this project enables UAH researchers to perform leading edge research impacting
the entire nation, particularly in the areas of big data management and
analysis, space exploration and space science, cybersecurity, earth and
atmospheric science, optical engineering, aerospace, and propulsion. Scientific
research is not only vital to scientific discovery and UAH's expansion of
undergraduate and graduate STEM education programs, the research done at UAH
contributes to local, state, and national economic development and job
creation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many of the research initiatives at UAH involve
the collection, analysis, visualization and sharing of large amounts of data,
and include use of sensors and other real-time data sources. To better support
data-intensive science, this project enables a fast, highly secure, and highly
flexible network environment called a Science DMZ. The Science DMZ is comprised
of both 100GE and 40GE connections between major research facilities on the UAH
campus. By using Software Defined Networking (SDN) and OpenFlow, the network
intelligently selects the Science DMZ exclusively for secure, protected research
data flows. An expanded PerfSONAR implementation is utilized to monitor and
continuously tune the Science DMZ network performance. Scientists and
researchers experience a secure, friction-free network through the use of the
UAH Science DMZ, further enabling future data-intensive research.