* 1541504
* Student Travel Support for IEEE 23rd International Symposium on Modelling, Analysis and Simulation of Computer and Telecommunication Systems (MASCOTS 2015)
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2015,01/31/2016
* Ali Butt, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 01/31/2016
* USD 10,000.00

The goal of this project is to promote the progress of science by providing
student travel scholarships to attend the 23nd IEEE International Symposium on
Modeling, Analysis and Simulation of Computer and Telecommunication Systems
(MASCOTS 2015), to be held in Atlanta, GA, on Oct. 5-7, 2015. The 2005 PITAC and
2007 NSF Cyberinfrastructure Vision reports make it clear that people are key to
improving computational science and research and in maintaining the competitive
edge of the United States. To this end, the project aims to support about 20
students from US-based universities to attend MASCOTS 2015 by defraying travel
and hotel expenses for them. The conference offers opportunities for students to
interact and learn about state-of-the-art research in the areas of computer
networks and performance evaluation of computer systems by bringing together
professionals from academic and industrial backgrounds in what has become a
premier forum for discussing the design, implementation, and implication of
modeling and advanced computing systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are
significant growth opportunities available to the students, such as three days
of technical sessions, keynotes/plenaries, panels, parallel sessions, an
industrial session, and a poster reception. The goal is to improve the computing
field by: exposing more students to technical experts and potential
collaborators, building better relationships between students, helping students
meet potential hosts for summer visits/internships, helping students meet
potential post-doctoral sponsors, and encouraging the students to stay in the
field. Especially, the supported students will interact with researchers who are
doing key work in crucial computing areas such as systems, networking, I/O,
middleware/OS, and applications. The broader impacts of the project are the
opportunities for the students to gain access to contacts with academia,
industry, and national laboratories, leading to useful feedback on the students'
research as well as opportunities for future employment.