* 1541737
* Collaborative Research: CPSF30 at the convergence of cellular signaling and RNA Processing
* BIO,IOS
* 03/17/2015,08/31/2018
* Qingshun Li, Western University of Health Sciences
* Continuing Grant
* Gerald Schoenknecht
* 08/31/2018
* USD 244,855.00

Non-technical summary:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Environmental stresses (from
conditions such as drought and high or low temperatures) are significant and
ongoing concerns for crop productivity. Plants, including crops, respond to cues
from the environment in many ways. Among these responses are changes in the ways
that genes are expressed. Understanding and manipulating these changes are
likely to be profitable means for improving crop productivity. The subject of
this research is a protein (termed AtCPSF30) that is important for the responses
of plants to environmental stresses, as well as to other cues (or developmental
signals) that guide development from a seedling to a mature and productive
plant. The goals of the research are to understand how this protein helps the
plant to discriminate between different cues, so that subsequent changes in gene
expression are appropriate to the respective stress or developmental signal.
This research will lead to a better understanding of how plants respond to
environmental stresses, and to how stresses affect different aspects of growth
and development. This understanding will allow scientists to develop improved
crop varieties, and will help producers to make informed decisions regarding
crop and variety choice, as well as production management.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical description of the
project:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The subject of this study is a hypothetical hub
that transduces cellular signaling cues into differential poly(A) site choices
and phenotypic outcomes. This hub, the 30 kD subunit of the so-called Cleavage
and Polyadenylation Specificity Factor in Arabidopsis (AtCPSF30), is regulated
in vitro by two distinctive chemical or biochemical signals (calcium and redox
signals), and is involved in a range of developmental and physiological
responses. The goals of the research are to determine how these different
signaling cues are transduced to specific outcomes, potentially through
alternative polyadenylation (APA) during pre-mRNA processing. The goals will be
accomplished by testing these three hypotheses:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1.
Different signaling inputs are processed, through AtCPSF30, into differing sets
of APA events and outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;2. AtCPSF30-mediated APA alters mRNA
functionality for some of the numerous direct targets of the
protein.&lt;br/&gt;3. AtCPSF30-mediated APA affects gene expression early in
lateral root development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Extensive use will be made of
systems approaches - both high-throughput DNA sequencing and computational
analyses of large datasets. These will be complemented by genetic, transgenic,
cellular, molecular, and biochemical studies, all of which will be brought to
bear on tests of the stated hypotheses. The outcomes of this research will
further an understanding of how RNA processing integrates signaling cues into
distinctive molecular outcomes, and how these outcomes affect genetic networks
that in turn impact essential growth processes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The data
from this project will be incorporated as appropriate into classes to give the
students first-hand information on how the research process works, and how
large-scale datasets are collected and analyzed. The laboratory and
computational expertise and the datasets that will be generated in the course of
the proposed studies will be made available to a consortium of colleges and
universities that has the goal of facilitating the development of laboratory and
classroom exercises intended to familiarize undergraduate students with high-
throughput DNA sequencing. Other outreach activities include: a collaboration
with faculty at regional HBCU and highs schools and participation (by Dr. Li) in
a project intended to recruit and mentor minority students in research in cell
and molecular biology.