* 1541728
* Conference Support for IEEE Photonics Society Summer Topical Conferences, Bahamas, July 13-15, 2015
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/15/2015,05/31/2016
* Anupama Kaul, University of Texas at El Paso
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 05/31/2016
* USD 14,500.00

The Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE) Summer Topical
Meetings are the premier conference series for exciting, new areas in photonic
science, technology, and applications. This Topical Meeting Series creates the
opportunity for researchers to learn about emerging fields, and to interact with
the research and technology leaders in an intimate environment. Unlike regular
conferences of professional societies, the topical meetings provide a unique
forum where members from academia, national labs, industry, and government labs
working in the same field will convene in a highly interactive environment to
foster active cross-disciplinary discussions. The funds requested for this
conference support proposal will allow the participation of
graduate/undergraduate students at this conference, in particular those from
underrepresented groups, to leverage NSF funds to partially cover their
registration and travel expenses. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Topical Meetings of
the IEEE Photonics Society are the premier conference series for exciting, new
areas in photonic science, technology, and applications. It serves as an
international forum to facilitate information exchange between various technical
communities using or affected by the rapidly growing areas of science and
technology. The program will: 1) sponsor a student poster session and poster
presentation awards at the Summer Topical Meetings; and 2) provide financial
support for student participants to attend the IEEE Photonics Society Topical
Conferences. The conferences will cover six topical areas: Functional Two-
Dimensional Materials (FTDM), Ultraviolet Lasers and Light Emitting Diodes
(UVLED), On-chip optical interconnects (OCOI), Visible Light Communications
(VisC), Mid Infrared Photonics (MIP), Nonlinear-Optical Signal Processing
(NOSP). The six topics have been proposed by experts in the respective areas and
selected by the IEEE Photonics Society, and represent some of the most important
and intensively investigated fields as deemed by the photonics community.