* 1541250
* I-Corps: Networking Medical Implants Through Ultrasounds
* TIP,TI
* 05/15/2015,10/31/2016
* Tommaso Melodia, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 10/31/2016
* USD 50,000.00

As of today, existing wireless medical implants are connected through radio
frequency (RF) electromagnetic waves. RF-based solutions tend to almost blindly
scale down traditional wireless technologies (e.g., Wi-Fi, Bluetooth, Zigbee) to
the intra-body environment, with little or no attention to the peculiar
characteristics and safety requirements of the human body. The human body is in
fact composed up to 65% of water, a medium through which RF waves do not
propagate well. In addition, the RF frequency spectrum is scarce and already
crowded with many devices interfering with one another. Therefore, RF-based
technologies raise serious concerns about potential interference from existing
RF communication systems that can unintentionally undermine the reliability and
security of the implantable network, and ultimately the safety of the patient.
This team has developed the ultrasonic wideband (UsWB) technology, a networking
platform that enables wireless communications through ultrasounds (i.e.,
acoustic waves at non-audible frequencies).

Ultrasonic wireless communications and networking technology (i.e., based on
acoustic waves at non-audible frequencies) is proven to have significant
advantages with respect to radio-frequency (RF)-based solutions in the human
body. Ultrasounds propagate better than RF waves in human tissues, leading to
(i) lower energy consumption and (ii) reduced heating of tissues. Ultrasounds
have also been long used for medical imaging and are proven to be safe. And,
unlike RF waves, ultrasonic waves do not penetrate from outside-the-body to
inside-the-body, and vice versa, at low transmission powers. Therefore,
ultrasonic communication links are potentially more secure as they are less
prone to unintentional or malicious interference. At this stage, the team has
developed the first, non-integrated and non-implantable UsWB prototype that uses
off-the-shelf high-frequency ultrasonic transducers to enable transmission and
reception of ultrasonic waves, through media that emulate with high fidelity
acoustic propagation in biological tissues, i.e., so-called ultrasonic phantoms.