* 1541491
* Collaborative Research: FishLife: genealogy and traits of living and fossil vertebrates that never left the water
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/2015,05/31/2019
* Ricardo Betancur, University of Puerto Rico-Rio Piedras
* Continuing Grant
* David Cannatella
* 05/31/2019
* USD 381,717.00

This project will develop and apply a unified framework for studying the
evolution of all fishes, including lampreys, sharks, and the coral reef, deep
sea and freshwater fishes. This work will illuminate the genealogical
relationships (phylogeny), evolutionary timing, and mechanisms for the origin
and maintenance of the world's diversity of fishes, including the most important
food and aquarium fishes. The project will contribute to community-driven
scientific efforts, to student training, to web content and application
development, and to public outreach. All fish specimens, specimen and DNA data,
and analytical results obtained will be made publicly available through a
dynamic and open structure that complies with established standards to
facilitate wide accessibility to the broader scientific and non-scientific
communities. High school, undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral student
training are central activities for this project. Social media outreach and
training will provide diverse professional development opportunities as well. A
fish species identification application for smartphones based on image data
(FishSnap) will be developed and made freely available to the public to allow
accurate identification of selected groups of fishes. Outcomes of this project
will form part of a new public exhibit at the National Museum of Natural History
to highlight the value of specimen collections at natural history
museums.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This integrative project will combine genomic,
paleontological, anatomical, functional, ecological, and comparative approaches.
The research team blends strengths in collections-based research on fishes,
molecular and morphological phylogenetics, bioinformatics, and comparative
analyses, allowing them to synthesize big data sets to resolve the phylogeny of
all described fish species and conduct evolutionary analysis of key traits.
Time-calibrated trees will be used to reveal diversification patterns of the
major groups. Image analysis, morphometrics, and phenomic data will enable the
discovery of evolutionary patterns in size, shape, and biomechanical function
across thousands of species.