* 1541678
* EAGER: Engineering light-matter interaction via topological phase transitions in photonic heterostructures with aperiodic order
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/15/2015,09/30/2016
* Luca Dal Negro, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 09/30/2016
* USD 117,574.00

Nontechnical description: Enhancing light-matter interaction processes such as
the emission and absorption of photons using engineered optical nanostructures
is a key feature to sustain the continuing development of a number of active
devices that include light sources, modulators and optical sensors. These
devices are the cornerstones of our present information age, where highly
integrated semiconductor chips deliver and manipulate optical and electrical
signals at ever increasing rates, directly or indirectly affecting every aspect
of our society. In this project we propose a novel approach to boost light-
matter interaction and tailor the fundamental transport processes that govern
the photon dynamics in optical nanostructures. In particular we plan to engineer
light-emitting photonic nanostructures with unprecedented optical properties by
leveraging the interdisciplinary physics of the recently discovered topological
phases in electronic systems. An example of such fascinating structures is
provided by topological insulators, which are materials that behave as
electrical insulators in their interior but can robustly conduct electricity on
their surface irrespectively of perturbations and disorder. Our project explores
photonic analogues of such systems extended to non-periodic geometries that
support localized field solutions with greatly enhanced light-matter coupling
and give rise to novel photon transport properties. The successful development
of our research program may lead to a number of breakthroughs in the
technologically strategic area of active silicon photonics, potentially
resulting in transformative device applications to optical signal generation,
propagation, processing and energy harvesting on the cost-effective silicon
chip. The science of this project also offers exciting opportunities for the
development of a vibrant educational and outreach plan on undergraduate and
graduate levels. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical description: Our proposal
combines interdisciplinary perspectives on topological theory of deterministic
aperiodic systems, device-level electromagnetic modeling of complex photonic
structures, materials and device fabrication with spectroscopic characterization
of light-emitting nanostructures based on silicon technology. The proposal
builds on recent theoretical advancements that established a surprising
connection between the rich physics of two-dimensional topological insulators
and one-dimensional photonic quasi-crystals. In the project we will extend this
vision to more general aperiodic systems and we will engineer topological phase
transitions by smoothly connecting active waveguide structures with inequivalent
topologies. Such devices will be fabricated using the widespread silicon
technology that guarantees high-volume and low-cost production. Our goals will
be achieved by first fabricating low-loss silicon compatible materials, such as
transparent conductive oxides and nitrides doped with light emitting rare earth
ions and Si quantum dots. We will then fabricate sub-wavelength slot waveguide
gratings structures with aperiodic refractive index modulations that will
controllably implement different types of topological transitions. The
theoretical foundation to understand optical waves in such graded aperiodic
systems will be developed in close partnership with experimental
characterization of materials and devices. In particular, rigorous
electromagnetic theory of and device-level modeling of the fabricated structures
will be performed. The optical emission and transport properties of fabricated
samples will be investigated by steady-state and time-resolved fluorescence
spectroscopy in combination with structural characterization of materials.
&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work paves the way to a novel class of photonic
materials that leverage topological effects and aperiodic order to manipulate
photon transport and light localization phenomena in active nanostructures.
Moreover, this research can result in the discovery of novel surface phenomena
in nanophotonics and will enable the development of new strategies to boost
light-matter interaction in aperiodic systems with emission characteristics
intrinsically determined by the nature of their topological invariants.