* 1541164
* CRISP: Type 1: Reductionist and Integrative Approaches to Improve the Resiliency of Multi-Scale Interdependent Critical Infrastructure
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2021
* Rae Zimmerman, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 08/31/2021
* USD 500,000.00

Critical infrastructures are evolving to be more diverse and increasingly
connected. The growing complexity creates convoluted dependencies and
interdependencies between infrastructures arising from cyber-physical,
geographical, supply-and-demand, and human-in-the-loop relationships between
different components of the system. Understanding these interactions requires a
reductionist and an integrative approach. The reductionist approach focuses on
studying the characteristics of four fundamental classes of dependency links,
while the integrative approach uses them as building blocks to establish a
holistic network framework to capture the interdependencies of the
infrastructure systems. This bottom-up methodology provides a systematic way to
generate an integrated and multi-scale view of a system of systems, enabling the
identification and quantitative characterization of unanticipated
interdependencies through feedback loops. The overarching goal of this project
is to improve the resiliency of interdependent infrastructures, enabling them to
recover from disruptive events and disturbances within an acceptable amount of
time and cost.

The proposed research will expand the knowledge base of such interdependencies
by adopting both reductionist and integration approach to create a bottom-up
methodology to provide fundamental principles to understand interdependencies.
The project aims to classify and characterize four fundamental classes of
dependencies using principles from physical laws, communications theory, supply
chain theory, and game and economic theory. In addition, the project will
develop automated scalable vertical and horizontal compositional techniques to
form a holistic interdependency network model to investigate the fundamental
tradeoff between heterogeneous measures, and the tradeoff between pre-event and
post-event measures. The analysis of these relationships will lead to an optimal
design of a multi-scale resilience mechanism, which will be applied to case
study scenarios of Staten Island during Superstorm Sandy and a nuclear power
plan accident such as the one that occurred in Fukushima, Japan.