* 1541516
* Development of X-ray Atlas, a high-brilliance high-sensitivity high-load-capacity X-ray diffractometer for mineralogy and mineral physics research at the University of Hawaii
* GEO,EAR
* 04/15/2016,03/31/2020
* Przemyslaw Dera, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 03/31/2020
* USD 635,209.00

Experiments that allow probing the structure, behavior and properties of Earth
forming minerals at extreme pressure and temperature conditions representative
of the Earth deep interior are one of primary sources of information about the
inner workings of our planet, indispensable in creating reliable geophysical
models used e.g. to predict earthquakes. X-ray diffraction based experiments
play a special role in mineral physics, being the only reliable source of
information about changes in the crystal structure and bonding that take place
at depths. Within this project we will develop X-ray Atlas, a new generation of
instrument optimized for innovative, laboratory-based diffraction experiments
with tiny mineral fragment samples at extreme pressures and temperatures. X-ray
Atlas will also provide the much needed and currently non-existent experimental
capabilities for the mineral physics lab at the University of Hawaii, and will
be a valuable resource to a large number of geology-focused faculty and students
on campus. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;X-ray Atlas will be capable of exploring
pressure and temperature conditions relevant for the Earth upper mantle,
transition zone and some of the lower mantle (up to 50 GPa and 1000o C,
corresponding to depths greater than 1000 km). The new instrument will consist
of commercial X-ray diffractometer, Bruker D8 Venture as a base platform. The
Venture diffractometer will retain its original full functionality after the
planned modification, but a range of new unique capabilities will be added by
integrating a parallel kinematics hexapod robotic device as an alternative
sample mounting platform for high pressure diamond anvil cells and thin
sections. In addition to the hexapod, we will incorporate a fiber optics
transport to the sample viewing system of the Venture diffractometer, which will
enable collection of ruby fluorescence and Raman signal using an existing
standalone Princeton Instruments spectroscopy system, while the sample is
mounted on the diffractometer. Through development of the X-ray Altas we will
create new and very exciting opportunities for lab-based mineralogy, petrology
and mineral physics undergraduate and graduate education at the University of
Hawaii, create a personnel training and new technology and software prototyping
site for mineral physics and deliver novel, unique, robust and custom-designed
technology that will be transferred to other university mineral physics research
labs, and will be marketed by a commercial instrument vendor.&lt;br/&gt;