* 1541294
* Insight Into Clovis Faunal Utilization
* SBE,BCS
* 06/15/2015,05/31/2018
* Bruce Huckell, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 05/31/2018
* USD 31,770.00

Dr. Bruce Huckell, University of New Mexico, and his collaborators Drs. Timothy
Rowe (University of Texas), Grant Meyer (UNM), and Leslie McFadden (UNM), will
undertake research to investigate the exploitation of now-extinct elephants
(mammoths, mastodons, and gomphotheres) by latest Pleistocene North American
hunters of the Clovis cultural complex. The research documents a significant
part of the American cultural heritage and to preserve artifacts associated with
it. Despite the passage of some 80 years since discovery of the first Clovis-
elephant association, disagreement remains about the significance of these large
mammals in the Clovis diet. Some scholars believe that they were critical
dietary resources killed whenever encountered, while others suggest that they
were rarely taken and ranked much lower in the diet than small- and medium-sized
game. Researchers who favor the latter perspective argue that elephant hunting
only makes energetic sense if killed animals are thoroughly butchered; however,
others propose that situational factors such as the size of the elephant, its
nutritional condition, and the size of human social group will frequently
dictate a less-than-thorough butchering. Archaeological evidence at previously
excavated Clovis sites has suggested that many elephants were "lightly used."
The disagreements are fueled in part by the small number (15) of known Clovis-
elephant sites, and in part by divergent theoretical views on recent and past
hunter-gatherer use of elephants.

Dr. Huckell and his collaborators will undertake high-risk research to test the
hypothesis that Clovis hunters did not thoroughly butcher the elephants they
killed, and that they were sensitive to diminishing energetic returns of meat
with continued butchering labor. Optimal foraging theory - and specifically the
diet breadth and patch choice (prey-as-patch) models - underpin the research.
The scientific merits of this project are two-fold. First will be excavation of
the newly discovered Hartley Mammoth in northern New Mexico, which contains the
bones of a single mammoth rapidly being exposed by erosion, and nearby on the
surface, a Clovis point. Excavation - including paleoenvironmental studies - of
the areas containing the bones and the nearby point will determine whether
Clovis foragers killed this mammoth, and if so, how intensively they butchered
it. The second aspect of scientific merit is that investigation of the Hartley
Mammoth provides a point of departure to review the extent of Clovis butchering
of mammoth and other elephant carcasses at 10 previously excavated sites.
Archival records for spatially discrete, single elephant carcasses will be
examined for patterning among the carcasses. Maps of each carcass will be
digitized, bones will be identified to element, portion, and side, and the
position of the animal in death, its age, and size will be determined. The
positions, types, and numbers of associated lithic or other artifacts will be
tallied. Broader impacts of this research will include educational and training
benefits for the graduate student crew, and use of the site for master's degree
research by a young woman. The project will publicize Gary Hartley's decision to
share his discovery with scientists, which may encourage others to do the same
in the future, thereby contributing to the enhancement of knowledge of the
nation's history of human occupation.