* 1541863
* FEW: Technology and Information Fusion Needs to Address the Food, Energy, Water Systems (FEWS) Nexus Challenges
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2016
* Phillip Owens, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 07/31/2016
* USD 60,105.00

This proposal addresses a multidisciplinary workshop with academic researchers,
corporate technology providers, and agricultural producers to define research
challenges and a research road-map to address the following major FEWS
challenges:&lt;br/&gt;1)Developing novel targeted remote sensing and in-situ
sensing technology that can be practically fielded and used in food and water
system management.&lt;br/&gt;2)Developing novel integrated hydrology, soil,
microclimate, and plant/agricultural production models that interact accurately
and across traditional scales for understanding local, regional, and national
impacts.&lt;br/&gt;3)Turning this developing and pending FEWS data deluge into
usable, actionable information for agricultural producers, local and regional
decision makers, and citizens.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop addresses the
emerging issues in the food/water/energy system throughout the diverse geography
of United States and over various crops and environmental conditions to better
understand and model, and ultimate devise a solution for the changes to the FEWS
system. The solution must be multifaceted, multidisciplinary in order to
incorporate sensing, hydrology, visual analytics, and the potential for
increased climate change. The workshop will generate a report and other
artifacts that will lead to research into solving these challenges and have an
impact on scientific fields including, sensing technology, hydrology, soil
science, climate, data fusion, analysis, visualization, and data driven decision
making, as well as agricultural production, local and regional economies,
sustainability and planning.