* 1541880
* FEW: Workshop:  Developing Intelligent Food, Energy,and Water Systems (DIFEWS)
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2018
* NONE NONE, NONE
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 06/30/2018
* USD 49,863.00

1541880&lt;br/&gt;Potts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Drought is pushing California's
intertwined food, energy, and water systems to the breaking point. Reservoirs
are at historic lows, fields lie fallow, and energy systems struggle on high
demand days. Beyond the current drought, California's food, energy, and water
systems are further stressed by legacy infrastructure, prior land use decisions,
and a population pushing towards 50 million. As the largest agricultural
producer in the US, California faces food, energy, and water systems challenges
with impacts extending far beyond its own borders, into domestic and
international markets. Nearly 46% of California's $46.4 billion in agricultural
products is exported internationally; exported along with this food are the
water and energy resources used in its production. The interconnectivity of
global agricultural markets ensures that California's food, energy, and water
systems challenges are likely to be especially acute in dairy, fruit, vegetable,
and nut markets. Regionally, as with many western states, California's energy
and agriculture systems are dependent on large-scale, snow-fed hydrological
systems subject to high climate variability and possess a legacy of polluted
soil and groundwater. At the local scale, growing urban populations experience
increasing food prices and water use restrictions while rural communities
struggle to remain viable in the face of persistent water
shortages.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To work towards creating more secure, safe,
productive, and resilient food, energy and water systems from the local to
national scales, the University of California, Berkeley seeks to host a
Developing Intelligent Food, Energy, and Water Systems workshop on September
21-22, 2015. Using California as a test bed, the workshop will develop a
targeted multi-dimensional research agenda towards the development of
intelligent FEWS that increase efficiency across space, time, and applications.
The proposed workshop will bring together 60 investigators in the physical,
natural, computer, and social sciences, along with engineers, economists,
policy-makers, and practitioners from diverse backgrounds. The PIs goal is to
enable cross-disciplinary exchange that will identify tractable research
questions, promote resourceful problem-solving, and identify educational
challenges for the next generation of citizen-scientists. Immediate outputs from
the workshop will include: (i) a set of tractable research questions that cut
across elements of food, energy, and water systems; (ii) outlines of future
research efforts and identification of lead authors for white papers to be
generated by 12/31/15; and (iii) ideas about how new scholars should be educated
in this set of cross-disciplinary efforts. Specifically, the DIFEWS workshop
will explore the synergies across four areas: agroecology; sustainable
environmental engineering; consumer behavior; and the application of cyber-
physical systems research to food, energy, and water systems. Agroecology, in
its application of ecological principles to sustainable food systems, opens up
new and traditional channels to food production that can lessen absolute water
and energy use. Sustainable environmental engineering uses new approaches to the
design and operation of water collection, treatment, and distribution. For
example, engineering innovations developed by the NSF's Engineering Research
Center for Reinventing the Nation's Urban Water Infrastructure decrease energy
use, facilitate resource recovery, and enhance the resilience of water systems.
On the energy front, recent investments by public utilities in smart grid
infrastructure support real-time coordination of demand- and supply-side
responses to changing system conditions. Behavioral economics and the social
sciences are actively exploring how consumers interact with these technologies
and, in particular, are experimenting with the use of economic incentives to
substantively enhance energy efficiency. Finally, the rapidly evolving domain of
cyber-physical systems has enabled the use of sensors in physical objects to
coordinate optimal allocation of resources across space and time. This
technology is utilized in food, energy, and water systems, for example, to
safely operate distributed systems for controlling energy and water. At the
undergraduate level, workshop themes will be integrated into a large
introductory environmental science course and an upper division course on the
economics of energy and the environment. At the graduate level, the members of
the organizing committee will run a Developing Intelligent Food, Energy, and
Water Systems graduate seminar at UC Berkeley during the fall semester of 2015.
All seminar participants will be invited to the workshop and will have the
opportunity to be an integral part of the team that writes the white papers and
subsequent peer reviewed publications. In addition to contributing to the
interdisciplinary training of undergraduate and graduate students in one of the
nation's most ethnically and culturally diverse regions, the organizing
committee will reach out to key California food, energy, and water systems
planners to share the workshop findings and will partner with Berkeley Energy
&amp; Resources Collaborative to reach out to the public on California's food,
energy, and water systems issues.