* 1541911
* RE-C^2: Research Experiences in Community Colleges
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2021
* Helena Noronha, The University Corporation, Northridge
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 08/31/2021
* USD 449,121.00

Community colleges are often overlooked in efforts to increase the number of
students pursuing careers in the mathematical sciences. The RE-C^2 program will
engage community college faculty and their selected students in meaningful
research experiences led by California State University, Northridge (CSUN)
faculty. The program will include both summer and academic year activities. The
summer program will include an introductory boot camp and guest speakers, in
addition to intensive work in research groups. During the academic year,
students and community college and CSUN faculty will continue the research
activities and also participate in workshops and conferences. RE-C^2 will
identify and recruit talented and highly motivated students from the
predominantly Hispanic/Latino area. By involving these students in mathematical
research, we expect to increase the number and diversity of students who
successfully transfer to universities and receive bachelor's degrees in the
mathematical sciences. By engaging both community college faculty and their
students in research, RE-C^2 has the potential to positively alter the
intellectual atmosphere in the mathematics departments at these institutions. An
expected, long-term outcome of this project is that participating community
college faculty members will continue their research collaborations with CSUN
faculty. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;RE-C^2 will give community college students the
opportunity to grow mathematically through the excitement and challenge of doing
research in the mathematical sciences. Selected students will have a strong
background in calculus when they enter the program. During the program, students
will develop the ability to transition from general coursework to independent
study, and acquire the logical and abstract thinking necessary to succeed in
university-level mathematics. The research topics include Fractals in Industrial
Design, Genetic Algorithms for Scheduling Problems, Markov Chains and Gambling
Strategies, Problems Arising from Mathematical Biology, Problems in Number
Theory and in Differential Geometry. These topics will provide a rich
intellectual environment for the research projects and strengthen the
mathematical background of the participating students. During the project,
students will be encouraged to present their research work, and community
college faculty will be encouraged to continue their research collaborations
with CSUN faculty.