* 1541142
* NSF I-Corps Teams: Innovative Hurricane Damage Mitigation Systems
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2015,10/31/2016
* Amir Mirmiran, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 10/31/2016
* USD 50,000.00

A significant proportion of damage to buildings in hurricanes occurs owing to
weak connections between the roof and the walls. Innovative connection system is
a high priority research topic in building construction and needs careful
consideration for new construction as well as for retrofitting existing
buildings in hurricane-prone areas. This I-Corps project will help determine the
commercial viability of an innovative, efficient, and nonintrusive roof-to-wall
connection for wood-frame structures. The new connection system will have
significant practical applications in improving the hurricane resiliency of
coastal residential buildings by providing means for rapid, cost-effective
retrofits through minimally intrusive techniques. The proposed project will
serve the national interest as the new technology can significantly enhance
built environment sustainability and development of hurricane-resilient
communities, thus contributing to greater economic competitiveness of the U.S.
coastal region. Strategic alliances with industry and an integrated market-
driven approach will help to commercialize such technologies. Streamlined
research-to-market process with expeditious technology transfer and
commercialization of products has the potential for advancing the national
prosperity and welfare by reducing risk to life and fostering new companies in
the U.S. coastal states, requiring a skilled workforce, thus creating new jobs.

The scope of this I-Corps team project is to demonstrate the readiness to
transition a technology that has been developed by previously-funded NSF
project. Past studies and experiments have revealed that the performance of
traditional hardware-type, intrusive roof-to-wall connections (e.g. hurricane
clips, toe-nail connections) can be the cause of serious building safety
problems in extreme wind events (e.g. hurricanes). To eliminate these problems
an innovative roof-to-wall connection system applicable to residential wood
buildings has been developed. The methodology is to use strips of high-
performance fiber reinforced polymer (FRP) materials applied with high-strength
adhesives to create an effective load path from the roof through the walls. The
connection is cost-effective, light, strong, and non-intrusive, and is
applicable to new construction as well as for retrofitting of existing buildings
that require strengthening against extreme wind loads with minimally intrusive
techniques. The strength of the connection is provided by the high tensile
strength of the fiber composites. The non-intrusiveness of the system eliminates
water-infiltration problems and the strength degradation of the members being
connected. The new technology has the potential for significantly contributing
to achieving hurricane resilient communities and advancing the state-of-the-art
in hurricane damage mitigation.