* 1541005
* EAGER: The evolutionary consequences of subtle biases in the outcome of meiosis
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/2015,12/31/2018
* Stuart McDaniel, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 12/31/2018
* USD 169,500.00

The central assumption of Mendelian genetics is that an individual has as good a
chance of passing on a gene that it received from its mother as one that it
received from its father. In general, this assumption holds. Yet striking
exceptions, in which either the maternal or paternal gene selfishly transmits
itself to the next generation, are known from well-studied plants and animals.
Are these cases rare exceptions, or are they the tip of a non-Mendelian iceberg?
New genetic tools have now enabled researchers to find more subtle deviations
from 50:50 ratios in wild plants and animals, suggesting that selfish genes may
be more frequent and varied than previously appreciated. This is important
because even a gene that causes a genetic abnormality can persist if it has a
slightly better than 50:50 chance of making it to the next generation. This
project will study the effects of non-50:50 transmission of genes on fitness in
the moss model system Ceratodon purpureus. Combining new mathematical models and
genetic data from this simple moss system will reveal insight into the genetics
of infertility, the outcome of reproduction, and its influence on the structure
of the genome. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal presents a comprehensive plan
to link genome-wide patterns of segregation distortion with fitness in the moss
model system Ceratodon purpureus. The PIs central hypothesis is that segregation
distortion is common across the genome and contributes to the maintenance of
genetic variation for fitness, one of the central problems in evolutionary
biology. The rationale for this proposal is to develop a new system to
understand, at a mechanistic level, previously unexplored links between the
outcome of meiosis and quantitative trait variation. To accomplish this goal,
the PIs will combine genome-wide polymorphism data from natural populations of
C. purpureus with new statistical models that treat segregation ratio as a
quantitative trait whose architecture will be inferred. Because mosses have a
haploid-dominant lifecycle, the PIs can efficiently survey the products of
meiosis and generate simple yet powerful tests for specific associations between
genes exhibiting biased transmission and fitness variation in natural
populations.