* 1541637
* An interdisciplinary approach to elucidating the causes of widespread mangrove die-off
* GEO,OCE
* 05/15/2015,04/30/2016
* Craig Layman, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 04/30/2016
* USD 75,187.00

Foundation species are those that form the basis for entire ecosystems,
substantially altering the physical and biological characteristics of the areas
in which they are found. Mangroves are one of the most conspicuous groups of
foundation species, providing numerous ecosystems services which we highly
value, e.g., habitat for ecologically and economically important species,
shoreline stablilization and carbon storage. As such, global declines in
mangroves is of upmost concern. For example, an extensive die-off of dwarf red
mangrove has been identified in a remote area on the west side of Abaco Island,
The Bahamas. Because of its remote nature of the site, the die-off is unlikely
to be directly due to human activities. Despite its largely inaccessible nature,
the area is ecologically and economically important, e.g., it is the primary
bonefishing area on Abaco - an industry worth more than $150 million annually in
The Bahamas. Therefore, it is of pressing concern for stakeholders in The
Bahamas to identify the underlying cause(s) of decline and assess potential
threat to mangroves in other areas. To do so, a series of activities will be
carried out, included widespread surveys for a recently identified fungal
pathogen, laboratory efforts to isolate and identify this pathogen, satellite
imagery mapping activities, and simulated grazing experiments. The area in which
the die-off is occurring is currently being considered for designation as a
national park by the Bahamian National Trust (BNT). The results of the study
will be directly communicated to the BNT and will be used to make immediate
management decisions. In collaboration with two Bahamian environmental NGOs,
Friends of the Environment and Bahamas Reef Environmental Education Foundation
(BREEF), a citizen science-based survey for fungal lesions, as well as an
educational module on mangrove ecology, will be designed. The data from the
citizen-science and student surveys will be integrated in a map of the incidence
of the lesions across The Bahamas. The citizen-science component, and
interaction with bonefish guides, provides the opportunity to further integrate
science and education. The educational module will be introduced at the BREEF
summer teaching training workshop in July. This annual event typically includes
30 teachers from 10 islands. The investigators will continue to make all of our
research findings immediately available and accessible to the public through the
Abaco Scientist website (http://appliedecology.cals.ncsu.edu/absci/).

Provisioning of ecosystem services in the coastal realm is largely mediated by
foundation species, such as mangroves, coral and salt marsh grasses. Many of
these species are undergoing substantial declines throughout the world. These
declines are often driven by complex, interacting, stressors that may be
difficult to identify and elucidate. Despite the difficulty, unraveling such
mechanistic drivers is essential for stemming declines and developing management
strategies for these ecosystems. Mangroves provide many highly valued ecosystem
services to coastal communities, yet worldwide these forests are rapidly
declining. Much of this loss is related to various human activities along
coastlines, but natural ecological mechanisms contribute to declines in many
areas as well. An extensive die-off of dwarf red mangrove (Rhizophora mangle)
was observed in a remote area on the west side of Abaco Island, The Bahamas.
Preliminary observations suggest the die-off may be due to a combination of
fungal pathogens, grazing, and physical stress. This combination of stressors is
strikingly parallel to the drivers of salt marsh decline on the East and Gulf
coasts of the U.S. To date, different fungal strains from mangrove leaves have
been identified. One fungus is a species of Pestalotiopsis, an Ascomycete
fungus, and members of this genus are known plant pathogens. There are also high
densities of a nocturnally active herbivorous cricket (Tafilasca eleuthera) in
die-off areas. It is unclear whether this species has recently colonized the
area, is increasing in density, or both. In addition, high salinities in the
sediment porewater in the die-off area suggest another potential stressor for
the plants. A series of observations and experimental studies will be used to
examine potential mechanistic drivers of the mangrove die-off. First, the extent
of the die-off areas will be mapped using aerial surveys conducted with a GPS-
integrated drone equipped with a video camera. Progression of the die-off will
be examined with historical spectral profiles of mangroves from 1980s-present
(on an annual basis) using Landsat satellite data. Second, the incidence of
lesions on mangroves across Abaco Island and throughout The Bahamas will be
explored using a series of citizen science initiatives. Third, identification of
fungi will require DNA sequencing and examination of the morphology of fungal
spores/conidia at North Carolina State University. Fourth, maintenance of a
grazer exclusion experiment near the die-off location will provide an assessment
of the role of herbivory in this system. Finally, simulated grazing scar
experiments will be used to assess if grazing can indeed facilitate fungal
infections.