* 1541373
* CC*DNI Campus Design: Networking Upgrades for Colorado State University Pueblo
* CSE,OAC
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2018
* Patrick Burns, Colorado State University-Pueblo
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 12/31/2018
* USD 306,663.00

This project provides networking infrastructure upgrades to support research and
education particularly in STEM disciplines, by implementing a research-level
high-speed subnetwork DMZ for the local area network (LAN); adding a data
transfer node; deploying the multidomain network measurement/monitoring toolkit
known as perfSONAR to improve the ability to identity and isolate network
problems and increase productivity; implementing the globus toolkit (software
infrastructure for distributed computing, including large file storage and
transfer); and installing fiber optic cable to the CSU-Pueblo observatory,
providing increased bandwidth for telescope images and video. The research DMZ
connects via a 10 Gbps wide area network (WAN) connection to the Front Range
GigaPop (FRGP) network, which provides access to multiple research networks
including Intra-FRGP, Western Regional Network, Internet2, and ESnet. Upgraded
equipment is primarily at Colorado State University - Pueblo (CSU-P) in Pueblo,
CO; some optical equipment is housed in Colorado Springs, Monument Hill, and
Denver, CO.

The upgrade improves networking for CSU-P, allowing high-speed research to be
centralized and supported with networking resources (relieving congestion on
CSU-P's existing LAN and WAN). Nine particular research projects benefit from
this project. Broader community impacts include computer science courses
incorporating details about this next-generation network, along with
transporting, storing, preserving, manipulating, processing and analyzing big
data; and the entire community participating remotely in imaging of astronomical
events through CSU-P's observatory telescope. Large datasets generated on campus
are preserved regionally on the shared digital repository, and then made
accessible and reusable for others.