* 1541248
* Gordon Research Conference on Multifunctional Materials and Structures; Ventura, California; January 31-February 5, 2016
* ENG,CMMI
* 11/01/2015,04/30/2016
* Scott White, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 04/30/2016
* USD 30,000.00

The Gordon Research Conferences provide an international forum for the
presentation and discussion of frontier research in the biological, chemical,
and physical sciences, and their related technologies. For over 80 years, high-
quality and cost-effective meetings organized by Gordon Research Conferences
have been recognized as the world's premier scientific conferences, where
leading investigators from around the globe discuss their latest work and future
challenges in a uniquely informal, interactive format. These forums are
especially important for exploring new scientific frontiers and for training and
supporting young scientists and engineers (including graduate students) in their
early careers. This award partially supports a new Gordon Conference on the
emerging field of multifunctional materials and structures to be held in early
2016.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Multifunctional materials and structures have the
ability to perform multiple functions through a judicious combination of
structural properties and at least one additional function such as thermal
management, shape morphing, energy harvesting, etc. This conference seeks to
address fundamental scientific issues that have broad application in the field
including: translation of model biological functions to synthetic materials,
accelerating transport or dynamic chemical changes in strong, stiff materials,
optimizing interfaces between hard and soft materials, multi-physics modeling of
multi-component systems, etc. The potential applications of multifunctional
materials and structures includes visionary advancements such as (a) "autonomic"
structures that can sense, diagnose and respond to external stimuli with minimal
external intervention, (b) "adaptive" structures allowing reconfiguration or
readjustment of functionality, shape and mechanical properties on demand, and
(c) "self-sustaining" systems with structurally integrated power
harvest/storage/transmission capabilities.