* 1541026
* CRISP Type 2: Resilient Cyber-Enabled Electric Energy and Water Infrastructures: Modeling and Control under Extreme Mega Drought Scenarios
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Virginia Kwan, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 07/31/2019
* USD 1,478,907.00

1541026 (Vittal). Resilient, reliable and efficient critical infrastructures are
essential for the prosperity and advancement of modern society. The electric
power grid and the water distribution system are among the most critical
infrastructures. They are highly automated and interdependent. A range of
sensors, communication resources, control and information systems together form
the cyber networks that are an integral part of these infrastructures and
contribute to their efficient, reliable, and safe operation. This project will
(1) build mathematical models capturing the interdependencies between the
electric and water systems and simulate their operation in time, (2) develop
innovative behavioral models of consumer demand for electricity and water under
extreme scenarios, (3) simulate demand under these extreme scenarios and propose
control actions to mitigate detrimental impacts, and (4) enable internetworking
between the cyber systems of the two infrastructures using middleware gateway
deployment and emulate it in simulation to determine the effect of the shared
information from sensors on the control actions under the extreme scenarios.
With the predicted mega droughts in the southwest, an interdependent model as
proposed is expected to significantly benefit electric and water utilities by
enhancing their ability to perform scenario analysis coupled with consumer usage
data to determine the impacts of severe droughts on each of the infrastructure
systems and benefit society at large. Interdependent control of the two systems
will help optimize water usage and electricity production to cope with severe
environmental conditions. A clear understanding of the factors that impact
behavioral responses to water and electricity use under extreme conditions will
inform governments, suppliers, and the public about effective methods to address
real-world challenges such as mega droughts. Findings of this work, including a
test best based on realistic data, will suggest strategies for informing social
practices and behavioral changes in conserving electricity and water resources.
These capabilities could provide significant benefits to nations across the
world and enhance sustainability of scarce natural
resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will develop a system dynamics-based
mathematical model of two interdependent critical infrastructure systems, namely
electric energy and water supply, and identify key interdependencies between the
two systems. The overarching goal of the research is to transform interdependent
but "independently operated" infrastructure systems of today into resilient
infrastructures, through efficient information exchange enabled by inter-
networking that can handle forecasted extreme scenarios using innovative
behavioral models of consumer demand and sophisticated control. The following
research and educational tasks are included. Task 1: Development of a system
dynamics based mathematical model of the interdependent infrastructures. (a)
Electric infrastructure, (b) Water delivery and treatment infrastructure, (c)
Identification of their interdependencies, and (d) Simulation of interdependent
systems. Task 2: Extreme Scenario, social/behavioral model based contingency
selection and analysis (a) Behavioral model of consumer demand of commodities
supplied by infrastructure under extreme scenarios. (b) Risk assessment of
interdependent system and contingency selection for extreme scenarios. (c)
Analysis of model under extreme scenarios and associated contingencies. Task 3:
Analysis and control of interdependent infrastructures (a) Formulation of
interdependent control, (b) Implementation and simulation of designed control,
(c) Examination of the ability of control to mitigate detrimental effects of
extreme scenarios. Task 4: Optimal middleware gateway deployment for inter-
networking between infrastructure information systems (a) Middleware development
and emulation, (b) Control implementation with middleware-enabled shared
information and comparison of control efficacy with the independent information
setting in Task 3. Educational outreach integrates research into education and
outreach by (i) Interdisciplinary graduate course offering, (ii) Short course
and webinars for industry partners, (iii) Self-study modules on interdependent
infrastructures and (iv) Web based module development of extreme scenarios and
operation of infrastructure systems for K-12 students.