* 1541218
* CC*DNI Marshall University Data Driven Networking Infrastructure for the Campus and Researcher
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2017
* Jan Fox, Marshall University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 08/31/2017
* USD 499,856.00

Marshall University is improving and expanding its campus research network to
offer high-performance end-to-end network connectivity between research
facilities by implementing: a) Science DMZ to provide a dedicated network with
configuration and policies optimized for scientific applications. b) a dedicated
data transfer node to offer a high-speed storage server with adequate data store
to host large data sets and 10G transfer rate on the Science DMZ and c) high
performance network improvement supporting 10-40 Gb/s connectivity between
research facilities, laboratories and the campus core network/data center. The
end-to-end network performance measurement is based on the perfSONAR framework
allowing constant monitoring of performance and latency.

The improved network infrastructures provides support to advanced data-intensive
scientific research by enhancing data transfer from the end points at the
researcher locations to the main campus research facilities including the Robert
C Byrd Biotechnology Science Center, Genomics & Bioinformatics Core Facility
(GABC), Arthur Weisberg Family Applied Engineering Complex, Visualization Lab,
and Big Green XSEDE-compatible High Performance Computing cluster in University
data center and the backup facility.

The new network capabilities enable faster data transfer for intra-campus
connectivity and remove the bottleneck in external connectivity to foster
collaboration with other institutions over the Internet2 national network. The
project aligns with the institution's cyberinfrastructure plan in achieving the
goal of creating a scalable network design that supports current and future
science requirements to advance scientific research.