* 1541170
* CC*DNI Engineer: Cyberinfrastructure Engineer at Case Western Reserve University
* CSE,OAC
* 03/15/2016,02/28/2019
* Sue Workman, Case Western Reserve University
* Continuing Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 02/28/2019
* USD 399,524.00

Case Western Reserve University (CWRU) has made significant investment in its
campus cyberinfrastructure to support research that is increasingly compute-,
data-, and network-intensive. The NSF-funded Cyberinfrastructure Engineer (CIE)
collaborates closely with researchers to understand their needs and guide their
use of cyberinfrastructure to ensure optimal benefit, and also works with
university network engineers to make architectural, design, and configuration
changes to the cyberinfrastructure to better serve the research community and
ensure they are able to fully leverage local, regional, and national
cyberinfrastructure. The CIE is part of an emerging program that embeds staff
from the university's Research Computing and Cyberinfrastructure (RCCI) unit
within key research groups to provide a liaison between these groups and to
provide collaborative technical support for their needs in cyberinfrastructure,
including high performance computing, data-intensive computing, private cloud,
peta-scale storage, and end-to-end network performance. The CIE engages not only
with CWRU research groups, but also with their collaborators at other
institutions to ensure the optimal use of cyberinfrastructure resources at all
institutions and along the network paths that link them. Such activity is a
critically important success factor as researchers tackle increasingly large
problems and collaborate in geographically distributed research teams, and as
they work to converge data-intensive and numerically intensive computing within
the National Strategic Computing Initiative. Finally, the CIE participates in
formal classroom presentations to students who rely on campus
cyberinfrastructure in their research and learning experience in STEM
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At CWRU, the CIE has primary responsibility for
the university Science DMZ , perfSONAR, and data transfer node services. As the
Science DMZ is tightly integrated with the university's high performance
computing, data-intensive computing, private cloud, peta-scale online research
storage, and near-line research data archive services, the CIE's responsibility
extends into all areas of campus cyberinfrastructure and requires close
coordination and collaboration with staff having primary responsibility in those
areas. To ensure optimal end-to-end network performance, the CIE routinely works
in collaboration with peers at other universities, government institutions, and
regional and national networking organizations including Internet2, the Ohio
Academic and Research Network, Ohio Supercomputing Center, NIH facilities such
as NCBI, DoE facilities such as ORNL, and the NSF-funded national supercomputer
centers. The CIE is involved in the university's efforts in IPv6, identity and
access management, SDN, and OpenFlow, and works closely with information
security and the network security groups.