* 1541001
* CC*DNI Networking Infrastructure: Building a High Performance Network to Support Advanced Instrumentation, Computation-Intensive Analysis and Data-Intensive Science Research
* CSE,OAC
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2017
* Allan Weatherwax, Siena College
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 12/31/2017
* USD 394,715.00

Siena College is a vibrant undergraduate liberal arts college with a strong
School of Science. Siena faculty in the sciences conduct cutting-edge research
and involve undergraduate students in that research. Students also conduct
independent research with faculty supervision as part of the Center for
Undergraduate Research and Creative Activity (CURCA)
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This two-year project creates a state-of-the-art
research oriented network infrastructure to support STEM research at the
College. Research projects in the fields of computational chemistry (using
Siena's High Performance Computing Cluster or HPCC), nanoscience, biophysics,
astrophysics, and particle physics have been hampered by currently limited
network transfer speeds. This project significantly enhances the ability for
faculty and students to carry out their work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
creates a network infrastructure designed to optimize networking and security
for high performance scientific applications. This includes improving data
transfer speeds within the School of Science building complex and between the
sciences and the College data center where the HPCC is housed by a factor of 10.
The proposed upgrades also position Siena to create connections to external
high-performance networks such as NYSERnet and Internet2, facilitating
collaboration with researchers at other institutions as well as access to
instrumentation and research tools at other
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As a result of this project interdisciplinary
research projects are fostered and encouraged. Sophisticated cyberinfrastructure
is a critical underpinning to scientific research initiatives and this project
creates that foundation at Siena College.