* 1541307
* CC*DNI Campus Design: Building a State-Of-The-Art Research Network at Franklin and Marshall College
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Jaime Blair, Franklin and Marshall College
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 08/31/2018
* USD 350,000.00

Science education at Franklin &amp; Marshall College prioritizes student-faculty
research led by highly accomplished scholar-teachers. In embracing that role
within the context of projects that increasingly involve large amounts of shared
data, present local network infrastructure limitations emerge when such
transfers compete with other campus network traffic and pass through campus
firewalls. This project creates a local area network optimized for high-
performance scientific applications, a Science DMZ, which will be architected
with particular attention paid to identifying and sharing replicable techniques,
while ensuring institutional information security requirements are not
compromised. The addition of a local data transfer node, combined with increased
local network capacity, improves Franklin &amp; Marshall's ability to exchange
data with researchers at universities worldwide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project expands end-to-end performance monitoring, improves inter-institutional
data exchange capabilities, and strengthens current and future research support
for faculty via collaboration with a Pennsylvania-wide education and research
computing network (KINBER). The network infrastructure improvements also enable
new experimentation with off-site high performance computing solutions that
cannot presently be evaluated due to infrastructure constraints. This project
prepares undergraduate students for postgraduate work and study in data-
intensive fields. Franklin &amp; Marshall plans to share the results of the
project with similar-sized institutions seeking to support their faculty and
undergraduate researchers.