* 1541443
* CC*DNI Networking Infrastructure: Enabling International Data Intensive Scientific Collaboration for Vanderbilt Researchers
* CSE,OAC
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2016
* David Mathews, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 12/31/2016
* USD 500,000.00

This project significantly improves the Vanderbilt University external network
link, which is fostering and enabling national research programs in a wide
variety of disciplines. For example, Vanderbilt hosts a computing site for the
Compact Muon Solenoid experiment (CMS) running at the Large Hadron Collider at
CERN in Geneva, Switzerland, and this resource is used by global collaborators.
Biochemists in the medical center make extensive use of remote network access to
robots and beamlines at the Advanced Photon Source at Argonne National Lab and
the Advance Light Source at Lawrence Berkeley National Lab, and download the
resulting crystallography data to disk at Vanderbilt. The Vanderbilt Television
News Archive project routinely uploads digital copies of network news programs
that it has archived to the Library of Congress in Washington DC and makes them
available to a large research community. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project
Vanderbilt acquires the hardware necessary to upgrade the Vanderbilt external
research and education network connection between the campus and Southern
Crossroads point of presence in Atlanta to 100 gigabits per second. Vanderbilt
is also replacing the perimeter research router, and upgrading the research
router that sits between it and the Science DMZ and the rest of the campus
research network.