* 1541468
* CC*DNI CI Engineer: Adapting Research Workflows to Use Campus Cyberinfrastructure
* CSE,OAC
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2019
* Larry Conrad, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 12/31/2019
* USD 399,446.00

Research workflows across many domains from life sciences to social and
behavioral sciences, are scaling to require more computational analysis of much
larger data sets. Workflows that have leveraged local computation and data
storage resources must be transformed to use larger shared compute facilities
like the UC Berkeley Savio supercomputing cluster, and national centers like
NERSC and XSEDE. However, researchers have struggled to connect their data
sources (such as laboratory instruments, remote data-sets, etc.) to the shared
computation and storage resources in an efficient, productive workflow. Barriers
range from poor network throughput, to inexperience with data management and
shared computing infrastructure and best practices.

The Berkeley Research Computing (BRC) program is adding cyber-infrastructure
engineering support to engage research groups to understand their needs, and to
design and implement effective workflows that take advantage of campus and
national computation and data management resources. These research engagements
transform existing workflows to advance project-specific research goals, but
also provide concrete templates that other research groups can leverage, and an
architectural pattern for research engagement going forward.

The BRC CI Engineer leverages campus resources including a Science DMZ that
connects high-speed state and national network links, including California's
Advanced Research and Education Network (CENIC) and the Energy Sciences Network
(ESNet), to campus infrastructure, including the BRC Savio supercomputing
cluster. The BRC CI Engineer draws upon campus expertise in networking, high-
performance computing, and research data management, as well as the domain
expertise of campus partners. As research engagements are completed and
documented, we will expand faculty understanding of the new scalable workflows,
and enable them to address the next generation of research questions.