* 1541244
* ERA SynBio: A Unified Nucleic Acid Computation System (UNACS) for Organisms
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Andrew Ellington, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Elebeoba May
* 07/31/2019
* USD 539,997.00

Synthetic Biology is an emerging discipline that distinguishes itself by drawing
on engineering principles and computational methods to help find the answers to
vital biological questions, and to inspire sustainable biomanufacturing
solutions for many societal needs. This project combines cutting-edge expertise
to create programmable, high-performance, nucleic acid-based regulatory devices
that can be optimized for specific applications through work on a bacterium's
metabolism (the chemical reactions of life). This research contributes to the
groundwork underlying the ability to program living organisms, and is
anticipated to produce transformative changes in science and technology
encompassing nanotechnology, green technology, and the bioeconomy.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nucleic-acid-based regulatory elements offer a solution to
a critical bottleneck problem in synthetic biology by taking advantage of
predictable Watson-Crick base pairing to control cell behavior, and by
harnessing sophisticated software tools used to predict molecular structures and
their interactions. New developments in directed protein evolution prompted this
investigation of the broader applicability of these techniques to perform
"Unified Nucleic-Acid based Computation" (UNACS) in living organisms. In this
proposal, the team proposes to identify the fundamental principles of
riboregulator-based computation in living organisms and to demonstrate the
application of complex nucleic-acid based circuits for metabolite control in
prokaryotes and higher organisms. These tools and approaches will represent a
precise recipe for rational design of circuit elements that function in living
organisms as steps towards transformation of biotechnology. UNACS lends itself
to standardization, abstraction, and scaling. These are all important pre-
requisites for genuine "engineering" and "reprogramming" of biological systems,
which are essential for synthetic biology to realize its full
potential.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is funded through a transnational
funding mechanism between the United States National Science Foundation and
European Funding Agencies that are part of the European Commission endorsed
Research Area Network in Synthetic Biology. The United States component of this
project was co-funded by programs in Systems and Synthetic Biology (Directorate
for Biological Sciences) and Biotechnology and Biochemical Bioengineering
(Directorate for Engineering).