* 1541684
* EAGER: Two-Dimensional Material-Based Epidermal Active Sensors for Brain Monitoring.
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2017
* Nanshu Lu, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 06/30/2017
* USD 160,000.00

Electroencephalographic (EEG) measures subtle voltage fluctuations along the
scalp resulting from ionic current flows within the neurons of the brain. EEG is
widely used as a low cost, portable, and noninvasive means to capture not only
cognitive and memory performance, but also brain disorders like epilepsy and
stroke. Conventional EEG recording is obtained by placing individual thick and
stiff electrodes on the scalp with conductive gel after skin abrasion which
enhances electrode-skin contact. For many decades, EEG technology has suffered
from limitations such as low spatial resolution, poor signal-to-noise ratio
without proper signal amplification, time consuming and obstructive electrode
connections, and short measurement time as gel dries out. Such limitations are
partially due to the incompatibility between the soft, curvilinear, and
deformable human skin and the hard, planar, and rigid electrodes and
electronics. The ultrathin, high electronic performance, and transparency of
atomically thick two-dimensional materials offer clear mechanical, electronic,
and optical advantages over silicon in the neuroelectronics. This research
proposes to explore the idea of replacing conventional rigid EEG electrodes by
tattoo-like ultrathin, ultrasoft, dry electrodes and signal amplifiers
fabricated from two-dimensional materials. Preliminary results indicate this
idea is feasible and further research will prove the feasibility and future
prospects for tattoo-like, long lasting, and high performance neuroelectronics
to benefit society. In addition, the graduate student and post-doctoral
researchers working on this research effort will gain advanced scientific and
engineering skills needed to be technical leaders in industry, academia or
government post-graduate careers. Moreover, undergraduate students from diverse
backgrounds will be recruited to participate in the research effort to promote
advanced science and engineering careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of
this proposal is to carry out a feasibility study that two-dimensional materials
such as graphene and atomically thin molybdenum disulfide can be applied as the
electrode and amplifier materials for noninvasive, long-term, high fidelity
Electroencephalographic sensing. The major technical barrier towards two-
dimensional materials based epidermal active EEG sensor lies in the device
design, heterogeneous fabrication, and reliable bio-integration with the final
goal of enhanced EEG sensing. An innovative active electrode architecture is
proposed in which graphene is employed as both the sensing and gate electrodes,
and molybdenum disulfide integrated with ultrathin polymer dielectrics and
graphene source/drain as the on-site signal amplifier. Two research thrusts are
proposed to accomplish the feasibility study: i) fabricating and validating
graphene based passive epidermal EEG electrodes, and ii) integrating molybdenum
disulfide vertically on top of the graphene electrode with ultrathin polymer
dielectrics and graphene source/drain as a transistor amplifier for active EEG
recording. The expected outcome is an affirmative decision on the feasibility of
an integrated neuroelectronics that can be conformally laminated on human skin
without conductive gel but still able to record long term, high fidelity EEG
with orders of magnitude signal amplification. For the targeted gain of several
hundreds the active electrode minimizes both the extrinsic noise and allows
substantial reduction of the electrode arrays.