* 1541043
* EarthCube IA: Collaborative Proposal: Optimal Data Layout for Scalable Geophysical Analysis in a Data-intensive Environment
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Hongfeng Yu, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 08/31/2019
* USD 332,941.00

Steady advance in remote sensing, satellite imaging, and computing technology
has enabled scientists to study geophysical phenomena of unprecedented
resolutions and complexity. Earth observation data generated from space-based
satellites or ground-based radar and radiometer facilities are typically time-
varying, and multivariate, and can take tera- or even peta-bytes of space to
preserve and process. The common practice is to choose and transfer subsets of
data from multiple data archive servers to local machines and then conduct data
analysis tasks. However, this approach becomes increasingly unsustainable with
an exponential growth of observation data size. It becomes an increasing severe
problem that scientists can gain detailed observation data but lack suitable and
scalable analysis capabilities to study the full extent of data. The team will
work closely to develop, evaluate,and deploy the computer infrastructure to
improve the performance and scalability of geophysical analysis for scientific
discovery and education. By making the system available to other researchers, it
will facilitate the development of new scalable solutions.Interactive
geosciences applications will be used as an effective means to promote students
interest in science and engineering studies, and to attract and retain students
for geosciences community growth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research develops
new techniques in support of scalable geophysical analysis in a data-intensive
environment. The innovation and the basis of our technique approach are to
develop an optimal data layout algorithm for indexing and placing massive
heterogeneous observation data across distributed devices of a cluster. The new
data layout is tailored to the spatial-temporal characteristics of Earth
observation data, and can directly account for advanced compute techniques,
including non-volatile storage resources and GPU- and Manycore-based computing
nodes, and support high-throughput and high-resolution exploration of large-
scale data. The long-term goal is to study theory and technology that enable
scalable data management and analysis for the geosciences community.