* 1541860
* Food-Energy-Water Systems Challenging Chemists and Chemical Engineers in the 21st Century
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2015,12/31/2017
* Frank Bright, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Lin He
* 12/31/2017
* USD 74,548.00

Division of Chemistry The Chemistry Division and the Chemical, Bioengineering,
Environmental, and Transport Systems (CBET) Division are sponsoring this
workshop entitled "Food-Energy-Water Systems Challenging Chemists and Chemical
Engineers in the 21st Century" to be held on October 22-24, 2015 in Arlington,
Virginia. Population growth combined with a concomitant need for more food,
energy, and clean fresh water necessitates technological innovations that
address a myriad of complex global problems that center on fresh water.
Professors Tim Long (Virginia Polytechnic Institute), Frank Bright (Buffalo),
and Paul Edmiston (College of Wooster) bring leading scientists and engineers to
identify the integrated challenges in water research at the water-energy-food
nexus and to explore new opportunities in rapidly advancing area of water
research, especially on the integration of water research with energy
utilization and food production. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop includes
lectures and breakout sessions designed to identify the critical research
activities in water recycle and reuse. The proposed workshop provides: (1) a
sociotechnical systems model for the integration of experimental research at
emerging intersections of chemistry with food science, biology and plant
science, crop and soil sciences, economists, entrepreneurs, and diverse
engineering disciplines, (2) fundamental knowledge underpinning the more
efficient use of food, energy and water resources with attention to safety,
economics, and security, and (3) strategies to train the next generation
workforce to address the global challenges in rapidly emerging food, energy and
water systems.