* 1541426
* CC*DNI Integration: Enhancing Science Through Custom Paths For Trusted Users
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Zongming Fei, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 08/31/2019
* USD 999,313.00

Progress in medicine, science, and engineering -- as in essentially all areas of
human endeavor -- increasingly depends on network access to very large data sets
(billions to trillions of bytes) containing information such as scientific
measurements, monitoring information, images, videos, simulation results, etc.
The number of researchers working with, transferring, and sharing very large
data sets is growing at an alarming rate. Although network transmission speeds
are rapidly increasing, devices deployed in the middle of the network for
security and management purposes -- e.g., firewalls, intrusion detectors, and
the like -- create major bottlenecks that prevent researchers from being able to
quickly move these large files between laboratories, high-performance computing
sites, and storage facilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Historically, network
designers have addressed this problem by creating and maintaining a special
"Science DMZ" network that provided a "fast lane", bypassing performance-
limiting security devices thanks to the trusted nature of the users and
applications connected to the Science DMZ. Today, however, the growing number
and variety of users who need high-performance data transfer makes it
increasingly difficult to maintain such a separate infrastructure. This project
is developing ways to provide trusted users on the normal (campus) network with
dynamic access to such fast lanes by authenticating them on-the-fly, determining
the nature of their data transfer, and whether it should be allowed or
not.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project leverages emerging Software-Defined
Networking (SDN) capabilities to single out individual data flows for
specialized treatment in the network. Using the SDN infrastructure already
deployed on campus, the project is developing new control software and protocols
that enable trusted users to authenticate themselves to the network and set up
network connections free from middlebox interference while still enforcing
middlebox security functionality for normal campus traffic. The ability of
trusted users to create such fast lanes -- as opposed to (only) network
administrators -- will enable future networks to handle the rapidly growing
number of big data users.