* 1541461
* CC*DNI Integration: PROnet: A PRogrammable Optical Network Prototype Serving the Campus
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Andrea Fumagalli, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 08/31/2018
* USD 998,867.00

Without high-performance networking big data and high performance computing have
very limited value. It has long been recognized that the highest performance
data transfers should directly run the on top of optical circuits without
Ethernet switching or IP routing. This direct layering avoids switching-related
packet loss and provides a cost effective service. Optical equipment now exists
that will permit the dynamic establishment of single application light paths.
However, the time required to set up optical circuits is too long for short or
small transfers ? taking a second to set up a 100 Gigabit/sec link in order to
transfer a small file does not make sense. This project is building an
integrated campus network where small data transfers (megabytes or gigabytes)
ride conventional networks and big data transfers (terabytes or petabytes) ride
directly on optical circuits.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project is building
PROnet, a campus network at the University of Texas, Dallas, which provides the
lowest possible network latency (signal propagation only), scalability to
100Gbps and beyond, and equipment having low power consumption and complexity. A
user-friendly interface will be developed and deployed for the network
inexperienced researcher to request the provisioning of as needed optical. A
PROnet controller will be developed for the scheduling and automatic
provisioning of optical circuits, which will shorten the circuit reservation
procedure time significantly by removing human intervention from the entire
process. For inter-domain operation, the open platform OSCARS will be extended
to work with PROnet. With this OSCARS extension, provisioning of hybrid (optical
and virtual) circuits spanning across multiple (optical and non-optical) domains
will be a reality. The software will support secure use of the network via
InCommon identities.