* 1541230
* CAREER: Synthesis, Characterization and Physical Properties of Pr-Based Heavy Fermions
* MPS,DMR
* 01/01/2015,06/30/2018
* Robin Macaluso, University of Texas at Arlington
* Continuing Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 06/30/2018
* USD 189,154.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In recent years, studies on quantum
phase transitions (QPTs) in Ce-based heavy fermion compounds have transformed
our understanding of magnetism and superconductivity. This CAREER project,
supported by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry Program, will expand our
repertoire of heavy fermion materials beyond Ce-based compounds and towards Pr-
based materials. Exploratory synthesis, structural characterization, and
magnetic property measurements will be used to determine structure-property
relationships that impact crystal-field splitting of the localized Pr3+ ion
4f2-electronic configuration. Efforts will placed on synthesis of single-
crystals, which will increase the availability of single crystals in the United
States and enable unambiguous determination of crystal structure and physical
behavior. Collaborative work in inelastic neutron scattering studies will be
conducted to determine structural effects on crystal field splitting as a
function of chemical composition, pressure or magnetic field. Investigations of
PrAu2-xCuxSi2 and PrAu2Si2-x Gex and the Heusler compounds, PrInT2-xT?x (T, T'=
Cu, Ag, Au), will be the foundation for a long-term research program of
exploratory synthesis and characterization of PrxTyMz (T = transition metal and
M = main-group metal).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is integrated into
education and outreach activities involving undergraduate students, postdoctoral
scholars, and high school teachers. Undergraduate research experiences will be
enhanced by materials chemistry seminars and research opportunities at national
laboratories. Postdoctoral researchers will receive comprehensive training by
participating in both solid-state chemistry research and undergraduate
education. High school teachers will gain hands-on research and teaching
experience in solid-state chemistry during summer research opportunities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Investigations on quantum phase transitions have
transformed our understanding of magnetism and superconductivity. This project
will expand the current repertoire of quantum phase transition materials towards
Praesodynium-based compounds, thereby enhancing our ability to design magnetic
and superconducting materials in the future. Emphasis is placed on exploratory
synthesis, structural characterization, and physical property measurement of
single-crystals of Praesodynium-intermetallic compounds. Crystallography
experiments at neutron and synchrotron facilities will be correlated with
magnetic, thermodynamic and electrical property measurements. Growth of single
crystals will address the deficit of single crystals available for research in
the United States. In addition, collaborations between academia and national
laboratories will expand single-crystal growth capabilities to University of
Northern Colorado, yield more productive synthesis efforts, and engage students
and postdoctoral researchers in national laboratory environments. High school
teachers will gain hands-on research and teaching experience in solid-state
chemistry during summer research opportunities.