* 1541331
* Workshop on Nitrate Radicals and Biogenic Volatile Organic Compounds (VOCs):  Oxidation, Mechanisms and Organic Aerosol; Atlanta, GA; June 22-24, 2015
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2017
* Steven Brown, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 05/31/2017
* USD 10,000.00

This project supports a small workshop that will provide opportunities for
participants to discuss current research, address key outstanding questions, and
stimulate future research ideas on the role of nitrate radical chemistry in the
formation of small particles in the atmosphere in regions where there are
emissions of volatile organics from the biosphere. A deeper understanding of
this chemistry will provide improved constraints on model predictions of aerosol
formation and their effects on climate and air quality.

The workshop will involve researchers with expertise in laboratory, field, and
modeling together to identify laboratory studies (e.g., kinetics, mechanisms,
products, etc.) to obtain a deeper understanding of the chemical interactions
between biogenic volatile organic compounds (BVOC) and nitrate radicals (NO3).
The workshop will include early-career scientists and established scientists, as
well as a number of younger researchers (post docs and students).

The expected results of the workshop are: (1) a review paper on BVOC+NO3
chemistry; (2) a list of key scientific questions to be addressed and directions
for future fundamental studies on the oxidation of BVOCs with nitrate radicals;
(3) a list of critical measurements and types of studies (e.g., chamber
experiments, flow tube studies, wet chemistry, etc.) needed to address the key
scientific questions; (4) collaborative research proposals that may be submitted
to various funding agencies; and (5) the publication of new findings on key
scientific topics identified at the workshop in a special issue in Atmospheric
Chemistry and Physics.