* 1541167
* 2015 Chemical Sciences &amp; Society Summit; Leipzig, Germany - September 14-18, 2015
* MPS,CHE
* 06/15/2015,08/31/2016
* Bradley Miller, American Chemical Society (ACS)
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Bushey
* 08/31/2016
* USD 34,485.00

This award from the Division of Chemistry supports an international meeting as
part of the Chemical Sciences and Society Symposia (CS3). The CS3 convenes
eminent high-level researchers from the US, UK, Japan, China and Germany to
explore frontier chemistry research on diverse topics. The CS3 meeting in
Leipzig, Germany, September 14-18, 2015 will be on the topic "Chemistry and
Water". Previous meetings have been developed multilaterally through discussions
of the chemical societies in each participating country (American Chemical
Society in the US). This series is intended to be of great value to the global
chemistry enterprise and to the world at large as it attempts to foster work in
trans-national teams, across scientific disciplines, and beyond institutional
boundaries. The workshop proceedings are promoted and distributed to the global
science and technology community and the general public through reports on the
web. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, this workshop will focus on chemistry
and its application for clean water. Four subtopics are included 1) Health and
the Environment: an assessment of water and its role in disease, environmental
contamination and the role of sanitation. 2) Detection: exploring analytical
techniques to detect and measure contaminants. 3) Treatment: evaluating
techniques to treat contaminated water including new membrane technologies,
point-of-use treatment, UV, and the use of nanomaterials. 4) Recovery of
Materials from Water: Assessing the viability of recovering valuable materials
from wastewater including phosphorus and nitrogen.