* 1541075
* CC*DNI Networking Infrastructure: Enabling Frictionless Scientific Data Transfers in the Texas Medical Center
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2017
* Deniz Gurkan, Baylor College of Medicine
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 09/30/2017
* USD 499,837.00

The Texas Medical Center (TMC) in Houston, Texas, is home to a 15-year
networking association called the Collaborative Healthcare Alliance for
Technology (CHAT), comprised of 11 research and clinically focused organizations
and over 70,000 researchers, educators, students and staff. CHAT is led and
operated by the founding member, Baylor College of Medicine (BCM), in support of
the community's explosive research-centric, network-intensive needs. This
project replaces aging infrastructure with state-of-the-art equipment, while
simplifying the design, and simultaneously enabling Â frictionless, high-speed
data transfers by creating a first-ever Science DMZ, directly benefiting
research labs such as:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; - Baylor's Human Genome Sequencing
Center, led by Dr. Richard Gibbs, which has transferred hundreds of terabytes of
genomic data in the past year, most notably as a part of the CHARGE
project;&lt;br/&gt; - the Center for Genome Architecture producing and sharing
some 50 Tbytes of new sequenced data each year; and&lt;br/&gt; - the Center for
Metagenomics and Microbiome Research engaged in the production and collaborative
processing of tens of terabytes of microbial genomic
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While updating the underlying infrastructure, the
project also upgrades the connection between CHAT and its nearest upstream
provider, the Southeast Texas GigaPoP (SETG), from 10 to 100 Gbps, matching the
recently upgraded 100Gbps connection between SETG and LEARN, the Texas-wide
research and education network backbone that ties the R&amp;E community to
Internet2. By streamlining research data transfers, the investigators will
empower researchers at BCM and other CHAT partners to hasten the eradication of
today's greatest health challenges.