* 1541917
* MRI: Development of the Intelligent River (R), A Basin-Scale Monitoring Instrument
* CSE,CNS
* 12/15/2014,08/31/2018
* Jason Hallstrom, Florida Atlantic University
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 08/31/2018
* USD 1,748,894.00

Proposal #: 11-26344&lt;br/&gt;PI(s): Hallstrom, Jason&lt;br/&gt; Edison, Gene;
Geist, Robert; Goasguen, Sebastian: Post, Christopher&lt;br/&gt;Institution:
Clemson University &lt;br/&gt;Title: MRI/Dev: Dev of the Intelligent River (R),
a Basin-Scale Monitoring Instrument &lt;br/&gt;Project Proposed:&lt;br/&gt;This
project, developing a river and water-resource consisting of a sensor network
that forms an intelligent sensor fabric on a river basin, aims to provide real-
time access to essential environmental and hydrological parameters at
appropriate temporal and spatial scale for managing resources. Based on the
INTELLIGENT RIVERÂ®, this observation instrument comprises in situ sensors that
form an expansive intelligent fabric. The instrument enables a new &lt;br/&gt;1.
Sensing Fabric: serves as the instrument lens and comprises multiple sensor
networks.&lt;br/&gt;2. Transit and Uplink System: responsible for relaying the
data from the lens to a high-performance computing backbone.&lt;br/&gt;3.
Observation Management Middleware: responsible for normalizing data, ensuring
validity, and routing the resulting data streams to end users
applications&lt;br/&gt;4. Repository and Presentation Services: serves as an
instrument eyepiece and comprises an extensible set of
applications.&lt;br/&gt;The design of the goals in 1 include broad support for
interconnect standards, support for high-fidelity sensing, scalable temporal and
spatial coverage, rapid and reliable deployment, and system longevity. In 2,
these goals include adaptability to diverse environments, coverage scalability,
fault-tolerant data transport, and low cost operating expense. Scalability,
real-time performance, and fault-tolerant, secure messaging are included in 3.
The default instrument package in 4 includes an application for archiving
observation data to common scientific data formats and presenting that data to a
broad audience of end-users, including scientists, educators, ecosystem
managers, and legislative policy makers.&lt;br/&gt;It is evident that the
growing mismatch between water supply and demand impacts us all: USA watersheds
are in peril! This project does something about it with support from EPA and
USAGE. Within the reach of environmental science, this work explores the
connections among land use, energy production, climate effects, and water
resources applying information and computing systems. The design, construction,
and deployment of the instrument along the full reach of the Savanna River and
two adjacent watersheds, covering a broad range of physical and chemical
parameters should yield significant research contributions applicable to other
watersheds and across subdisciplines, from sensor networking, to operating
system design to cloud computing, to high performance ecosystem visualization.
When complete, the instrument should enable a new class of data-intensive
environmental ecological programs, ranging from fine-scale studies of river
transport phenomenon to assessments of hydroelectric impacts on greenhouse gas
concentrations, as well as the validation of kinetic-based quality models.
Moreover, the instrument should yield significant research contributions in the
areas of sensor networking, operating system, cloud computing, and high-
performance ecosystem visualization.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: &lt;br/&gt;The
impact should be felt both regionally and nationally. At the national level, the
instrument should initiate a transformative shift towards real-time management.
At the local level the instrument will contribute to initiate two new degree
programs, creating collaborative ties with other institutions, and serve as an
outreach hub that links regional high schools and museums.