* 1541736
* FEW: A sustainable rural framework workshop for the upper Great Plains.
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2017
* Ranjit Koodali, South Dakota School of Mines and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Torgersen
* 06/30/2017
* USD 50,000.00

South Dakota School of Mines and Technology (working in collaboration with South
Dakota State University, University of Nebraska-Kearney, North Dakota State
University and Sitting Bull College) will host a workshop to explore sustainable
rural supply chain problems and Food-energy-water nexus research needs in the
semi-arid Upper Great Plains. The workshop will 1) present key recent research
synopses by leading experts in food, water, energy, land-use and climate; 2)
identify critical FEW research needs in the UGP using strategy-based discussion
groups during the conference; 3) summarize research needs into a white
paper.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;South Dakota School of Mines and Technology
(working in collaboration with South Dakota State University, University of
Nebraska-Kearney, North Dakota State University and Sitting Bull College) will
host a Food-Energy-Water (FEW) Nexus workshop to explore sustainable rural
supply chain problems research needs. The semi-arid Upper Great Plains UGP is a
net exporter of food and energy, yet it is also the site of competing nexus
interests: the Bakken shale-oil boom, corn grain ethanol production, in-situ
uranium mining, coal mines, wind farms, and major hydroelectric dams compete
with public and private interests in relation to land-use alternatives. Large
and volatile changes in agricultural commodity and livestock prices, competing
land-use for incoming bioenergy crops, increasing agricultural efficiencies
through biotechnology and precision agriculture; and regional effects of climate
trends and variabilities have impacted regional agriculture and water resources.
Recent energy and commodity end-use developments have led to substantial
regional economic growth; however it has strained infrastructure (e.g. lack of
housing, power transmission, pipelines, roads/rail lines), contributed to
grassland to cropland conversion, resulted in soil salinization and
sodification, and reduced ground water supplies. The workshop will 1) present
key recent research synopses by leading experts in food, water, energy, land-use
and climate; 2) identify critical FEW research needs in the UGP using strategy-
based discussion groups during the conference; 3) summarize research needs into
a white paper.