* 1541676
* CAP:   Data Science, Learning and Youth: Connecting Research and Creating Frameworks
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2015,09/30/2016
* Joseph Polman, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Lee
* 09/30/2016
* USD 49,958.00

The Cyberlearning and Future Learning Technologies Program funds efforts that
will help envision the next generation of learning technologies and advance what
we know about how people learn in technology-rich environments. Cyberlearning
Capacity (CAP) Projects focus on expanding and strengthening the cyberlearning
community and often include conferences, workshops, or short courses. This
project focuses on a workshop exploring the application of data science to K-12
education. It is motivated by the importance that reasoning with data has in
today's world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop is entitled Data Science,
Learning and Youth: Connecting Research and Creating Frameworks. Its objective
is to move the educational implications of Data Science to the forefront of
conversations among the cyberlearning research community. A large number of
undergraduate and post-graduate programs are presently focusing on imparting
data skills and computational reasoning. This workshop will extend this focus to
K-12 education. It will bring together established and emerging scholars
interested in Data Science Education from fields including Learning Sciences,
Human-Computer Interaction and Computer Science, Mathematics and Statistics
Education, Science Education, and Community Engagement and Citizen Science, and
practitioners from K-12 settings. This workshop will foster new
interdisciplinary collaborations and expose researchers interested in Data
Science Education to relevant communities, literatures, and projects. The short
term goal is to enable these communities to synthesize emerging findings,
frameworks, and theories and better understand what tools, activities, and
environments can support Data Science literacy. Our long term goal is to foster
the development of a unified research community interested in Data Science
Education. Direct outcomes of the workshop will include concrete plans to
produce articles and synthesis documents focused on Data Science Education
during the year immediately following the workshop. These documents will speak
to three broad and complementary audiences: researchers, through the proposal of
a special issue of a scholarly journal; practitioners, through two practitioner-
oriented articles focusing on mathematics and science education; and the broader
Cyberlearning community, through an online Synthesis Statement to be hosted by
the Center for Innovative Research in Cyberlearning (CIRCL) resource website.