* 1541455
* CC*DNI Networking Infrastructure: Data Driven Research-Wise Network Infrastructure Upgrade ("DaRWiN")
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Andrew Goodenow, University of Missouri-Kansas City
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 08/31/2018
* USD 516,000.00

The Data Driven Research-Wise Network Infrastructure Upgrade (DaRWiN) project
upgrades the network infrastructure and external connectivity at the University
of Missouri-Kansas City to significantly address research and educational needs
of science and engineering for the next five to seven years. This project i)
enhances the connectivity between the two physical locations of the university
to an ultra-high-speed 100 Gbps backbone, ii) upgrades the connectivity among
the core research buildings to 10 Gbps high speed optical links, and iii)
establishes dedicated 10 Gbps connections for research to external regional
entities that amplifies existing research collaborations among multiple
disciplines and foster new opportunities.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project
provides an enhanced platform for solving a variety of single-, inter-, and
multi-disciplinary problems across several fields of science and engineering.
The project particularly assists and promotes the following research activities:
end-to-end campus network performance management, large data movement service
research, chemical fingerprinting and sequencing research, computational physics
and electronic structure research, and human balance and ambulation research.
The project broadly impacts both interdisciplinary research and education
throughout the university at both the graduate and the undergraduate level.