* 1541348
* CC*DNI Campus Design: Internet2 Infrastructure to Enable Research in Big Data Science and Engineering at Tennessee State University
* CSE,OAC
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2017
* Suping Zhou, Tennessee State University
* Continuing Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 12/31/2017
* USD 349,144.00

This project enhances cyberinfrastructure at Tennessee State University (TSU)
with high-speed access to massive and complex datasets and distributed computing
infrastructure via Internet2. The two-year project accelerates outcomes of
ongoing astronomy, bioinformatics and cybersecurity projects with high speed
access to: instruments, such as robotic telescopes and their streaming data;
high dimension datasets, such as genomic datasets; and large scale distributed
computing and networking platforms. TSU is adding a dedicated network for
science and engineering research traffic, upgrading the backbone network
connections to the research complex housing the astronomy, bioinformatics and
cybersecurity laboratories, and providing high speed access to Internet2. The
enhanced infrastructure will enable TSU faculty and students to effectively
engage in science and engineering research and education.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The new campus network capacity enables TSU to transfer
large datasets and improves quality of computational research conducted by
science and engineering faculty. Specifically, researchers can connect to TSU's
state-of-the art telescopes located in Southern Arizona and perform daily
analysis of images of several thousand stars. Bioinformatic researchers can
conduct genomic sequencing service facilities to analyze massive and complex
datasets of plant tissues at Pittsburgh Supercomputing Center, Vanderbilt
Technologies for Advanced Genomic, Cornell's Genomic Diversity Facility and
national distributed computing platforms. Cybersecurity researchers can conduct
at scale research experiments and take advantage of high speed access to
computing servers and Openflow switches on the Global Environment for Network
Innovations (GENI) facility. The project also advances undergraduate research,
allowing students to conduct data analysis with effective use of computational
resources.