* 1541624
* Improving Understanding of Convection Initiation in Nocturnal Environments During PECAN (Plains Elevated Convection at Night) Using High-Resolution Ensemble Data Assimilation
* GEO,AGS
* 12/01/2015,11/30/2020
* James Marquis, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 11/30/2020
* USD 592,055.00

Nocturnal thunderstorms in the central United States provide rainfall for
productive agricultural regions but also can pose hazards to lives and property
through flooding and severe winds. In 2015, NSF funded a large group of
scientists to collect data on these nighttime thunderstorms. This award will
make use of that data by conducting very small scale numerical modeling studies
to determine what initially triggers the thunderstorms, a process known as
convective initiation. The research has the potential to improve understanding
and modeling of these events, giving forecasters more information about when and
where thunderstorms may happen. The award would also contribute to human
resource development by funding an early-career researcher, providing an
opportunity for an undergraduate student to participate in a research project,
and allowing the researcher to develop a seminar course based on the field
campaign.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Plains Elevated Convection at Night (known
colloquially as PECAN) field campaign was conducted in the Great Plains region
in June and July of 2015. The campaign included numerous observational
platforms, such as mobile radars, aircraft, vertical profilers and surface
instrumentation. In this project the researcher intends to assimilate data from
the campaign into an ensemble with nested mesoscale and convection-resolving
grids. The primary focus of the research is to accurately reproduce the
evolution of the nocturnal mesoscale environment in which convective initiation
occurs and to determine which specific small- and large-scale processes result
in parcels lifted to their level of free convection. The ensemble data
assimilation experiments will employ the WRF-ARW and the Data Assimilation
Research Testbed (DART) ensemble analysis software configured as an Ensemble
Adjustment Kalman Filter. Fifty ensemble members will be used and the researcher
plans to employ a triple nested model grid strategy with the finest grid spacing
of 0.4 to 0.6km. In addition to the work on identifying processes triggering
nocturnal convection, the researcher will also conduct forecast sensitivity
experiments.