* 1541453
* CC*DNI Networking Infrastructure: Utah Valley University Dense Wavelength Divisions Multiplexing Connection and Science Network
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2017
* Kim Nielsen, Utah Valley University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 09/30/2017
* USD 498,333.00

Utah Valley University (UVU) is implementing a high speed network connection in
conjunction with the Utah Educational Network (UEN) that connects the university
to other state and national research networks using dense wavelength division
multiplexing (DWDM) across existing fiber optic cable. Additionally, an on-
campus research and science network is being created, separate from the regular
campus network, to facilitate current and future research. The project is headed
by UVU's CIO and implemented by UVU/UEN engineers; a Research Advisory Committee
will help maximize the benefits of the new technology.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Network upgrades provide the UVU community with
cyberinfrastructure for scientific and education projects requiring high
bandwidth capabilities. The project increases capacity for undergraduate
research and experiential learning. As UVU is a major hub on the UEN network
(one of the nation's premier education networks), the enhanced connectivity will
improve STEM education in all Utah schools and many public education services;
access to STEM education will be strengthened for rural, remote, and underserved
populations in this vast state. Additionally, high bandwidth, high speed
capabilities facilitate UVU's partnership in the US Ignite
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through this project, UVU is installing
networking hardware that will connect to the 4x10GE equipment previously
installed by UEN. The networking equipment consists of switches capable of
supporting 10, 40, and 100 Gigabit Ethernet ports with more than 83 terabits per
second of overall switching capability. The switches support layer-2 routing,
and IPv4 and IPv6 routing. A perfSONAR host is being deployed for network
performance monitoring.