* 1541654
* NSF/FDA Scholar-in-Residence at FDA: Understanding the Bioactivity and Safety of Metal and Metal Oxide Nanoparticles Used in Medical Devices
* ENG,CBET
* 01/15/2016,12/31/2017
* Zhihong Nie, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 12/31/2017
* USD 69,920.00

PI: Nie, Zhihong &lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1541654 &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
production of reactive oxygen species (ROS) is known as one of the most
important reasons for the cytotoxicity of metal and metal oxide nanoparticles
(NPs) that are commonly used in medical devices. This project proposes to use
electron spin resonance spectroscopy to assess potential toxicity associated
with nanoparticles. It aims for new insights and mechanistic knowledge regarding
nanoparticle toxicity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will meet the
pressing need for identifying the potential hazards of metal and metal oxide NPs
used in medical devices. The project has three expected outcomes. First, these
studies will offer new insights into the fundamental understanding the ROS
generation by nanomaterials in general. Second, it will, for the first time,
fully elucidate the role of spatial arrangement of NPs on their ROS generation
in biologically relevant environments. Finally, the mechanistic knowledge
obtained from this research will guide the better design of safe and effective
medical devices or products containing nanoscale materials. The PI will recruit
and train students particularly from under-represented groups at both graduate
and undergraduate levels into this research program. Students involved in the
multidisciplinary research will acquire skills and knowledge crossing in
nanomaterials, spectroscopy, nano-bio interactions, and medical safety.