* 1541282
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award: Mobility As A Response To Social And Economic Factors
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2015,01/31/2017
* Mary Morgan-Smith, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 01/31/2017
* USD 24,252.00

This project explores indigenous Yucatec Maya responses to and experiences of
Colonial and Republican rule, and the variability of social and economic
organization beyond the hacienda. The majority of archaeological investigations
in Yucatán, México have highlighted Pre-Columbian Maya sites and Colonial
haciendas. By contrast the relationships between indigenous landowners
(caciques) and their subject populations on sites of more modest architectural
scale, such as ranchos, has been understudied from an archaeological
perspective. Morgan-Smith's research examines landowner-laborer relationships
among Maya-speakers on the cusp of historical political shifts, addressing the
critical issue of how socioeconomic status and tenancy on indigenous-owned
landed estates factor into household abandonment, and relationships with sites
of oppression in the present. The processes involved in landowner-worker
interactions continue in many regions of the world today and this research thus
has current relevance. Within this context, this research addresses the
following broader questions: How are social and economic relationships between
the landowners and laborers materialized in household contexts? How do
differential patterns of tenancy and inequality inform the understanding of debt
peonage on indigenous-owned landed estates? The proposed research is designed to
address gaps in the current literature on household abandonment and the nascent
field of Yucatec historical archaeology using a mixed-methods
approach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Morgan-Smith's archaeological research explores
the material expression of household abandonment from Rancho Kiuic, a rural
18th- 20th century landed estate in the Puuc region of Yucatán, México. Occupied
by generations of Maya-speaking landowners and laborers through the late-
Colonial and Republican eras. The Rancho represents a site type with that has
seen little archaeological or ethnohistoric investigation. Using household-level
excavation data, oral histories of the descendant community, and archival
research, this project examines the relationships between the Rancho?s owners
and the laboring population through house-lot abandonment contexts.
Archaeological excavation will establish occupation lengths within, and material
inequities between, house-lots of the landowning and laboring families. Oral
history interviews and archival research will be employed to identify resources,
opportunities, and historical processes that may have drawn the population to or
away from the Rancho. Using network analysis, the resulting archaeological,
archival, and oral history data will be evaluated to understand how complex
socioeconomic relationships impacted decisions to leave the community, produced
the material manifestations of household abandonment, and continue to shape the
descendants? interactions with the landscape today. The advantage of this
approach is that it gives the oral history and archival data ? which are often
treated as parallel or comparative in historical archaeology - the analytical
consideration of material data sets. At the same time, this project furthers
ongoing collaborative relationships with the descendant community Xobenhaltun,
of Rancho Kiuic, who maintain their ties through use of the site's cemetery.
Specifically, community members will participate in the project as consultants
and contributors to histories of their experiences at Rancho Kiuic. Involving
the descendant community in dialogue about their pasts in their native language
permits more meaningful engagement with communities in the archaeological
process. Furthermore, this research provides field, lab, and oral history
training for both graduate and undergraduate Anthropology student volunteers.