* 1541891
* EAGER:  FEW:  Life cycle comparison of water, energy, nutrient, and carbon requirements of urban and conventional food production strategies
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2018
* Eric Masanet, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Holly Barnard
* 06/30/2018
* USD 260,000.00

A variety of urban food production strategies have been proposed to reduce
energy required to provide food to urban residents, reduce flooding, increase
water reuse, increase biodiversity in cities, improve supplies of healthy fresh
food to urban residents, and stimulate economic development. However, the water,
nutrient, and energy requirements of urban food production have not been
determined, and the resulting impacts on flooding and water quality have not
been documented. To meet these needs, this project will instrument and monitor
three urban agriculture demonstration sites in the Chicago area, and use the
resulting data to assess the effects of alternative urban food production
strategies on water, energy, and nutrients in cities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will 1) develop a general techno-economic life-cycle modeling framework
for urban food systems, 2) monitor water, energy, nutrient, and carbon balances
in urban food production, 3) develop physically-based models for hydrologic and
biogeochemical dynamics at these sites, and 4) integrate these data and process
models into the techno-economic model in order to compare whole-lifecycle
energy, water, nutrient, and carbon impacts of alternative urban food production
strategies relative to each other and to conventional production of the same
crops. Very little data are available to quantify the water, energy, nutrient,
and carbon requirements and impacts of urban food production. The projectwill
yield novel data enabling parameterization of both process-based and techno-
economic models for three alternative urban food production strategies. The
project will be conducted in collaboration with the Chicago Botanic Garden
through the Windy City Harvest program (WCH). This collaboration will engage
apporoximately 200 students (grades 9-14) and community members per year in
project science activities, and enable direct use of project results to improve
design and operation of urban food production facilities. The project will also
involve a student-science effort at Northwestern University, thereby engaging
approximately 700 undergraduate students per year to analyze metals
concentrations in samples obtained from WCH sites. Overall, the project will
provide capability to estimate the magnitude of potential impacts that could be
achieved by deploying urban food production at regional scales, along with
information needed to design these production systems and optimize their
location within urban landscapes, and engage approximately 2,000 students and
community members in analysis and development of sustainable urban food
production.