* 1541133
* BRAIN EAGER:   Tuning the Intrinsic Computational Properties of Neurons to Changing Circuit Outputs during Early Brain Development
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2015,12/31/2017
* William Moody, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Evan Balaban
* 12/31/2017
* USD 300,000.00

Neurons that are being formed in the brain of a developing animal send out
electrical signals that spread like waves over large parts of the brain. The
waves are essential for normal brain development. The goal of this project is to
find out how this spontaneous electrical activity controls brain development.
Recently, a specific type of neuron has been identified as being the pacemaker,
or trigger, for these waves. This project will study how these neurons trigger
the spontaneous waves. The project will take advantage of a mouse that allows
these neurons to be stimulated using light. The responses of the neurons to
these stimuli will be monitored, and the results will be used to make computer
models of the neurons. These models will reveal the properties of these neurons
that allow them to produce the waves. The project will offer opportunities for
undergraduate and graduate students to be trained in interdisciplinary research
that involves both theoretical and experimental biology, under the guidance of
two collaborating principal investigators with unique expertise in these areas.
Emphasis will be placed on actively recruiting women into full participation in
the computational aspects of the project.

This project investigates how the intrinsic electrical properties of developing
GABAergic interneurons in the cerebral cortex allow them to initiate spontaneous
waves of electrical activity during early development. Previous genetic and
pharmacological data indicate that these neurons, which are excitatory during
early development, are the primary pacemakers for waves of spontaneous activity
in the mouse cortex between embryonic day 18 and and postnatal day 3. The
detailed input:output relations of GABAergic neurons will be determined by using
calibrated optical stimulation in a dlx5/6 channel-rhodopsin mouse and by
recording the outputs of the neurons with extracellular electrode arrays.
Conductance-based models of the neurons will be constructed that reflect the
diversity of intrinsic properties that are encountered in the population. The
model neurons will be connected into synaptic circuits to determine whether the
measured properties lead to pacemaking activity in the circuit. By
systematically varying the intrinsic properties in the model, aspects of the
intrinsic properties that are critical for pacemaking function will be
determined. If successful, this project will provide a new high-throughput
method for determining how the intrinsic properties of neurons determine circuit
output in the brain.