* 1541056
* CRISP Type 2:Collaborative:  Multi-scale Infrastructure Interactions with Intermittent Disruptions: Coastal Flood Protection, Transportation and Governance Networks
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2021
* Mark Lubell, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 09/30/2021
* USD 575,000.00

Infrastructure networks in coastal communities must anticipate and respond to
the emerging threat of coastal inundation due to sea level rise, tidal forcing,
wind events and precipitation. As inundation events become both more frequent
and more severe, human activities and services are disrupted, including
transportation, recreation and economic activities. In many of these
communities, decision making about protective infrastructure and transportation
planning is highly dispersed and variable, including local property owners,
individual communities, counties and regional, state and even federal agencies.
The result is a highly multi-scale governance system in which decision-makers
are influenced by local and regional interactions, while managing the multi-
scale and interacting infrastructure that defines the shoreline and the
transportation networks. This research project focuses on how the interaction of
environmental forcing with the shoreline infrastructure disrupts the
transportation network, and how both of these networks influence the governance
network that makes planning decisions about the infrastructure. In the context
of coastal flooding, this work will provide insights into how governance
institutions and networks are prepared, or can be better prepared, to make
effective decisions about infrastructure planning and operation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the threat of flooding in urbanized coastal
communities requires the integration of climate sciences, coastal oceanography
and hydrodynamics, transportation engineering and planning and political
science. In this Critical Resilient Interdependent Infrastructure Systems and
Processes (CRISP) collaborative research project, these disciplines will be
formally linked with one another using computational and empirical approaches to
define the network structures. The goal is to examine multi-scale interactions
between infrastructure and governance networks in the context of disruption by
coastal inundation and flooding events. The underlying hydrodynamics and the
nature of the transportation network ensure cross-scale interactions, both
spatially and temporally, which must be a component of regional and local
decision-making and governance. Through the use of state-of-the-art hydrodynamic
models, projections will be developed for future inundation due to sea level
rise, oceanic water level fluctuations including tides, and precipitation and
runoff. With an inverse modeling approach, we will determine the local and
regional impacts of infrastructure projects on water level and inundation, which
will link to analyses of both the transportation infrastructure and the regional
governance network. The transportation network will be analyzed to define both
the short-term disruption of travel times by inundation events and the long-term
optimal resource allocation across the network. The spatial structures inherent
in the inundation and transportation network results will be compared to the
empirically-defined governance network to examine whether the governance network
is well-suited to manage the risks and actions associated with future inundation
and associated transportation disruptions. The interaction between these three
infrastructure networks (shoreline, transportation and governance) will be
quantitatively analyzed to establish similarities in topology and flow and the
influence of each network on the others. By applying this research on
interacting infrastructure systems to the real-world problem of coastal
flooding, an opportunity will be created to inform communities' proactive
preparation for sea level rise, including decision-making about both
transportation and shoreline infrastructure development. In the San Francisco
Bay Area, work will be done with the Climate Readiness Institute to connect with
practitioners and managers through a series of workshops designed to inform the
research and communicate research findings. Finally, the interdisciplinary
nature of the research provides an outstanding opportunity for young scientists
to develop. The project will involve 2 postdoctoral scholars and 3 graduate
students, who will be involved with all aspects of the project, including
outreach through the creation of "CRI Fellows" who connect directly with area
practitioners.