* 1541866
* FEW Workshop:  Food, Energy, and Water Nexus in Sustainable Cities
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2016
* Nada Assaf-Anid, New York Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 08/31/2016
* USD 98,877.00

1541866 (Assaf- Anid). The workshop "Food, Energy, and Water (FEW) Nexus in
Sustainable Cities," to be held in Beijing on October 20 and 21, 2015, will
convene participants from both the United States and China. Both nations are
principal actors in global sustainability. The FEW workshop will provide
participants from both nations opportunities to explore scientific challenges of
mutual interest in sustainability and stressors on the built environment in
relation to the FEW nexus. The workshop's programming team is led by New York
Institute of Technology (NYIT) in collaboration with Peking University (PKU).
Several academic, government, and private entities will be actively engaged in
planning the workshop, including from the United States: NYIT (Dr. Nada Assaf-
Anid), and the American Institute of Chemical Engineers and its Institute for
Sustainability (AIChE-IfS, Dr. Darlene Schuster), and from China: Peking
University (Dr. Chunmiao Zheng) and Wuhan University (Dr. Xiaohui Cui), along
with representatives from the various agencies in the U.S. and China. The
overarching goal of the workshop is to stimulate basic research on the
interdependence of systems involving agriculture, water, and energy, as well as
to identify barriers to sustainability in food production, transport,
distribution, use, and access in urban environments.

The workshop will cover several research areas, including sustainability and
life-cycle assessment challenges in addressing complex systems-based indicators
and responses to stressors and coupling those responses to the FEW system, as
well as technology breakthroughs and approaches for more efficient FEW resource
utilization and reuse in cities. The workshop will enhance scientific
cooperation between U.S. and Chinese scholars, educators, industry
practitioners, government agency representatives, urban planners and
policymakers. The workshop is to result in a white paper on scientific,
engineering and information systems and data challenges in understanding FEW
systems.

This workshop is co-funded by the CBET/ENG Environmental Sustainability program
and the Global Venture Fund (GVF) of the Office of International Science and
Engineering (OISE).