* 1541410
* CC*DNI Engineer: University of Cincinnati (UC) Cyberinfrastructure Engineer and Educator (CI2E)
* CSE,OAC
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2018
* Richard Beck, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 12/31/2018
* USD 399,986.00

The University of Cincinnati (UC) is establishing a Campus Cyberinfrastructure
Engineer and Educator (CI2E) FTE. The CI2E works side by side with UC's
researchers and students to facilitate the use and integration of local,
regional and national cyberinfrastructure components with Science, Technology,
Engineering and Mathematics (STEM) research. The CI2E improves STEM education in
the classroom and in the laboratory by providing relevant curriculum and guest
lectures; opens new opportunities for research partnerships between universities
and industry; and promotes commercialization and job growth. The CI2E helps the
university fulfill the research pathways identified in the university's Third
Century strategy, including research in engineering, climate change, clean water
and sustainability, analytics, high-energy physics and medicine. The UC CI2E
provides educational outreach opportunities to encourage women, first-generation
college attendees and underserved populations to explore careers in sustainable
networking and the future of big data.

The CC*DNI Campus CI2E FTE facilitates collaboration across the UCScienceNet,
identifying opportunities and bottlenecks and recommending strategic upgrades to
our existing campus cyberinfrastructure to create a highly functional and
integrated whole. The CI2E works with researchers to utilize software defined
networking (SDN) and OpenFlow resources to achieve optimization and the high-
throughput capacity required to achieve UC's STEM education and research goals
funded by the NSF, NASA, DOE, DoD, USEPA, USGS and private industry in many
disciplines. S/he leads UC's ScienceDMZ, IPv6, BCP 38 and related network
security efforts.