* 1541245
* Conference: 2015 Crystal Growth and Assembly: Fundamental Mechanisms of Ordering from the Atomic to the Mesoscale; University of New England, June 28- July 3, 2015
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Lara Estroff, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 05/31/2016
* USD 10,000.00

Non Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;Advanced materials for many applications ranging
from superalloy turbine blades to microelectronics to new therapeutics for
malaria depend on a fundamental understanding of crystal nucleation and growth.
This conference seeks to gather leading scientists representing the major areas
in the field of crystallization and to bring them into contact with each other
and, more importantly, with the next generation of researchers in the field.
This year, a particular focus of the conference will be on the development and
application of high-resolution, in situ characterization techniques that can
provide mechanistic insights, and how this unprecedented visualization of
crystal nucleation and growth can lead to the development of important new
materials with desired properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary
&lt;br/&gt;With support from the Solid State and Materials Chemistry program,
the organizers of the 2015 Gordon Research Conference on Crystal Growth &amp;
Assembly will provide scholarships for students and postdoctoral to participate
in the conference and join the "Crystal Growth" community. This conference is
focused on developing an understanding of the fundamental atomic and nanoscale
physics and chemistry that are central to the nucleation and growth of crystals
for a wide array of technologies. This year, the conference will specifically
address five specific areas: (1) The role of self-assembly and pattern formation
in crystallization, (2) Vapor-liquid-solid growth of nanostructures, (3)
Inorganic/organic interactions at interfaces that control shape and function,
(4) In situ methods to observe nucleation and growth, and (5) Design of
materials for use in energy and biomedical technologies. To this end, the
conference brings together scientists from industry, national laboratories and
academia to discuss the latest advances and challenges in Crystal Growth and
Assembly.