* 1542841
* A workshop proposal: Building US-China Collaboration in Biodiversity Studies - Frontier Issues, New Approaches, and Opportunities; North Carolina 10/9-11,2015; China 10/13-15, 2015
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2015,12/31/2017
* JennyQiuyun Xiang, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 12/31/2017
* USD 49,798.00

This award will support a workshop in North Carolina and travel for U.S.
researchers to a companion workshop in China to discuss recent advances and
emerging areas in U.S.-China biodiversity research. The workshops will integrate
keynote talks from invited speakers, mini-talks among participants in topical
groups, discussion periods, and field trips. A diverse group of participants
from the U.S. and China will include established scientists, junior researchers,
graduate students, and postdoctoral researchers from the fields of evolutionary
biology, ecology, systematics, and bioinformatics. The involvement of
individuals from under-represented groups will be prioritized during the
selection process. Group discussions and field trips to coastal, freshwater
swamp, and mountain ecosystems in North Carolina will foster broad and informal
interactions that will facilitate new research directions and inspire new
research collaborations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The United States and China
occupy large areas of North America and eastern Asia at similar temperate
latitudes. The two regions offer many opportunities for comparative studies of
biodiversity, from the origin, evolution, and distribution of species, to
community assembly, ecosystem processes, ecological interactions, and
sustainability. Workshop participants will include early career scientists,
including postdocs and students, in discussions regarding the next generation of
international biodiversity research and will involve participants from diverse
disciplines and institutions. A website will be constructed to share information
from the meeting including research talks, discussion summaries, and participant
information. Outcomes from the meetings will also be disseminated broadly
through presentations and exhibits at the North Carolina Museum of Natural
Sciences, North Carolina State University, and The National Evolutionary
Synthesis Center.