* 1542265
* Workshop:  Learning,  Perception and Control in Robotics and Humans
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2015,02/29/2016
* Evangelos Theodorou, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* jeffrey trinkle
* 02/29/2016
* USD 88,211.00

Autonomy and robust intelligence are important research areas due to the
plethora of applications from space exploration, manufacturing, robotics and
transportation to medicine and biology. In aerospace applications, autonomy
becomes more and more important due to the need for deep space exploration. In
manufacturing, the development of technologies for safe human-machine and human-
robot interaction have the potential to improve the competitiveness of existing
industrial processes and create economic growth. In medicine and biology, the
use of intelligent systems can improve health care and minimize risk factors. In
the area of disaster response, there is the need for autonomous systems to
operate in remote and dangerous for the human environments. Given the importance
of autonomy and robust intelligence in the aforementioned areas, this workshop
aims to identify fundamental scientific questions and encourage new research
directions at the confluence of aerospace, medicine, transportation,
manufacturing, disaster response, space exploration, and
biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Learning, perception and control are fundamental
modalities necessary for autonomous systems to operate in dynamic, uncertain and
remote environments. Autonomous systems should be able to robustly walk,
navigate, e&amp;#64259;ciently explore, quickly learn new motor skills and
generalize these skills to unseen conditions. This workshop brings together
scientists from di&amp;#64256;erent areas of sciences and engineering to
brainstorm on two questions related to the representation of sensory information
and data, and generalization of decision and control mechanisms in robotics and
autonomous systems. The aforementioned topics are investigated at the
intersection of planning and control, information theory, machine learning,
neuroscience and perception. The emphasis of the workshop will be on the
mathematical interdependencies and interconnections of these areas based on
mathematical concepts that include but they are not limited to
di&amp;#64256;erential geometry and topology. The goal for the workshop is to
determine future research directions and identify open questions across the
disciplines of control theory, machine learning, perception and cognitive
sciences.