* 1542205
* NNCI: Soft and Hybrid Nanotechnology Experimental (SHyNE) Resource
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2021
* Chad Mirkin, Northwestern University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 08/31/2021
* USD 5,098,461.00

The Soft and Hybrid Nanotechnology Experimental (SHyNE) Resource NNCI site is a
collaborative venture between Northwestern University (NU) and the University of
Chicago (UC), building upon each institution's long history of transforming the
frontiers of science and engineering. Soft nanostructures are typically
polymeric, biological and fluidic in nature while hybrid represents systems
comprising soft-hard interfaces. SHyNE facilities enable broad access to an
extensive fabrication, characterization and computational infrastructure with a
multi-faceted and interdisciplinary approach for transformative science and
enabling technologies. In addition to traditional micro/nanofabrication tools,
SHyNE provides specialized capabilities for soft materials and soft-hard hybrid
nano-systems. SHyNE enhances regional capabilities by providing users with on-
site and remote open-access to state-of-the-art laboratories and world-class
technical expertise to help solve the challenging problems in nanotechnology
research and development for non-traditional areas such as the agricultural,
biomedical, chemical, food, geological and environmental, among other
industries. A critical component of the SHyNE mission is scholarly outreach
through secondary and post-secondary research experience and integration with
curricula at both universities, as well as, societal outreach through a novel
nano-journalism project in collaboration with the Medill School of Journalism.
SHyNE promotes active participation of underrepresented groups, including women
and minorities, in sciences and utilizes Chicago's public museums for broader
outreach. SHyNE leverages an exceptional depth of intellectual, academic and
facilities resources to provide critical infrastructure in support of research,
application development and problem-solving in nanoscience and nanotechnology
and integrates this transformative approach into the societal fabric of Chicago
and the greater Midwest.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SHyNE is a solution-focused, open-
access collaborative initiative operating under the umbrella of NU's
International Institute for Nanotechnology (IIN), in partnership with UC's
Institute for Molecular Engineering (IME). SHyNE open-access user facilities
bring together broad experience and capabilities in traditional soft
nanomaterials such as biological, polymeric or fluidic systems and hybrid
systems combining soft/hard materials and interfaces. Collectively, soft and
hybrid nanostructures represent remarkable scientific and technological
opportunities. However, given the sub-100nm length-scale and related
complexities, advanced facilities are needed to harness their full potential.
Such facilities require capabilities to pattern soft/hybrid nanostructures
across large areas and tools/techniques to characterize them in their pristine
states. These divergent yet integrated needs are met by SHyNE, as it coordinates
NU's extensive cryo-bio, characterization and soft-nanopatterning capabilities
with the state-of-the-art cleanroom fabrication and expertise at UC's Pritzker
Nanofabrication Facility (PNF). SHyNE addresses emerging needs in
synthesis/assembly of soft/biological structures and integration of classical
clean-room capabilities with soft-biological structures, providing expertise and
instrumentation related to the synthesis, purification, and characterization of
peptides and peptide-based materials. SHyNE coordinates with Argonne National
Lab facilities and leverages existing super-computing and engineering expertise
under Center for Hierarchical Materials Design (CHiMaD) and Digital
Manufacturing and Design Innovation Institute (DMDII), respectively. An
extensive array of innovative educational, industry and societal outreach, such
as nano-journalism, industry-focused workshop/symposia and collaborations with
Chicago area museums, provide for an integrated and comprehensive coverage of
modern infrastructure for soft/hybrid systems for the next generation
researchers and the broader society.