* 1542130
* Partial Support For International Symposium on Cluster and Nanomaterials in Richmond Virginia; October 26-29, 2015
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2016
* Purusottam Jena, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Standard Grant
* Alexios Klironomos
* 08/31/2016
* USD 20,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award provides partial support for the
International Symposium on Cluster and Nanomaterials in Richmond Virginia, on
October 26-29, 2015. This symposium brings together a variety of researchers
from academia, national laboratories, and industry, belonging to diverse
disciplines: physics, chemistry, biology, materials science, engineering, and
medicine. The focus of the symposium is on the important role that clusters and
nanostructures play within the energy and life sciences. In particular, central
topics to be covered include the efficient storage and conversion of alternative
energy sources such as solar power and hydrogen; bioactive, bioresponsive, and
biomimetic materials; nanotoxicity; bioengineering and regenerative medicine.
Topics related to both areas such as reactions, catalysis, electronic, optical,
and magnetic properties will also be featured. NSF support will enable the
participation of 30 contributors, who might not otherwise be able to attend.
Half of the requested funds are destined for the support of young
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This
award provides partial support for the International Symposium on Cluster and
Nanomaterials in Richmond Virginia, on October 26-29, 2015. This symposium
brings together a variety of researchers from academia, national laboratories,
and industry, belonging to diverse disciplines: physics, chemistry, biology,
materials science, engineering, and medicine. The focus of the symposium is on
the important role that clusters and nanostructures play within the energy and
life sciences. In particular, central topics to be covered include the efficient
storage and conversion of alternative energy sources such as solar power and
hydrogen; bioactive, bioresponsive, and biomimetic materials; nanotoxicity;
bioengineering and regenerative medicine. Topics related to both areas such as
reactions, catalysis, electronic, optical, and magnetic properties will also be
featured. NSF support will enable the participation of 30 contributors, who
might not otherwise be able to attend. Half of the requested funds are destined
for the support of young researchers.