* 1542479
* Dimensions US-China: Collaborative Research: Allozomes and dioecy in plants as drivers of multi-level biodiversity
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Kenneth Keefover-Ring, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 08/31/2021
* USD 459,656.00

Although most flowering plants (angiosperms) have flowers that combine male and
female organs, an estimated seven percent of flowering plant species are
dioecious, meaning male and female flowers are on separate plants. All poplars
and willows are dioecious and these two genera are the most abundant trees and
shrubs in many parts of the United States and China. This research aims to
understand the genetic basis for the evolution of unisexual flowers in poplars
and willows, how defense and volatile chemical compounds differ between male and
female individuals, and how different chemical profiles within these plants
affects insect biodiversity. Moreover, poplars and willows are also important
components of the timber and biofuels industries, so results from this research
may lead to new insights into how growth and yield may be improved in the two
genera. The collaboration between United States and Chinese researchers will
provide extensive cross-disciplinary and cross-cultural training opportunities
for over fifteen graduate students and five postdoctoral scholars, and the data
generated from the research will be incorporated into teaching materials for
courses to be taught in both Chinese and US institutions. Dozens of
undergraduates from diverse backgrounds will be trained in plant genomics and
functional ecology through direct contributions to data collection and analysis,
or through access to the data for research immersion experiences. Finally,
researchers will lead K-12 teacher training workshops targeted at under-
represented groups in rural Texas to encourage teaching of the foundational
theories of biodiversity.

This research will address functional biodiversity with a comprehensive survey
of gender dimorphism for defense and volatile chemistry in Populus and Salix,
and determine how gender dimorphism influences pollinator attraction, herbivore
feeding preferences, and overall arthropod community structure. Genetic aspects
of biodiversity will be investigated by population genomic characterization of
the allosomes in comparison to autosomes. Researchers will map the chromosomal
locations of sex determination regions (SDRs) in a suite of sixteen Salix and
Populus species, determine whether these genomic regions contain defense and
volatile chemistry loci consistent with their theoretical influence on movement
of the SDR, and investigate predicted population genomic patterns of allosome
divergence caused by interactions between sexually antagonistic loci with the
SDR. The phylogenetic component of this research will place gender dimorphism
and allosome evolution in a historical context by developing and integrating
robust phylogenies of Populus, Salix, and closely related genera within the
Salicaceae in order to understand how many times the SDR has moved during
evolution of the family, how the SDR has changed in size and composition, and
whether movement of the SDR correlates with barriers to interspecific
hybridization.