* 1542923
* Support for Rise of Data in Materials Research Workshop; University of Maryland; June 29-30, 2015
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/2015,05/31/2018
* Ellad Tadmor, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 05/31/2018
* USD 119,283.00

This award provides support for a workshop to bring together 80-100 participants
to discuss issues and opportunities arising from the creation and use of digital
data in materials research and work toward a community consensus on best
practices. The workshop will be held during June 29-30, 2015 on the Campus of
the University of Maryland, College Park, MD. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Materials
research is undergoing a revolution driven by the generation and integration of
vast amounts of experimental and computation data created by scientists and
engineers from various fields including Materials Science, Engineering
Mechanics, Physics, and Chemistry. There is potential to dramatically advance
the creation of predictive methodologies coupling theory, computation, and
experimentation in innovative ways for the design of new materials. This process
could not only expedite existing techniques for materials design, but has the
potential to lead to entirely new approaches and paradigms that are yet to be
identified. At the same time, there is potential for enhanced access to data to
advance more traditional and formal approaches to science including those based
on minimal models that capture the essence of physical, chemical, and materials
phenomena.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This workshop provides an opportunity for the
community to discuss themes related to the rising importance of data in
materials science with the aim of identifying high priority issues and work
toward a concrete way-forward to facilitate the emerging data revolution while
fostering scientific excellence.