* 1542465
* RET Site:  Cyber Security Initiative for Nevada Teachers (CSINT)
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Shamik Sengupta, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Harriet Taylor
* 08/31/2019
* USD 540,000.00

This funding establishes a new Research Experience for Teachers (RET) Site at
the University of Nevada, Reno (UNR). The primary objective of this RET site is
to explore unique ways to engage middle and high school teachers in summer
research experiences that emphasize cybersecurity. The teachers will spend six
weeks in the summer participating in research experiences and developing
classroom modules and materials which will be implemented in their classrooms
during the academic year. The UNR team will use inter-personal role-playing and
cybersecurity games to help the teachers learn about cybersecurity and its
importance to our nation. The project involves a partnership between the
university, the school districts in the surrounding Nevada counties, industrial
associates, and the Nevada Department of Education. The project will develop a
community of teachers who are passionate about cybersecurity and who can
translate this excitement to their students through engaging, high-quality
inquiry learning experiences. This RET Site is co-funded by the Secure and
Trustworthy Cyberspace (SaTC) program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is
anchored by a research area this is compelling and exciting for teachers and
K-12 students and by faculty team that has demonstrated expertise in both
research and education. The goals of the project are to: recruit a cohort of
middle and high school teachers interested in introducing cybersecurity and
computer science topics into their classrooms; engage the recruited teachers in
research experiences with applications in various modern day systems and
security; develop instructional modules that can be incorporated into a variety
of grades/classes; initiate collaboration and engagement with all schools in
Nevada and other stakeholders in the country to promote and disseminate the
results to a large group of middle and high school teachers; and sustain long
term partnerships between the RET Site teacher participants, the UNR mentor team
and industry partners, in order to bring the excitement of computing, problem
solving and research to students and encourage them to pursue STEM related
careers. The site features projects that are teacher accessible as well as
connected to current research and practice. The RET site includes sound
evaluation and dissemination plans that will provide models for integrating
cybersecurity concepts into the middle and high school curricula. Teachers will
develop and hone their research, communication, and presentation skills, all of
which are essential to their professional growth and success. The project will
build the technical capacity of teachers so they are capable of developing and
implementing new, exciting inquiry-based learning activities at their schools.
The project team will disseminate the project materials through the
TeachEngineering digital library and a dedicated local website and server
repository that will be shared with a wider audience of teachers at annual
workshops and meetings. The team will also disseminate project results through
high-quality journals and professional meetings.