* 1542301
* RET SITE: Robotics Research Experiences for Middle School Teachers
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2019
* Daniel Koditschek, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Harriet Taylor
* 04/30/2019
* USD 569,655.00

This funding establishes a new Research Experience for Teachers (RET) Site at
the University of Pennsylvania. The primary objective of this RET site is to
involve middle school teachers in the School District of Philadelphia in summer
research experiences that emphasize robotics. The teachers will spend six weeks
in the summer participating in research experiences and developing classroom
modules and materials which will be implemented in their classrooms during the
academic year. The project is led by the General Robotics, Automation, Sensing,
and Perception (GRASP) Laboratory at the University of Pennsylvania. The GRASP
Lab is known not only as a leader in robotics research but also for its
significant outreach and impact on K-12 education. The RET Site project involves
a partnership between the university, the school district, the Mayor's Office of
Education, and industrial associates. The teachers will continue to receive
classroom support for related activities in their classrooms during the academic
year including establishing FIRST LEGO League clubs in the schools. This RET
Site project will develop a community of teachers who are passionate about
robotics and who can translate this excitement to their students through
engaging, high-quality inquiry learning experiences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project is anchored by a research area this is compelling and exciting for
teachers and middle school students and by a faculty team that has demonstrated
expertise in both research and education. The goals of the project are to:
provide a quality research experience for middle school teachers in the field of
robotics and automation; increase understanding of science and robotics;
increase teachers' abilities to apply scientific and engineering methods to
problems; increase the opportunities in underserved Philadelphia schools to
prepare students for the engineering and scientific workforce; and develop
teachers into STEM leaders. The site features projects that are teacher
accessible as well as connected to current research and practice. The RET site
includes sound evaluation and dissemination plans that will provide models for
integrating robotics concepts into the middle school curricula. Teachers will
develop and hone their research, communication, and presentation skills, all of
which are essential to their professional growth and success. The project will
build the technical capacity of teachers so they are capable of developing and
implementing new, exciting robotics learning activities at their schools. The
project team will disseminate the project materials through the TeachEngineering
digital library and a GRASP's engagement web site that will be shared with a
wider audience of teachers at annual workshops and conferences.