* 1542760
* Collaborative Research: RAPID--Integration of Unmanned Aircraft System (UAS) into the Program for Research on Elevated Convection with Intense Precipitation
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2017
* Adam Houston, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 05/31/2017
* USD 129,389.00

Nighttime thunderstorms with heavy rainfall pose a threat to lives and property
in the central United States and are a difficult forecasting challenge. A field
campaign is planned during the summer of 2015 to study how these thunderstorm
complexes form and maintain themselves. This award will augment that campaign by
providing observations from an unmanned aircraft system (UAS) platform. The UASs
will fly in targeted locations near a frontal boundary and in the vicinity of
thunderstorms, making measurements that will be input into a computer model. The
overall goal of the project is to improve understanding and forecasting of these
hazardous events. In addition, the project will contribute to scientific
workforce development through the education and training of a graduate and
undergraduate student and the involvement of a number of other students in the
field work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Program for Research on Elevated Convection
with Intense Precipitation is an ongoing project with a goal of characterizing
the processes responsible for creating environments conducive to the development
and maintenance of organized elevated deep convection. UAS observations will be
assimilated into the Weather Research and Forecasting model to address the goals
of the project by improving the representation of: 1) the airmass upstream of
the synoptic scale front, 2) mesoscale lifting mechanisms such as Kelvin-
Helmholtz billows and gravity waves within and above the synoptic-scale cold
airmass, and 3) the structure of storm-generated outflow within the cold air.
The researchers involved in this award will take the lead on assessing the
impact of UAS observations on model forecasts and testing strategies for
targeting observations to produce the largest gains in forecast skill.