* 1542984
* PFI:AIR - TT:  High-Density Power Electronics for Large-Scale Distributed Battery Management with Real-Time Diagnostics
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2015,02/28/2018
* Eric Fossum, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 02/28/2018
* USD 199,994.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on translating research
results in power management and diagnostic capabilities for large-scale
distributed electrochemical systems, such as those needed in electrified
transportation or energy storage for the electrical grid, to commercial use.
This project is important because it addresses some of the fundamental
limitations of current battery systems that ultimately impact energy-density
(e.g. the driving range of hybrid or electric vehicles). It also provides new
insight into failure modes in order to mitigate or correct them early in the
life-cycle of the system. This could have a broader significance for a variety
of automotive, military, and electrical utility applications while reducing
barriers to low-carbon energy storage. The project will result in a proof-of-
concept prototype of a reliable, low-cost and efficient battery management
system. This active battery management system will have the following unique
features: it will utilize an integrated circuit design of a resonant DC-DC
converter to achieve high efficiency and high power-density, it will enable
efficient, granular management of individual cells or groups of cells in a large
battery array, and it will implement diagnostic capabilities based on
electrochemical impedance spectroscopy in an embedded system controller. These
features provide advantages of lower cost, smaller size, higher efficiency, and
greatly expanded visibility into real-time electrochemical phenomena when
compared to the leading competing battery management architectures in this
market space.

This project addresses the following technology gaps as it translates from
research discovery toward commercial application: the lack of high-density and
suitably cost effective power electronics for use in active battery management
systems, knowledge gaps in the control and regulation of large arrays of series-
connected cells, and technology gaps that exist between diagnostic capabilities
and power management in electrochemical systems. The first gap will be bridged
by designing a high-density resonant switched-capacitor DC-DC converter,
implemented in a mm-scale integrated circuit (IC) that has variable regulation
capability. The second gap will be bridged by designing embedded control
algorithms for large arrays of series-connected cells, using multiple-input,
multiple-output control algorithms explored in previous research. The final gap
is bridged by designing algorithms that can run on a system-level embedded
controller to implement online electrochemical impedance spectroscopy on top of
the power management platform.

In addition, personnel involved in this project, the PI and a graduate student,
will receive innovation and entrepreneurship mentoring through affiliation with
the Innovation PhD program at Dartmouth, which includes both coursework and
experiential business education and through discussions with industry
connections in the electric transportation sector. The Co-PI on this project is
the Director of the Innovation PhD program and will provide additional mentoring
and support specific to this project.