* 1542240
* Dimensions: Diversity, assembly and function of microbial communities on suspended and sinking particles in a marine Oxygen Deficient Zone
* BIO,DEB
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2021
* Allan Devol, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Michael Sieracki
* 08/31/2021
* USD 1,999,857.00

Marine oxygen deficient zones (ODZs) are waters that are functionally devoid of
oxygen. Without oxygen, some microbes are capable of converting nitrogen in the
water into N2 gas, which then leaves the ocean and enters the atmosphere. This
loss of an important nutrient from the ocean has impacts on phytoplankton growth
and marine food webs. While oxygen deficient zones occupy a very small
percentage of the ocean, they account for as much as half of the oceanic loss of
N as N2. Moreover, the size of these regions is predicted to expand during this
century due to climate change. The microbes that are capable of producing N2 gas
are extremely diverse, and use several different biochemical pathways to carry
out this process. They may occur both free-floating in the water and attached to
small particles that are suspended or sinking from the surface waters and
providing them a carbon source. However the importance of these two lifestyles
(free-living vs particle attached) in terms of contributions to N loss from the
oceans is not well understood. This project will identify the major organisms
that result in N2 gas production on both suspended and sinking particles, the
chemical reactions they carry out, and the rates at which this occurs. This
information will be used to improve global climate models to better predict
rates of N loss in a future ocean. Elementary and middle school teachers
enrolled in a Masters in Science for Science Teachers program will be involved
in the project and the graduate students and post-doctoral researchers supported
by the project will have opportunities to participate in their classrooms.
Underserved populations will also be integrated into the research at the
undergraduate and middle school level through a series of summer internships.

ODZs have very complex elemental cycles, implying great microbial diversity.
Intertwined with the microbial complexity of ODZ regions is the relatively
unexplored interplay between free-living bacteria and those living on either
suspended or sinking particles. Determining how these communities and niches
interact and relate is one of the most challenging components of ODZ system
studies today. Current climate models portray the dynamics of particles in the
ODZs and throughout the deep ocean through prescribed functions based on sparse
data from the oxic ocean with microbes represented only by the net chemical
reactions of the community. However, in reality a phylogenetically and
metabolically diverse group of microbes, likely acting in consortia, are
responsible for the nitrogen transformations that ultimately result in the
production of N2. To explore the processes maintaining the genetic diversity and
functional redundancy in N loss processes, four research areas will be
integrated: the community phylogenetic diversity (both taxonomic and genomic
diversity) the genetic diversity of the proteins that carry out key N
transformation processes (as seen through quantitative proteomics), the
resulting biogeochemical functions (15N labeled nitrogen transformation rate
measurements) and predictions about how this diversity and corresponding
function may change in response to climate change (biogeochemical modeling). The
approach will be to assay both phylogenetic (16S rRNA tag sequencing) and
functional genetic diversity (genomics) on sinking particles collected using
large-volume sediment traps. Phylogenetic and genomic studies will be intimately
tied to measurements of activity - who is doing key biogeochemical
transformations (proteomics) and what are the in situ rates at which they are
doing them (using novel incubation systems). Data will then be used to model how
diversity and corresponding function change on a range of time and space scales,
from the sinking of a single particle to seasonal cycles. To understand the
relationship of community diversity and function on suspended and sinking
particles, a series of three cruises will be conducted in the Eastern Tropical
North Pacific ODZ.