* 1542160
* NNCI: Nanotechnology Collaborative Infrastructure Southwest (NCI-SW)
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2022
* Stuart Bowden, Arizona State University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 08/31/2022
* USD 4,000,000.00

Arizona State University (ASU) will establish the Nanotechnology Collaborative
Infrastructure Southwest (NCI-SW) as a NNCI site. The NCI-SW will support the
advanced tool-set, faculty expertise and knowledgeable staff required by
academic and industrial users performing research at the frontiers of
nanoscience and engineering. Its training programs will focus on workforce
development and entrepreneurial initiatives for 21st century manufacturing
industries. A partnership between ASU, Maricopa County Community College
District (MCCCD), and Science Foundation Arizona (SFAz) will allow two-year
colleges in metropolitan Phoenix and rural Arizona to deliver a STEM-based
nanotechnology curriculum designed to meet the economic development needs of
their communities. Particular emphasis will be placed on programs in rural
Arizona that support Hispanic and Native American students. Students in these
programs will have access to advanced laboratory facilities either directly on
the ASU campus or via remote access. Faculty and students from local high
schools and community colleges will collaborate with ASU faculty on summer
research programs at the frontiers of nanotechnology and develop lesson plans
that convey the excitement of the latest discoveries back to their classrooms.
Public outreach events at science fairs and at the Arizona Science Center will
allow the wider community access to the latest breakthroughs in nanotechnology
at ASU and from around the world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of the NCI-SW
are to build a southwest regional infrastructure for nanotechnology discovery
and innovation, to address societal needs through education and
entrepreneurship, and to serve as a model site of the NNCI. The NCI-SW site will
encompass six collaborative research facilities: the ASU NanoFab, the LeRoy
Eyring Center for Solid State Science, the Flexible Electronics and Display
Center (FEDC), the Peptide Array Core Facility, the Solar Power Laboratory
(SPL), and the User Facility for the Social and Ethical Implications of
Nanotechnology. The NCI-SW site will open the FEDC and SPL to the broader
research community for the first time. The site will provide particular
intellectual and infrastructural strengths in the life sciences, flexible
electronics, renewable energy and the societal impact of nanotechnology. ASU
will collaborate with Maricopa County Community College District (MCCCD) and
Science Foundation Arizona (SFAz) to develop STEM materials with a
nanotechnology focus for A.S. and A.A.S students in communities throughout
metropolitan Phoenix and rural Arizona. NCI-SW will provide entrepreneurship
training for users who wish to commercialize nanotechnology in order to benefit
society. To facilitate the commercialization of research breakthroughs, the NCI-
SW will support prototyping facilities and low-volume manufacturing pilot lines
for solar cells, flexible electronics and biomolecular arrays. The Science
Outside the Lab summer program at the ASU Washington DC campus will allow users
across the NNCI to explore the policy issue associated with nanotechnology. A
web portal hosted and maintained by MCCCD will provide seamless access to all
the resources of the NCI-SW.