* 1542474
* Intergenerational Consequences of Incarceration
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2019
* Kristin Turney, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Toby Parcel
* 07/31/2019
* USD 410,677.00

SES-1542474&lt;br/&gt;Kristin Turney&lt;br/&gt;University of California,
Irvine&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The rapid growth of incarceration in the United
States, a phenomenon characterized by its concentration among already
marginalized individuals, means that a historically unprecedented number of
children experience parental incarceration. This project will examine how
paternal incarceration is linked to childhood inequalities in the United States.
The investigator will collect and analyze longitudinal primary data (multiple
interviews with mothers and children) from 100 families in California to
investigate inequalities in the academic, behavioral, and social outcomes
between children with incarcerated parents in comparison to those without such
parents. This project will contribute to knowledge about paternal incarceration
and inequalities among children. By considering the processes that unfold during
and after incarceration, the research documents the short- and long-term
consequences of paternal incarceration for children?s wellbeing. Also, by
considering the differences across families that are affected by paternal
incarceration, the study explores for which children paternal incarceration is
most consequential. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project examines the complex and
countervailing consequences of paternal incarceration for the intergenerational
transmission of inequality. The study will, theoretically and empirically,
contribute to our understanding of paternal incarceration and the
intergenerational transmission of inequality. The research considers the dynamic
nature of incarceration, as well as the processes that unfold during and after
incarceration. It also considers heterogeneity by developmental stage,
individual characteristics, and children?s risk of experiencing paternal
incarceration. By considering family, school, and neighborhood mechanisms that
may be strategic points of policy and practice interventions, the research
documents how paternal incarceration is deleterious for children. This project
will inform effective policy and practice interventions to alleviate inequality.
By moving beyond an examination of the average causal effects of paternal
incarceration, and by considering the nuances inherent in the intergenerational
consequences of paternal incarceration, the project has implications for social
policies and interventions. For example, understanding the dynamic relationship
between paternal incarceration and children?s developmental trajectories will
provide guidance about when and how long to intervene. Also, understanding
heterogeneity in the consequences of paternal incarceration across population
subgroups will provide an understanding about which children most need and will
most benefit from interventions and, therefore, provide guidance about how to
allocate resources. Finally, understanding the role of social contexts (e.g.,
families, schools, and neighborhoods) will provide direction about how to most
successfully intervene.