* 1542353
* I-Corps: Commercialization of Multiplatform Gigapixel Imaging and Annotation Software
* TIP,TI
* 05/15/2015,10/31/2015
* Amy Gooch, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Rathindra DasGupta
* 10/31/2015
* USD 50,000.00

The Analysis and Visualization of large scale data is a major challenge of
modern science. As new data acquisition devices are built to generate more
accurate, high resolution information, scientist struggle with the difficulty of
gaining access and making practical use of the information generated. Doctors
need to be able to make diagnoses with high resolution pathology images to make
the best diagnoses for their patients. Researchers need to use high resolution
microscopy data to gain a better understanding of human biology. Engineers need
to explore high resolution sensing and simulated data to develop new processes
and devices. For these reasons, large data analysis and visualization tools
proposed in this project are becoming a critical component in the science
discovery process. This new management and processing of Big Data allows
translating raw data into faster discovery and understanding leading to
actionable information, such as the diagnosis from a
doctor.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed ViSUS software framework was designed
with the primary philosophy that the visualization of massive data need not be
tied to specialized hardware or infrastructure. In other words, a visualization
environment for large data can be designed to be lightweight, highly scalable
and run on a variety of platforms or hardware. The proposed software can
visualize data from nearly any image capture source or simulation. Due to the
large size of datasets, it is emphasized that the data samples cannot all be
loaded into main memory. As a result, it is not feasible to use standard
implementations of visualization and analysis algorithms on commodity
hardware.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to complete the first release
with the minimum features needed to turn the proposed software into a commercial
product. The team also intends to conduct a pilot test to gather concrete
customer feedback in functionalities and user interactions while making the
first release available.