* 1542345
* WORKSHOP:  Pathways:Improving the African American Presence in Comparative Politics and International Relations to Improve Scholarship and Teaching
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2018
* Christian Davenport, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 07/31/2018
* USD 49,092.00

General Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Pathways workshops are designed to
address the lack of African-American faculty who conduct research and teach in
quantitative Comparative Politics and International Relations within Political
Science. The purpose of this grant proposal is to request funding for two new
workshops and mentor institutional visits. The workshops and visits are designed
to provide an environment in which senior faculty in these fields of study
provide feedback to junior faculty in order to support publication and tenure.
The outcome anticipated is an increase in the number of African-American tenured
faculty in these fields of study. We expect that their scholarship will inform
major academic and policy debates as well as produce senior faculty who are able
to mentor the next generation of young scholars in the profession. A network
among senior and junior scholars in the field will also be
created.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
workshops and mentor institutional visits are designed to provide feedback from
senior faculty in these fields to junior faculty, post-doctoral students and
graduate students on how to publish and navigate the tenure process. Verbal and
written feedback on the junior participant's work will be provided during the
workshops which will be held at two major professional conferences: the American
Political Science Association's and the International Studies Association's
annual meetings. Junior participants will present a manuscript in progress in a
formal presentation to all of the senior and junior workshop participants.
Verbal and written comments are expected. In addition, mentor institutional
visits to junior participant's home university institutions after the workshops
as well as virtual meetings via Google Hangout are mechanisms designed to
provide continuous feedback during the tenure process. Simultaneously, this
allows senior faculty to learn more about the tenure requirements of the
particular institution at which junior faculty seek tenure and to advise on how
to produce a research, teaching and service record that satisfies tenure
requirements at the national academic disciplinary and local university levels.