* 1542668
* ACES Symposium, Chengdu, China, August 10-16, 2015
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2016
* Louise Kellogg, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 06/30/2016
* USD 20,000.00

The APEC Cooperation for Earthquake Simulation (ACES) is a multi-lateral grand
challenge science research cooperation of APEC (the Asia Pacific Economic
Cooperation). ACES was originally founded to develop realistic supercomputer
simulation models for the complete earthquake generation process and to
assimilate observations into such models. Subsequent meetings have also
broadened the topics to include simulations of tsunamis, wildfires, volcanic
eruptions, mantle convection, and other geodynamically interesting topics. The
founding member economies of ACES are Australia, China, Japan and the United
States. Subsequently, three other economies have requested and attained
membership in ACES, including Canada, New Zealand, and Chinese Taipei. This
meetingwill continue the tradition of cutting-edge science in support of
earthquake risk reduction. Travel support for US scientists, in particular for
early career and under-represented groups, will contribute to the intellectual
development of this critical field.

This workshop support will allow US students and participants to travel to the
ACES Symposium on Earthquakes, Tsunamis, and other Multihazards, to be held in
Chengdu, China, August 10-14, with a field trip to visit the site of the May 12,
2008 M8 Wenchuan, China earthquake during August 15-16. The meeting is a
multilateral meeting of many APEC economies, whose participants are scientists
and technologists interested in computer modeling and simulation of earthquake
and other natural disasters. US participation is jointly supported with NASA.
Products from the symposium will include a proceedings volume of peer-reviewed
papers, similar to the many publications volumes produced from the previous
meetings.An example of potential impact is the Global National Satellite System
Tsunami Early Warning System project proposed by NASA. ACES is now playing a
critical role in the leadership and implementation of this project, through its
role as an approved scientific activity of the APEC Policy Partnership on
Science, Technology and Innovation.