* 1542307
* 2015 International Workshop on Robotics and Interactive Technologies For Neuroscience and Rehabilitation
* ENG,CBET
* 05/15/2015,04/30/2017
* Ferdinando Mussa-Ivaldi, Rehabilitation Institute of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Michele Grimm
* 04/30/2017
* USD 44,529.00

1542301&lt;br/&gt;Mussa-Ivaldi, Ferdinando A.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Since its
inception, Robotics has had a profound impact on our understanding of how the
brain constructs movements, processes sensory information and adapts to variable
environments. In more recent times it has entered the clinical domain of
sensory-motor rehabilitation for survivors of stroke and other disabling
neurological conditions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed workshop is intended
to organize a vigorous debate between experts in robotics, in rehabilitation
research and in the basic neuroscience of the sensory-motor system with the dual
purpose of enhancing the integration of these disciplines and developing new
international collaborations between centers of excellence for Neurotechnologies
and Rehabilitation in the United States and Italy. &lt;br/&gt;Therefore, the
general goal of the workshop will be to promote the progress of science in the
critical area where robotics and neuroscience are going to meet and interact,
with a specific emphasis on state of the art advances in the national health, in
relation with the increasing percentage of senior citizens in all industrialized
countries of the world. Moreover, the project will advance the rehabilitation
field strengthening the leadership of US research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
debate on the hot issues of Advanced Robotics and Robotic Neurorehabilitation
will be organized by scientists from two institutions, namely the Rehabilitation
Institute of Chicago (RIC) - the leading US hospital for rehabilitation research
- and the Italian Institute of Technology (IIT) - the leading Italian research
center for a broad spectrum of advanced technologies, including
neurorehabilitation, robotics and nanotechnology. The interaction between these
two research centers is intended to be a seed for developing a broader
collaborative network of US and Italian researchers in neurorehabilitation
science and technology. The significance of this initiative stems from its
potential to enhance and maintain the close contiguity of insights from basic
neuroscience with the ingenuity of rapid technological developments in the
clinical domain. It is expected that this tight interaction will serve to
promote the recovery of lost abilities and independence in the disabled
population, while expanding the intellectual and educational domains for current
and future generations of researchers in neural
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The three-days workshop will include four
discussion sessions, on the following themes:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. Sensory-
motor control and haptic interactions.&lt;br/&gt;2. Learning and motor
cognition.&lt;br/&gt;3. Human/machine interactions.&lt;br/&gt;4.
Neuroprosthetics and rehabilitation&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Each theme will be
introduced by brief presentations from IIT and RIC experts, followed by more
detailed demonstrations and descriptions of key scientific and technological
issues. A group of panelists will guide the discussion, inclusive of all
participants, during and at the end of the meeting, by pointing at specific
unresolved problems and future challenges. Participation of junior scientists
will be particularly encouraged both during the meeting and through the
preparation of articles that will be collected in the submission for a special
issue of Frontiers Research Topics. On the third day, principal investigators
from both institutions will visit the IIT laboratories. There, a discussion of
the perspective collaborations that have emerged in the previous two days will
conclude the workshop.