* 1542477
* Collaborative Research: Analysis and Modeling of Nonlinear Wave-Particle Interactions from the Siple Transmitter Experiment
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/2016,01/31/2021
* Philip Scherrer, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Moore
* 01/31/2021
* USD 203,920.00

The Siple Transmitter Experiment, operated in Antarctica from 1973 to 1988 under
sponsorship from the National Science Foundation, provided scientific
researchers with a heretofore unmatched opportunity to perform controlled
experiments to study nonlinear wave-particle interactions. Very low frequency
waves radiated by the transmitter at the Antarctic Siple Station propagated into
the Earth?s magnetosphere where they interacted with the energetic electrons in
the Radiation Belts. This interaction modified the waves, amplifying them and
generating new rising and falling frequency components. The modified waves were
observed with radio receivers on the ground at the Northern Hemisphere conjugate
points of the same geomagnetic field line. These "triggered" waves bear
similarities to naturally occurring "chorus" type waves that are a major driver
of space weather processes. The data were recorded and later digitized under the
Air Force Research Laboratory data-preservation award. Analyzing this legacy
dataset with modern techniques and comparing observations to the latest
numerical models will help resolve outstanding issues in space weather research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Whistler-mode waves are the electromagnetic waves with
frequency of about 100 Hz-30 kHz, observed in Earth?s magnetosphere, and they
are one of the major factors significantly affecting the energetic electrons
population in the Earth's Radiation Belts. Despite many decades of active
research, important questions on the whistler waves interaction with energetic
electrons in the Radiation Belts still remain unanswered, which does not allow
us to predict reliably the intensity of energetic electron fluxes in the
Radiation Belts. These fluxes of energetic particles may significantly affect
spacecraft in the geostationary and low orbits, astronauts in the space station,
as well space-based scientific, military, and communication satellites. This
project will study previously accumulated collection of data from the Siple
Transmitter Experiment. Statistical analysis of these data in combination with
numerical simulations will be used to characterize the dynamics of nonlinear
interactions of whistler waves with energetic particles, focusing on the wave
growth and generation of newly triggered emissions. This data analysis will
guide advanced numerical simulations of the wave-particle interactions in order
to understand fundamental physical processes involved, such as generation of
naturally occurring plasma waves called "chorus" and "hiss" and also
electromagnetic ion cyclotron waves. This research project will enhance
infrastructure for research and education through a strong collaboration between
two academic institutions and contribute to the training of graduate and
undergraduate students.