* 1542965
* Scaling K-12 Computer Science In Large Urban Districts:  A Leadership Conference
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/2015,11/30/2017
* Michael Lach, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* David Haury
* 11/30/2017
* USD 228,541.00

Computing has become an integral part of everyday practice within modern fields
of science, technology, engineering, and mathematics. As a result, the
STEM+Computing Partnerships (STEM+C) program seeks to advance new
multidisciplinary approaches to, and evidence-based understanding of, the
integration of computing in STEM teaching and learning, and discipline-specific
efforts in computing designed to build an evidence base for teaching and
learning of computer science in K-12, including within diverse populations. This
project addresses that mission by convening a leadership conference for
representatives of large urban school districts associated with the Council of
Great City Schools. Each two-person team will include the district's Chief
Academic Officer and a lead STEM educator. The one-day conference will: a) focus
on the importance of computer science education in urban contexts; b)
familiarize participants with a variety of planning tools to design and
implement computer science programs; c) provide examples of current computer
science initiatives; and d) promote participant networks to enable ongoing
collaboration after the conference. During the conference, attendees will hear
from and interact with representatives of major computer science curriculum
efforts, successful leaders of large-scale STEM education efforts, computer
scientists and computer science teachers, and scholars with expertise in
standards-based reform efforts in large urban schools. The intent of the
conference is to promote increased, targeted attention to the quality and
quantity of computer science education within large urban schools with highly
diverse student populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The computer science
leadership conference will be held in conjunction with the 60th Annual Council
of Great City Schools Fall Conference. Participant teams will be recruited from
the 67 school districts comprising the Council and serving over 7 million
diverse learners. A pre-conference survey will solicit participant information
regarding current school district computer science efforts and challenges, and a
survey will be administered at the conclusion of the conference to gain feedback
about the effectiveness of the conference in raising awareness of needs, issues,
resources, and implementation strategies related to school computer science
programs. The success of the conference will be evaluated on the basis of
results from these surveys, observations during conference sessions, and a
review of conference artifacts distributed during the event. The collected data
will be used to assess the extent to which conference participants indicate: a)
a greater awareness of the current state of computer science education programs
in K-12 schools; b) an increased knowledge of computer science improvement
strategies for school districts; and c) willingness to interact with each other
and other stakeholders after the conference to facilitate the development of a
wide-scale infrastructure supporting computer science education in schools.