* 1542007
* NSF/FDA SIR: Tools for Studying Soft Material Biofilms and Related Antimicrobial Resistance
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2015,01/31/2017
* Chuanwu Xi, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Joseph A. Akkara
* 01/31/2017
* USD 99,938.00

Non-Technical: This NSF/FDA Scholar-in-Residence Program award by the
Biomaterials Program to University of Michigan is to develop and evaluate tools
for detecting bacterial colonization and antibiotic resistance associated with
medical devices including soft materials. Healthcare associated infections exact
an enormous toll (100,000 deaths and $28-33 billion per year) on our society.
Early detection of bacterial colonization and antibiotic resistance would
provide tremendous benefits to clinicians and patients to save lives and costs
associated with these infections. This project will develop and evaluate tools
based on molecular techniques and imaging tools to detect early bacterial
colonization and soft materials on soft materials and other medical devices. The
long term goal of this project is to develop such tools for clinician to use for
non-invasive and rapid diagnostics; therefore, then provide immediate
appropriate treatment for patients. The project will provide great opportunities
for research education because it is so interdisciplinary, combining methods
from material science, biology, and optical sciences and engineering. Success of
this project will have a big impact to protect public health. This research will
be integrated with teaching and training of post-graduate and undergraduate
students in these areas, and particularly will provide extensive experience to
trainees while working at both academia and federal
agencies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical: Microbial colonization of medical
devices including soft materials is thought to lead to many healthcare
associated infections. Better and early clinical diagnostics are needed to: 1)
detect and quantify medical device colonization; and 2) assess the degree to
which bacteria are developing resistance to antibiotics. In response to these
calls and urgent needs, this project aims to develop and evaluate the potential
of molecular and imaging diagnostics tools for detecting biofilms on dermal
filler materials and related drug resistance. The investigator will first
identify potential colonization and biofilm specific markers using RNA-Seq
techniques and develop specific molecular probes for these markers. The project
is expected in developing imaging tools such as optical coherence tomography and
confocal laser scanning microscopy in combination with molecular probes in
assessing early bacterial colonization/biofilm formation on dermal soft
materials in vitro. The researcher expects that developing and understanding on
how to use these tools in vitro/in vivo could lead to further development of
clinically relevant diagnostic tools. The study would provide a strong
foundation for further development of these promising diagnostic tools for quick
detection of biofilms in vivo and provide clinician a quick and versatile tool
to examine patients after plastic surgery. The primary goal is to protect
patients especially women with medical devices and implants, and to provide
scientific evidence and tools that will assist physicians and regulators to
address this public health issue. The project will provide training of
postgraduate and undergraduate students through research and internship
programs. These trainees will benefit from working collaboratively at both
academic laboratories and federal agencies.