* 1542174
* NNCI: Southeastern Nanotechnology Infrastructure Corridor (SENIC)
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2021
* Oliver Brand, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Cooperative Agreement
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 08/31/2021
* USD 8,000,000.00

Development of nanoscale materials and devices, and incorporation of these
components into full systems, has become an important part of addressing global
challenges in energy, health, and the environment. However, nanoscale science
and engineering often requires the use of complex and expensive tools and
facilities for the fabrication and characterization of these materials and
devices. This necessitates the support of shared national resources for both
basic research in academic institutions and the translation of these discoveries
into commercial products by small and large enterprises. As part of the National
Nanotechnology Coordinated Infrastructure (NNCI) program, the Southeastern
Nanotechnology Infrastructure Corridor (SENIC) will create a partnership between
the Institute for Electronics and Nanotechnology at the Georgia Institute of
Technology and the Joint School of Nanoscience and Nanoengineering, an academic
collaboration between North Carolina A&amp;T State University (NCA&amp;T) and
the University of North Carolina at Greensboro (UNCG). This national resource
will provide open access to nanofabrication and characterization facilities and
tools along with expert staff support to a growing user community across the
southeastern U.S. The SENIC infrastructure will strengthen and accelerate
discovery in nanoscience and nanoengineering, benefiting both traditional
disciplines, such as electronics and materials, as well as newer areas, such as
biomedical and environmental sciences. In addition, because societal and
economic need requires a skilled workforce trained in the tools and techniques
of nanotechnology, SENIC will implement a comprehensive education and outreach
program, embedded with lessons in socially and ethically responsible development
and use of nanotechnology, designed to reach a broad and diverse audience of
students, teachers and the public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With access to more than
230 nanotechnology fabrication and characterization tools, SENIC's goal is to
provide a one-stop-shop approach, covering both top-down approaches using
nanoscale patterning, as well as bottom-up approaches based on nanomaterials
synthesis and additive processing. A particular strength of the partnership is
the ability to connect nanomaterials and devices to full packaged systems. This
helps transition nanoscale research achievements more quickly into high-impact
applications in biomedical/health, energy, communication, smart transportation,
textiles and smart agriculture. SENIC will operate with an interdisciplinary
culture where engineers, scientists, physicians, educators, policy experts, and
economic development professionals work together with shared access to
facilities and tools and a deep understanding of industry opportunities and
societal challenges to promote the accelerated translation of invention into
innovation. Furthermore, the SENIC partners will work with undergraduate and
graduate students, as well as partner with 2-year technical colleges, to produce
science and engineering professionals from diverse backgrounds who are ready to
meet the global workforce demands of the 21st century. In tandem, the public
outreach with hands-on classroom activities as well as interactive facility
tours will encourage K-12 students to participate in the STEM pipeline and will
help create an informed citizenry that supports the safe development of
nanotechnology. Closely coupled with its education program, SENIC will have a
social and ethical implications program that educates on the challenges
associated with the expectations that nanoscale science and engineering will
contribute to the solution of societal, environmental, and economic problems,
while anticipating and avoiding potential negative consequences.