* 1542254
* I-Corps: A New Approach to Discovery and Learning in Management Education
* TIP,TI
* 05/15/2015,04/30/2016
* Ozalp Ozer, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* lydia mcclure
* 04/30/2016
* USD 50,000.00

The continual success of an individual in today's global economy depends on the
adequacy of knowledge and skills learned during both academic and professional
experience. Although technological enhancements vault businesses forward ever
faster, similar use of technology in higher education has been slow to keep pace
with business environment. Lecture-based learning and the case-method are still
the dominant forms of instruction in the world's leading institutions. To
adequately meet the needs of an innovative economy, students and professors need
to harness the power of interactive-learning with technology to drive
engagement, discovery, and knowledge retention. Gaming presents a unique
approach to facilitating a new type of interaction among students if focused on
the right academic subjects. Gamification provides an environment for enhanced
competition, accountability, discovery and instant feedback, which improve
overall learning outcomes above traditional lecture-based methods. The games
will supplement current teaching methods across academic fields and benefit both
knowledge seekers and knowledge providers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This team will
develop a scientific approach for 'gamification' in higher education, and to
facilitate the discovery of knowledge through action-based learning. The team
will design and create games covering core skills taught in business schools,
starting with core disciplines, such as Operations Management, Marketing, and
Finance, and eventually expand into other academic fields. The design principles
will closely follow the scientific approach used to design the Forecast Sharing
Game (FSG) previously created by the team PI as a means to collect field data.
This I-Corps team proposes to design a portfolio of games encompassing
fundamental management concepts, while learning, researching, discovering, and
documenting pedagogical scientific principles required to make such games
effective learning tools. The team intends to accomplish this in three stages:
individual game design and build, creation of a centralized technology platform,
and development of a game publishing mechanism.