* 1542747
* EFRI 2-DARE: From Atoms to Devices: Pathways to Atomic Layer Optoelectronics via Multi-Scale Imaging and Spectroscopy
* ENG,EFMA
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2020
* Mei-Yin Chou, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Alias Smith
* 08/31/2020
* USD 1,999,999.00

EFMA - 1542747&lt;br/&gt;PI: Li, Xiaoqin&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two-dimensional
atomic layers are versatile building blocks for forming novel optoelectronic
devices. The goals of this project are to synthesize high-quality, atomically
thin material layers using several techniques, measure the properties of the
layers using several spectroscopic methods, and assemble the layers to form a
variety of prototype optoelectronic devices. The project will explore how two-
dimensional layered materials can be integrated into current silicon-based
technology, which could result in innovative devices and improvements in
existing devices. Calculations will be carried out to predict material
properties and guide device development. The project will generate a database of
material properties for atomic layer materials that will be made available to
other researchers and practitioners in the field. The investigators will use the
project as a platform to provide new research opportunities at their
institutions and at surrounding institutions, including community colleges. In
addition, they will develop a new course for graduate students titled "Frontier
in Optoelectronics based on Atomically Thin Materials: Device and Material
Science." &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of this project are to demonstrate a
few novel optoelectronic devices made possible by two-dimensional materials and
to systematically improve their performance through a synergistic effort on
device fabrication and testing, calculations, material synthesis, and
characterization. The project includes the following coordinated activities: (i)
design, fabricate, and test prototypical devices that include injection lasers,
photodetectors, and single photon sources; (ii) synthesize high quality
atomically thin materials and heterojunctions using molecular beam epitaxy,
chemical vapor deposition, and layer transfer techniques; (iii) guide device
development and predict material properties using first-principles calculations;
and (iv) characterize materials properties using a wide range of imaging and
spectroscopy tools with atomic to mesoscopic spatial resolution and ultrafast
temporal resolution using scanning tunneling microscopy and spectroscopy,
microwave impedance microscopy and ultrafast optical spectroscopy. The project
aims to address important challenges in device fabrication, including overcoming
the thin interaction region in optoelectronic devices, limiting defect density
during growth, and understanding how defects, doping, stacking and photonic
cavities change band structure, transport and optical properties of two-
dimensional materials.