* 1542930
* Mapping, Measuring and Modeling Geomorphology and Ice Change in Dronning Maud Land, Antarctica
* GEO,OPP
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2024
* Nathaniel Lifton, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Cutler
* 03/31/2024
* USD 659,874.00

Reconstructing and predicting the response of the Antarctic Ice Sheet to climate
change is a major challenge facing the Earth Science community. Computer models
of ice sheet behavior are central to addressing this challenge. In this project
we will test and improve ice sheet models by comparing model predictions of past
ice extent to the geologic record in Dronning Maud Land, Antarctica. This
innovative project will collect key geologic data from mountains called nunataks
that extend above current and former ice levels that can be used as "dipsticks"
to reconstruct changes in ice elevation that will be used to improve the models.
The end result will be both much better knowledge of past three-dimensional
changes of the Antarctic Ice Sheet, and improved models that allow for more
accurate simulations of potential future changes in the ice sheet.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will fill critical gaps in the geologic
record of the pattern and timing of vertical changes in the East Antarctic Ice
Sheet in western Dronning Maud Land, by focusing on areas that are critical for
differentiating between possible models of past ice sheet configuration.
Reconstruction of ice-sheet surface changes will involve mapping and cosmogenic
nuclide dating of glacially sculpted bedrock, ice-marginal moraines, and erratic
boulders at different elevations on nunataks. Patterns of 10Be, 26Al, 14C, and
21Ne concentrations and ratios will enable inferences about the timing and
magnitude of changes in maximum ice surface elevations and periods of burial by
non-erosive (cold-based) ice. Results will be integrated with data from other
areas to provide insight into changes across the entire Antarctic Ice Sheet, and
into the role of large ice sheets in climate evolution and global sea level
changes. The field-based results will provide constraints against which
predictive ice sheet models will be tested and improved, contributing to
glaciology, climate and Quaternary science. Broader impacts of this study will
also advance the development of the next generation of STEM students and polar
scientists. While gaining experience in international collaboration, field and
laboratory methods, data analysis, and modeling, two graduate students will work
with teachers to develop, implement, and disseminate standards-based lesson
plans for student activities linking this research to learning objectives for
middle school science.