* 1542395
* Dimensions: Collaborative Research: Diversification Dynamics of Multitrophic Interactions in Tropical Communities
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Brian Wiegmann, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 08/31/2020
* USD 132,941.00

How is biodiversity generated and maintained? Much evidence suggests that
parasites play an important role in both the origin and the maintenance of
biological diversity. This project focuses on one of the most diverse groups of
organisms on the planet: herbivorous insects, their parasites, and their
microbes. The project targets three economically important groups of organisms:
plants in the pumpkin/cucumber family, true fruit flies that attack these
plants, and parasitic wasps that kill the flies. These wasps belong to a highly
diverse and little studied group of species. Each wasp species can kill only one
fly species; wasps attacking the "wrong" species of fly die. These bi-
directional lethal interactions may be mediated by microbes (in wasps, flies, or
both), by traits of flies' immune systems, or both. This project is designed to
uncover the mechanisms (evolutionary, ecological, and immunological) affecting
interactions that may help explain the diversity of life. Many species of true
fruit flies are major agricultural pests; this project will greatly increase
knowledge about factors contributing to their susceptibility to parasitoids.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project tests hypotheses that predict that: 1)
defenses of parasites and their hosts affect diversification rates; 2)
mechanisms of virulence differ among lineages, and 3) selection arising from
predator-prey interactions can affect rates of species-formation. To discover
and identify mechanisms of diversification, participants will generate and
analyze molecular 1) high-resolution genetic data, multiple nuclear loci, and
mtCOI haplotypes to delineate species, and resolve deeper phylogenetic
relationships; 2) microsatellites and ddRAD-seq markers to discover and quantify
fine-scale genetic diversity within and among populations; 3) phylogenies and
field experiments to test hypotheses about mechanisms generating and controlling
diversity on ancient, recent, and contemporary timescales. Undergraduate
students from all participating colleges and universities will participate in
the research.