* 1542286
* RET Site in Mechatronics and Robotics with Entrepreneurship and Industry Experiences
* ENG,EEC
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2021
* Sheila Borges Rajguru, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Amelia Greer
* 05/31/2021
* USD 600,000.00

This Research Experiences for Teachers (RET) in Engineering and Computer Science
Site at New York University (NYU) seeks to strengthen K-12 education in the STEM
disciplines by involving middle and high school science and mathematics teachers
from the New York City School District in mechatronics and robotics research,
entrepreneurship, and industry experiences through 6-week summer workshops. The
RET participants will gain first-hand multidisciplinary experiences to foster
their development of the necessary pedagogical content knowledge to engage their
own K-12 students in authentic experiences in science and engineering. The
program will impact two areas that are of direct interest to the United States
and the world: increasing access for K-12 teachers and their students to a
deeper understanding of the STEM disciplines, research, and career
opportunities; and inspiring teachers and students to pursue engineering
careers. The decreasing cost of electronics and hardware components along with
technological advances in additive manufacturing promise to significantly lower
the cost of robot hardware, making the use of robots economical in diverse
industries. Mechatronics and robotics designs will provide participants with a
comprehensive experience in systems integration and product development through
which they can practice and hone their skills in creativity, inventiveness, and
entrepreneurship and gain an appreciation of the pathway from STEM education to
careers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over a three-year period this RET Site will offer
an intensive summer research program for a total of 30 middle and high school
STEM teachers from schools in underserved New York City neighborhoods with
socially, economically, racially, and ethnically diverse student bodies. Planned
research projects include: marine robotics, microfluidic biosensing, wearable
robotics, mechatronics device for liquid projectile visualization, and robots
for disabilities. Project plans include: conduct guided training under the
supervision of the Principal Investigator; collaborate with management experts
to allow teachers to learn entrepreneurship, conduct innovation case-studies,
and shadow entrepreneurs; offer research and industry experiences to teachers,
in 2-teacher teams collaborating with faculty/industry mentors and research
students; conduct events such as Open House, RET Day@Poly, and research
seminars; conduct an Inno/Vention student idea contest and develop a business-
philanthropy partnership to offer summer internships to students.