* 1542368
* Collaborative Research: Enriching the Professional Development of School Teachers &amp; Community College Faculty in Rural Michigan - An RET Site on Smart Vehicles
* ENG,EEC
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2020
* Kumar Yelamarthi, Central Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* Amelia Greer
* 12/31/2020
* USD 616,611.00

Within a coherent theme of Smart Vehicles, this collaborative Research
Experiences for Teachers (RET) in Engineering and Computer Science Site at
Central Michigan University (CMU) and Western Michigan University (WMU) will
expose in-service and pre-service teachers, and community college faculty to
leading research spanning mobile robotics, kinematics and kinetics, vehicle
manufacturing robots, vehicular sensor networks, ergonomics, material science,
and circuit design. The multidisciplinary nature of Smart Vehicles in
engineering will provide a holistic ground for developing creative course
modules in physics, chemistry, engineering, and technology that aligns well with
the Next Generation Science Standards (NGSS), Common Core State Standards
(CCSS), and Accreditation Board for Engineering and Technology (ABET) Criteria
for STEM curriculum. Engaging regionally automobile focused industrial advisors
and university faculty with rural secondary school and community college
teachers will serve as a model-platform, and provide rare best-practices-based
professional development opportunities and experience. CMU, a regional
comprehensive university, is located in the heart of central rural Michigan
where it maintains a reputation as "the" university to which schools turn for
access to newly educated teachers, and for professional development for their
current teachers. This RET renewal site will focus on teachers in these rural
areas, and support them as they lift the STEM knowledge base of their students,
increasing their opportunities for employment and for becoming entrepreneurs.
Engaging pre-service teachers in cutting-edge research ensures that they begin
their careers well-equipped with research experience and confidence to take into
their classrooms. Similarly, with nurtured NGSS-based curriculum design and
implementation expertise these teachers will take on leadership roles in their
employing schools, thereby multiplying the effect of this project. Overall,
through partnership with K-12 schools, community colleges, and a public
university, this RET site will provide a profound influence on the learning and
career paths of young students in the rural Michigan area, with knowledge,
skills, abilities and attitudes which are in high demand, but who have
traditionally been underrepresented in the STEM education and
employment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Site will offer an intensive six-week
summer research program for a total of 45 rural STEM teachers over three years
with a focus on those serving groups that are underrepresented in science and
engineering. RET participants will engage in cutting-edge research on Smart
Vehicles, under the guidance of engineering faculty mentors who lead active
research programs, and who serve the community through outreach activities. The
engineering faculty mentors, curriculum development specialist, Instructional
Coach from Science/Mathematics, Technology Center, and staff from CMU's Faculty
Center for Innovative Teaching will coach participants as they design standards-
compliant curriculum modules and conduct professional development activities for
each participant group. Extensive follow-up activities through the academic year
include on-site Instructional Coaching, Quarterly Team Meetings, engineering
faculty involvement in secondary school and community college classrooms, and
Cross Classroom Collaborations to ensure translation of research experience into
practice. The annual CMU High-Impact STEM Teaching Symposium will share findings
with regional educators, and the annual CMU STEM Day will engage more than 200
secondary school students in exploration of engineering disciplines on CMU
campus. The Science and Mathematics Program Improvement (SAMPI) staff at WMU
will serve as external program evaluators, track and evaluate the site progress
and provide feedback for improvement. They will also conduct longitudinal
studies to assess the long-term impact of the proposed RET
site.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This RET Site is co-funded by the Directorate for
Engineering (ENG), Division of Engineering Education and Centers (EEC) and the
Directorate for Computer and Information Science and Engineering (CISE),
Division of Computer and Network Systems (CNS).