* 1542860
* I-Corps: Computer Vision for Tracking People in Different Scenarios
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2015,02/29/2016
* Davi Geiger, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 02/29/2016
* USD 50,000.00

A large retail chain with numerous stores in several shopping malls (e.g., Bed,
Bath & Beyond) may devise advertising campaigns in which they display new items
or feature promotional items within each store, and then endeavor to evaluate
the success of each campaign. In addition to tracking their revenues, the
retailer may seek to measure traffic outside each store, the percentage of
people who enter the store, how people move throughout the store, time spent in
each location throughout the store, etc. While there are tools and technologies
currently available to assist with these efforts, they provide very crude data,
resulting in an unmet market need. Today, infrared cameras are used to address
the needs described above, but are crude in their estimates. Other existing
solutions include mounted cameras in specific locations to spot people in a
given part of the store (e.g., hot zones or entrances to count people entering).
They are also used to distinguish different types of people (kids versus
adults). But these existing methods and technologies are unreliable and
unadaptable (e.g., adjusting to occlusions or changes in natural light over time
to get an accurate count), and therefore fail to deliver accurate results to the
retail chains.

This I-Corps team is developing technology that addresses this market need in
new and innovative ways, using technology not present in products today and
providing more accurate and higher fidelity data than existing solutions on the
market. The solution being developed will be easy to use, low cost, and
reliable. The proposed technology is applicable to both indoor and outdoor data
(accounting for light variations). To develop the solution and business model,
the team plans to establish relationships with large retail stores to further
assess their needs and where the technology will be best applied. Beyond the
retail market, it is believed that the proposed technology will have commercial
impact in airports, train/bus stations, and all surveillance activities.
Clearly, security is an area where this technology of accurate measurement of
people's movements is necessary. With the technology this I-Corps team is
developing, retailers will receive more accurate and reliable data about the
activities happening in and around their stores (such as the result of a window
marketing campaign). This will enable them to improve store operations and
provide better experiences to customers.