* 1542883
* EFRI 2-DARE: Energy Efficient Electronics with Atomic Layers (E3AL)
* ENG,EFMA
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* ERIC POP, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Garie Fordyce
* 07/31/2019
* USD 2,000,000.00

Recent scientific progress has isolated nanomaterials that are only 1 to 3
atomic layers thick, with semi- metallic (e.g. graphene), semiconducting (e.g.
molybdenum disulphide) and insulating properties (e.g. boron nitride). Unlike
well-known bulk materials such as silicon, these atomically thin materials have
no dangling bonds, while possessing high electrical and thermal conductivity in
the plane of the atomic layers, yet very low conductivity in the direction
perpendicular to the atomic layers. In this project, the Stanford team (Pop,
Goodson, Saraswat, Wong) will explore fundamental measurements guided by
computer simulations, leveraging the unique anisotropic properties of atomically
thin materials. The team will also focus on thermoelectric measurements, an area
that has received less attention. Applications of this research could include
energy-efficient electronics generating little heat, and flexible energy
harvesters for wearable sensors and medical devices. Many of the benefits and
insights generated from this work could also be applicable to conventional
electronics, thus further improving the return on investment for the National
Science Foundation, for society, and for education. The project will educate
students from high school interns through undergraduate and graduate
researchers, who will be exposed to a unique training program at the Stanford
Design School. This program seeks to create ?T-shaped? engineers (with technical
depth in nanotechnology and lateral ability to collaborate across disciplines).
The societal impact of such a new workforce could be just as important as that
of the novel nanoscience and nanotechnology enabled by the proposed
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical goals of the research are organized
into five tasks: (1) Modeling and simulation of atomically thin materials and
devices, guiding their design and assembly. Computational exploration will
support the electrical, thermal and thermoelectric experiments. (2) Large scale
synthesis and integration of atomic layers into electronic and thermoelectric
devices. Atomic layers will be assembled into heterogeneous stacks with
controlled angular orientation. (3) Examine and improve electrical inter- faces
to atomically thin materials, learning how to connect them to the outside world.
The team will leverage doping, and both ?surface? and ?edge? contacts to
minimize electrical contact resistance. (4) Thermal and thermoelectric
characterization. The researchers will examine thermal interfaces and probe
dynamic changes to thermal conductivity, particularly in the cross-plane
direction of the atomic layers. These could enable applications like thermal
diodes and thermoelectrics. (5) Enable energy- efficient devices and electronics
through an approach that ties together the fundamental theory and experiments
from Tasks #1-4. The team will examine the possibility of transistors and memory
that leverage built-in thermoelectric effects to shift or manipulate hot spots,
and that of layered thermoelectric modules for flexible substrates and mobile
environments where natural heat sinking is restricted. A key part of the
intellectual significance of this project is that it combines expertise from
three disciplines: Electrical, Thermal/Mechanical and Materials Engineering. The
team leaders have experience collaborating and co-advising students in a multi-
disciplinary environment; they will also build on a strong track record of
mentoring women and underrepresented minorities (who have gone on to positions
in academia and industry) and a strong record of online teaching and learning,
including lectures and simulation codes posted on the NSF-sponsored nanoHUB.org.
The Stanford environment is uniquely suited for translating fundamental
scientific advances to long-term industrial partnerships, and the team will also
partner with the Air Force Research Labs for thermoelectric measurements, with
Sandia National Labs for atomically thin contacts, and internationally with IMEC
(Belgium) and University of Tokyo for material synthesis and experimental
approaches for materials integration.