* 1542303
* North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics (NAACL-HLT) 2015 Student Research Workshop
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Smaranda Muresan, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 05/31/2016
* USD 15,000.00

The Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL) is the primary international
scientific organization in the fields of computational linguistics, natural
language processing and human language technologies. The annual meeting of its
North American chapter (NAACL-HLT) is one of the most prestigious and selective
international conferences in these fields. The goal of this grant is to
subsidize travel, conference and housing expenses for students selected to
participate in the NAACL-HLT 2015 Student Research Workshop, which will take
place during the conference May 31 - June 5, 2015 in Denver, Colorado. The
workshop aims to provide valuable research opportunity for students at different
stages of their academic career (undergraduate, early graduate and advanced
graduate). Accepted papers are presented as posters during the main poster
session of the conference. This format has the advantages of both allowing
longer, more personalized interaction between the presenting student and
interested researchers, and attracting a larger audience among conference
attendees who are already at the general poster session. In addition, each
accepted paper is assigned a mentor. The mentor is a senior researcher from
academia or industry who will prepare in-depth comments before the poster
session and will provide feedback to the student author. The workshop is
organized and run by students. The NAACL-HLT Student Research Workshop
contributes to the development of a skilled and diverse computational
linguistics and natural language processing workforce. This year, two of the
student organizers are female graduate students, which will help promote and
broaden the participation of females in natural language processing and
computational linguistics fields.

The Student Research Workshop (SRW) is an established tradition at ACL and NAACL
conferences, allowing students to present their research and receive feedback
from senior researchers. The goal is to aid students at multiple stages in their
education, from senior-level undergraduates to graduate students at different
stages. Therefore, the workshop allows three types of papers: 1) thesis
proposals; 2) research papers by graduate students, and 3) for the first time, a
special undergraduate research track. The first option is appropriate for
seasoned graduate students who wish to get feedback on their proposal and
strengthen their final work. The second track, research papers by graduate
students, is most appropriate for graduate students new to academic conferences.
The third option is specifically dedicated to undergraduate students. The SRW
also provides valuable experience for the student organizers, who are directly
involved in recruiting reviewers, managing the review process and running the
workshop. In addition, the students who are involved in running and reviewing
for the Student Research Workshop have ample opportunities to interact with the
researchers on the organizing committee of the main conference. Overall, the
opportunities for interaction with other students and with senior researchers
will positively influence the students' experience in research and will likely
inspire many to devote further effort to academic studies and careers. To
sustain the outreach tradition of the student workshop, this grant aims to
subsidize travel, conference and housing expenses for both student participants
and student organizers.