* 1542224
* Third Arab-American Frontiers of Science, Engineering, and Medicine Symposium: An Opportunity to Engage Young Outstanding Researchers from the U.S. and the Arab Region, Dec.5-7.
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2017
* John Boright, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 08/31/2017
* USD 150,000.00

ECCS-1542224&lt;br/&gt;Third Arab-American Frontiers of Science, Engineering,
and Medicine Symposium:&lt;br/&gt;A unique opportunity to engage the next
generation of S&amp;T leaders &lt;br/&gt;Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical
Summary:&lt;br/&gt;Interdisciplinary scientific collaboration plays an important
role in addressing global challenges that impact every region across the world.
These challenges often require national, as well as cross-boundary approaches.
The Arab-American Frontiers Symposium is a unique type of gathering that
convenes outstanding young scientists, engineers, and medical professionals from
the United States and the Arab region to discuss exciting advances and
opportunities in their fields. The third symposium will be held on December 5-7,
2015 in partnership with the King Abdullah University of Science and Technology
(KAUST) in Saudi Arabia and the National Academies under the overarching theme
of "Sensing Technologies, Networks and Applications". The program is
participant-driven and is therefore an excellent opportunity for the symposium's
attendees to strengthen their leadership, communication and organizational
skills and expand their professional network. In addition, by convening a group
of participants which is diverse not only in research fields, but also
geographically, the Arab American Frontiers symposia will build bridges between
countries and promote science diplomacy. Thus, the Arab-American Frontiers
program can forge partnerships at an early career stage to improve scientific,
engineering and medical research in the United States and the Arab region and
build successful long-term collaborative activities among future S&amp;T
leaders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary:&lt;br/&gt;The Arab-American
Frontiers of Science, Engineering, and Medicine program brings together
outstanding young scientists, engineers, and medical professionals from the
United States and the 21 countries of the Arab League for a symposium to discuss
cutting-edge scientific and technological advances in their fields. The third
symposium will be hosted by the King Abdullah University of Science and
Technology (KAUST) on its campus in Thuwal, Saudi Arabia. The symposium has
three objectives: (1) Enhance scientific dialogue and exchange among young
researchers in Arab countries and the United States; (2) Encourage and
strengthen scientific collaboration and the transfer of techniques and
approaches across disciplines within and beyond the region; and (3) Empower
young researchers to assume leadership roles. During the symposium, U.S. and
Arab scientists, engineers and medical professionals will discuss major
scientific advances on a wide array of topics under the overarching theme of
"Sensing Technologies, Networks and Applications". The symposium will cover
advances in discovery of new materials, design of new sensor platforms and
networks, and ingenious management, assimilation and interpretation of data and
our ever increasing need to understand our changing world from molecular to
planetary scales. The experience is intellectually stimulating and generates a
dialogue across disciplines considered as key for scientific innovation. These
exchanges on cutting-edge scientific knowledge among U.S. and Arab participants
take place through: five plenary sessions covering a wide range of disciplines;
poster presentations by each participant; educational exhibits, and informal
discussions. Following the symposium, Arab American Frontiers fellowships
(travel seed grants) are awarded to pairs of participants who intend to
collaborate on a research topic of common interest.