* 1542241
* I-Corps Teams: An Investigation on the Commercial Potential of Advanced Filtration Media
* TIP,TI
* 05/15/2015,10/31/2015
* Jaime Camelio, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 10/31/2015
* USD 50,000.00

Recent research indicates a nanofiber-based filtration system can potentially
provide an effective, efficient, and easy-to-use water purification technology.
Fundamentally, nanofiber-based materials make ideal filters due to inherent
properties, such as: extremely high surface area to volume ratios, high levels
of porosity, and high levels of surface interactions and cohesion. While the
societal benefits of nanofibers are clear, the barrier to commercialization lies
in the difficulty of shifting manufacturing from the laboratory setting to full-
scale mass production. Currently the most popular method of nanofiber production
is electrospinning, which is very difficult to scale-up. Recently, this team has
developed a polymer processing system capable of producing nonwoven mats of
composite polymer fibers. Unique to this process is the ability to strictly
control the number and thickness of alternating layers within the
fibers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this NSF I-Corps Team project is to
identify a potential market to commercialize a new form of nonwoven polymer
nano-composites. These new fiber materials are created using a novel melt-
blowing process that offers a scalable and environmental friendly approach. The
nature of the process allows for the processing of various types of polymers
with multiple functionalities creating a large number of opportunities for the
development of new products. With such a wide range of potential applications,
and based on initial research, the team's initial focus has been directed to the
liquid filtration industry. Initially, the team has identified the potential for
these fibers to replace those used in ?plate and frame filters? utilized in the
final steps of processing waste water in the micro-brewing industry.