* 1542879
* EFRI 2-DARE: Functionalized Monolayer Heterostructures for Biosensors with Optical Readout
* ENG,EFMA
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Alan Johnson, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Alias Smith
* 08/31/2020
* USD 2,229,999.00

EFMA - 1542879&lt;br/&gt;PI: Johnson, Alan T.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will develop new chemical sensors composed of biological molecules coupled to
two-dimensional atomic crystals. The biological molecules will act as sensors by
binding chemical targets in liquid and air samples. The atomic crystal layers
will act as readouts by changing their optical or electronic properties when
chemical targets are bound by the coupled biological molecules. The team will
explore several biological molecules capable of binding specific targets coupled
to various atomic crystals composed of compounds called transition metal
dichalcogenides. The project will involve fabrication of the crystal layers,
measurements of their electronic and optical properties, attachment of the
biological molecules, and analysis of the resulting sensor capabilities.
Experiments will be conducted in tandem with computational modeling to
understand the response of the atomic crystals and predict sensor performance.
Results of the project will lead to improved chemical sensors with unprecedented
sensitivity and specificity for a variety of applications, including diagnosis
of disease, environmental monitoring and law enforcement. The team will use the
project to increase awareness of local communities about research at the
frontier of nano-biotechnology and to involve student researchers, especially
members of groups traditionally underrepresented in science and engineering.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the project is to develop the basic scientific
and engineering knowledge needed to advance nano-biosensor research towards
implementation of transition metal dichalcogenides-based biosensors with optical
and/or electronic readout. The team will develop scalable chemical vapor
deposition approaches to large-area synthesis of MoS2, WS2, SnS2, and other
materials identified through materials exploration. The material properties of
these systems will be rigorously benchmarked using a combination of advanced
structural, chemical, optical, electronic, and scanned probe measurements. A
comprehensive set of chemical functionalization techniques will be developed
suitable for fabrication of protein-functionalized biosensors with plasmonic,
nanophotonic, and/or electronic readout. The impact of chemical
functionalization on the electrical and optical properties will be
systematically investigated. The measurements will be correlated with multi-
scale computational models appropriate for simulating the response of the
biosensors, with the goal of developing simulation methodologies suitable for
predicting biosensor performance and guiding sensor design.