* 1542976
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Resolving Ambiguous Exposure-Age Chronologies of Antarctic Deglaciation with Measurements of In-Situ-Produced Cosmogenic Carbon-14
* GEO,OPP
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2021
* Gregory Balco, Berkeley Geochronology Center
* Standard Grant
* Michael E. Jackson
* 04/30/2021
* USD 50,620.00

The overall goal of this project is to determine the effect of past changes in
the size of the Antarctic Ice Sheet on global sea level. At the peak of the last
ice age 25,000 years ago, sea level was 120 meters (400 feet) lower than it is
at present because water that is now part of the ocean was instead part of
expanded glaciers and ice sheets in North America, Eurasia, and Antarctica.
Between then and now, melting and retreat of this land ice caused sea level to
rise. In this project, we aim to improve our understanding of how changes in the
size of the Antarctic Ice Sheet contributed to this process. The overall
strategy to accomplish this involves (i) visiting areas in Antarctica that are
not now covered by ice; (ii) looking for geological evidence, specifically rock
surface and sediment deposits, that indicates that these areas were covered by
thicker ice in the past; and (iii) determining the age of these geological
surfaces and deposits. This project addresses the final part of this strategy --
determining the age of Antarctic glacial rock surfaces or sediment deposits --
using a relatively new technique that involves measuring trace elements in rock
surfaces that are produced by cosmic-ray bombardment after the rock surfaces are
exposed by ice retreat. By applying this method to rock samples collected in
previous visits to Antarctica, the timing of past expansion and contraction of
the ice sheet can be determined. The main scientific outcomes expected from this
project are (i) improved understanding of how Antarctic Ice Sheet changes
contributed to past global sea level rise; and (ii) improved understanding of
modern observed Antarctic Ice Sheet changes in a longer-term context. This
second outcome will potentially improve predictions of future ice sheet
behavior. Other outcomes of the project include training of individual
undergraduate and graduate students, as well as the development of a new course
on sea level change to be taught at Tulane University in New Orleans, a city
that is being affected by sea level change today.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will use measurements of in-situ-produced cosmogenic carbon-14 in quartz
from existing samples collected at several sites in Antarctica to resolve major
ambiguities in existing Last Glacial Maximum to present ice sheet
reconstructions. This project is important because of the critical nature of
accurate reconstructions of ice sheet change in constraining reconstructions of
past sea level change. Although carbon-14 is most commonly exploited as a
geochronometer through its production in the upper atmosphere and incorporation
into organic materials, it is also produced within the crystal lattice of rocks
and minerals that are exposed to the cosmic-ray flux at the Earth's surface. In
this latter case, its concentration is proportional to the duration of surface
exposure, and measurements of in-situ-produced carbon-14 can be used to date
geological events that form or expose rock surfaces, for example, ice sheet
expansion and retreat. Although carbon-14 is one of several trace radionuclides
that can be used for this purpose, it is unique among them in that its half-life
is short relative to the time scale of glacial-interglacial variations. Thus, in
cases where rock surfaces in polar regions have been repeatedly covered and
uncovered by ice sheet change during many glacial-interglacial cycles, carbon-14
measurements are uniquely suited to accurately dating the most recent episode of
ice sheet advance and retreat. We aim to use this property to improve our
understanding of Antarctic Ice Sheet change at a number of critically located
sites at which other surface exposure dating methods have yielded ambiguous
results. Geographically, these are focused in the Weddell Sea embayment of
Antarctica, which is an area where the geometry of the Antarctic continent
potentially permits large glacial-interglacial changes in ice volume but where
existing geologic records of ice sheet change are particularly ambiguous. In
addition, in-situ carbon-14 measurements, applied where independently
constrained deglaciation chronologies already exist, can potentially allow us to
date the last period of ice sheet advance as well as the most recent retreat.