* 1542159
* NNCI: Texas Nanofabrication Facility (TNF)
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2021
* Arumugam Manthiram, University of Texas at Austin
* Cooperative Agreement
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 08/31/2021
* USD 4,500,000.00

Nanotechnology deals with man-made objects with sizes that are much smaller than
everyday objects we deal with, but much larger than atoms or molecules, They can
thus manifest novel and potentially useful properties that can have applications
in diverse areas such as electronics, defense, and healthcare. Nanotechnology is
projected to be a significant segment of the U.S. and world economy in the 21st
century. However, since these objects are so tiny, fabricating them takes a
tremendous investment in equipment and infrastructure, and in personnel to
maintain and train users in these tools. Often, these are beyond the resources
of academic institutions and startups, and support from the federal government
is critical. The Texas Nanofabrication Facility (TNF), a National Nanotechnology
Coordinated Infrastructure (NNCI) site at the University of Texas at Austin,
builds upon a proven NSF-supported model, and will help train the next
generation of engineers and scientists in this nascent field, with a strong
focus on recruiting minorities and women in these STEM fields. It will also
engender startups in nanotechnology, and will lead to advances in areas such as
faster computers that would consume less energy, lasers and photonic devices for
faster communication, and a dazzling array of products for the consumer market
and defense applications. This effort will also have an impact on healthcare,
and other major federal initiatives such as developing nanosensors for the Brain
Initiative, better DNA and protein sequencing tools for personalized medicine,
and nanostructures for targeted drug delivery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The TNF will
facilitate breakthroughs in nanoscience and technology, with applications in
nanoelectronics/photonics, green energy and healthcare in the Southwest and in
the Nation, by providing state-of-the-art capability in nanodevice prototyping,
metrology and nanomanufacturing. The efforts in prototyping of nanoelectronic
devices will be underpinned not only by tool-training-based approaches, as in
the past, but also new holistic solutions-based schemes. Coupled with device
fabrication, TNF will provide cutting-edge tools in nanoscale imaging and
metrology at the atomic scale. The application of nano-in-healthcare will be
bolstered by the recently established Dell Medical School at the University of
Texas, one of very few new medical schools in recent decades, and one that is
committed to re-inventing medical education. The TNF will mentor and foster
start-ups in nanotechnology, and provide platforms for nanomanufacturing of
prototypes at the NSF Engineering Research Center in Texas. It will establish
educational activities in nanotechnology especially directed at underrepresented
minorities and women, while making social and ethical implications (SEI) of
nanotechnology an integral component of every activity. The growing Hispanic
population in the Southwest makes it crucial that this segment of the population
is well represented in STEM fields. The TNF is located centrally in the so-
called Texas Triangle, which encompasses most of the population and the high-
technology activity in Texas. This is one of eleven mega-population centers in
the Nation, and a key hub of nanotechnology in the U.S. As such, this site
should have a major impact on advancing nanoscience and technology in the 21st
century in the U.S.