* 1542741
* EFRI 2-DARE: Valley Optoelectronics with Atomically Thin Transition Metal Dichalcogenides
* ENG,EFMA
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Feng Wang, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 08/31/2019
* USD 2,000,000.00

Nontechnical Description: This project is aimed at exploiting the novel
electronic and optical properties of two-dimensional (2D) materials through the
use of a unique set of devices built at the nanometer scale. The main strategy
is to implement new techniques to control the quantum mechanical behavior of
electrons in 2D materials by tuning how they interact with photons of light as
well as with precise electrical signals. The optoelectronic devices explored in
this project have the potential to improve high-speed data communications and
low-power electronics in a transformative way. This project provides an ideal
framework for multidisciplinary education, where physics and engineering
students in different research areas can interact closely with each other. The
project also partners with existing programs at Berkeley (such as the Berkeley
Edge program) that are aimed at enhancing the recruitment and training of
underrepresented and woman students engaged the frontier research in science and
engineering. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: This EFRI 2-DARE
project aims to develop novel valleytronic and optoelectronic devices based on
atomically thin transition metal dichalcogenide (MX2) crystals. Owing to their
reduced dimensionality and high spin-orbital coupling, two-dimensional MX2
crystals (where M is a transition metal and X is a chalcogen) exhibit unusual
quantum phenomena, including unique exciton physics and emergent valley degrees
of freedom. An outstanding scientific question concerns the interplay between
photons, excitons, and charge carriers with different valley and spin states in
2D MX2 crystals. This project aims at obtaining fundamental understanding of
such interplay, and at developing novel valleytronic and optoelectronic devices
based on these new insights. These goals will be achieved through an
interdisciplinary and highly integrated approach that combines expertise in
materials synthesis, spectroscopic characterization, device engineering, and
theoretical modeling.