* 1542789
* Collaborative Research: Optimized Deployment of Antarctic Surface Weather Observations
* GEO,OPP
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2020
* Matthew Lazzara, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Peter Milne
* 05/31/2020
* USD 38,234.00

Numerical experiments are to be used to test probabilistic predictions as to the
optimal and sub-optimal siting of surface Automated Weather Station (AWS)
observations in Antarctica. Sensor placement is a generic problem across the
goesciences, and this project may have far-reaching impact as to fidelity and
cost of observational networks. In particular, problems where measurements are
difficult to obtain and/or expensive may be prioritized objectively with the
approach tested here. If successful, this research provides the basis for an
objectively optimized augmentation or re-configuration of the AWS network to
meet climate monitoring (such as locating new or paleoclimate proxy records) and
weather forecasting goals. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Gridded data from (archived)
Antarctic Mesoscale Prediction Systems (AMPS) will be used by University of
Washington and NCAR researchers to optimize the spatial correlation length
scales for the existing AWS network via ensemble sensitivity theory. These
predictions of optimal station placement will in turn be subject to observing
systems experiments, using both data denial and reconfiguration
approaches.&lt;br/&gt;A related line of enquiry is to be an evaluation of the
current locations of the active Antarctic radiosonde network, as judged by the
network?s ability to account for tropospheric variance in archived AMPS forecast
temperature data. Sonde measurements also may collocate with validation
observations from infrared soundings from satellites, or GPS radio occultation.