* 1542700
* Student Funding to Attend the 12th International School/Symposium for Space Simulations (ISSS-12);  Prague, Czech Republic; July 3-10, 2015
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2016
* David Schriver, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Janet U. Kozyra
* 06/30/2016
* USD 20,160.00

This is a proposal to fund airfare for U.S. students to participate in the
International School/Symposium for Space Simulations (ISSS-12), held in Prague,
Czech Republic. ISSS-12 is the synergistic combination of a noted international
school with world-class instructors and an international space plasma physics
symposium during which related cutting-edge research is discussed. The planned
school offers an exciting opportunity for U.S. students to get hands-on
experience with complex plasma simulation codes and to obtain copies of some of
the basic codes at its completion. In the subsequent symposium, students are
exposed to research using these same and additional cutting-edge simulation
technologies. Throughout this experience, students have the opportunity to
network with an international cadre of researchers and students both one-on-one
and in small groups. This school and symposium approach has proven over the
years to be very effective in maximizing the knowledge that students gain but,
in addition, it creates an environment that enables these same students to
establish international contacts and build future collaborations.

The strong relevance of ISSS-12 to international STEM-related workforce issues
makes it of potential interest to the Global Venture Fund program housed in the
NSF Office of International Science and Engineering (OISE). GVF agreed to co-
review the proposal with the NSF Geospace section. Although OISE normally does
not support international symposia, ISSS-12 was judged to be a solid investment
in 10 junior US researchers/students who will gain an exceptional early-career
opportunity to interact with the Czech research community, which is strong in
plasma physics and related areas. Furthermore, Czech research infrastructure is
world class, with existing simulators, an Institute of Plasma Physics, HILASE,
and a newly built EU-funded facility called ELI. Thus, this destination is an
important investment in the junior US participants? professional future. To make
this opportunity available to U.S. students, the GVF joined with NSF Geospace to
provide funding for this proposal.