* 1542995
* PFI:AIR - TT:  Towards Commercialization of Potassium-Oxygen Batteries: Solving Safety Challenges
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2015,02/28/2018
* Yiying Wu, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 02/28/2018
* USD 202,772.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on translating a novel
potassium-oxygen (K-O2) rechargeable battery technology to fill the increasing
need for high performance batteries for transportation electrification and
stationary energy storage. The K-O2 battery is important because it effectively
provides better-than-Li-ion battery performance at less-than-sealed-lead-acid
battery price. This novel energy-dense battery technology has the unique feature
that its operation is based on the reversible one-electron oxygen/superoxide
redox couple, which eliminates the need for high-cost electrocatalysts. This
feature provides the following advantages: low cost, lightweight, high-energy
efficiency and environmental friendly when compared to the foremost competing
lithium-ion batteries and other metal-oxygen batteries in this market space. The
technology would enable electric vehicles to travel longer ranges at affordable
prices and solve the energy-storage problem on the electrical grid system when
using intermittent renewable energies.

The project will result in a prototype of potassium-oxygen battery pack. This
will require investigation into the following technology gaps to translate from
research discovery toward commercial application: developing moisture-responsive
electrolytes, safe anodes alternative to potassium metal, and functional
potassium cation selective membranes with low oxygen permeation for anode
protection to improve the battery cycle life. The fundamental limitation of
potassium-air batteries is the crossover of molecular oxygen from the cathode to
potassium anode. This leads to the formation of potassium superoxide on the
anode surface and reduces the availability of metal that can participate in
energy storage. Therefore, designing alternative anodes and membrane
electrolytes can solve the technical challenges in battery safety and lifetime.
In addition, personnel involved in this project, including post-docs, graduates
and undergraduates, will receive experiences in technology innovation,
translation and entrepreneurship through the proposed research activities,
prototype development and commercialization efforts.