* 1542015
* NNCI: North Carolina Research Triangle Nanotechnology Network (RTNN)
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2021
* Mark Wiesner, North Carolina State University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 08/31/2021
* USD 5,500,000.00

The Research Triangle Nanotechnology Network (RTNN) enables innovation and
commercialization of new promising nanotechnologies and enables public education
for the U.S. by providing technical leadership and open access to comprehensive
and unique nanotechnology laboratories, equipment, and research expertise. The
RTNN is anchored by three major research universities (North Carolina State
University, Duke University, and University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill)
that are clustered near one of the nation's major nanoscience and nano-
biotechnology regional economies. The RTNN focuses on pioneering, studying, and
refining innovative methods to catalyze both traditional and emerging
nanotechnology research areas, including those from Biology, Biomedical
Engineering, Textile Engineering, Environmental Engineering, Agriculture, Soil
Science, Forest Biomaterials, and Plant &amp; Microbial Biology. Since the
barriers of distance, cost, and awareness often prevent facility usage by both
traditional and non-traditional users, the RTNN will surmount these barriers
using a variety of innovative programs. The RTNN further leads research on the
societal and ethical implications of nanotechnology, including issues of
environmental health, safety, ethics, and equity, through a Social and Ethical
Implications of Nanotechnology (SEIN) component that also assesses innovative
program success. The RTNN will create a nanotechnology innovation ecosystem that
spans grades 7-12, community colleges, universities, and industry. By
translating program successes across the nation, the RTNN will become a national
focal point for innovation and will serve as a guide for nanotechnology
innovation ecosystems across the nation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The RTNN brings
together comprehensive shared user facilities and complementary faculty research
programs at three major research universities. These resources will be used to
dramatically increase the national impact of state-of-the-art fabrication and
characterization facilities and research expertise in nanoscience and
nanotechnology. RTNN technical capabilities span nanofabrication and nano-
characterization of traditional hard, dry materials (i.e., 2D and 3D
nanomaterials, metamaterials, photonics, and heterogeneous integration) and
emerging soft, wet materials (i.e., tissue, textile, plant, and animal
nanomaterials). Specific areas of capability include the environmental
assessment of nanotechnology, atomic layer deposition, flexible integrated
systems, and fluidic systems. The RTNN will enable emerging research areas by
adding additional process flows and tools throughout the project that enable new
ways of integrating and interfacing the nano-scale with the human-scale. The
RTNN will expand shared facilities usage by creating and assessing innovative
programs and disseminating these programs across the nation. These programs
include graduate student peer-to-peer distance use internet networking, summer
undergraduate research internships with follow-on outreach to the student's
school of origin, public engagement leveraging large scale internet courses, and
outreach to grades K-12. A specific emphasis is on engaging users from
underserved user groups, including women, minorities, and people who do not
typically access shared university facilities. The aim of the RTNN is to create
a comprehensive, integrated nanotechnology ecosystem that will provide a
pipeline of STEM students for a strong, vibrant, and entrepreneurial next
generation workforce.