* 1542148
* NNCI: San Diego Nanotechnology Infrastructure (SDNI)
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2021
* Shaochen Chen, University of California-San Diego
* Cooperative Agreement
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 08/31/2021
* USD 5,500,000.00

The San Diego Nanotechnology Infrastructure (SDNI) site of the NNCI at the
University of California at San Diego offers access to a broad spectrum of
nanofabrication and characterization instrumentation and expertise that enable
and accelerate cutting edge scientific research, proof-of-concept demonstration,
device and system prototyping, product development, and technology translation.
Nanotechnology is the cornerstone of many industry sectors and a rich source for
scientific discoveries and innovations. Using nanotechnologies, scientists are
likely to find solutions for the most important challenges in health,
communications, energy, and environment. Nanotechnology is multidisciplinary by
nature and requires highly sophisticated tools and deep expertise, often
unavailable or unaffordable by individual research labs and businesses. The SDNI
site will offer state-of-the-art knowhow, tools, and services of
nanotechnologies to all interested users across the nation in a user friendly,
timely, and cost effective manner. The site will also become a nanotechnology
provider to create and develop new nanotechnologies and bring them to its users.
The goals of the site are to serve a large number of academic, industrial, and
government users, to transfer enabling nanotechnologies from research
laboratories to the general user community, to educate and train future
generations of scientists and engineers in nanotechnology, and to bring
nanoscaled research experience to college students and K-12 students, especially
underrepresented minority students, to prepare them for STEM careers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The SDNI site will build upon the existing Nano3 user
facility and leverage additional specialized resources and expertise at the
University of California at San Diego. The SDNI site is committed to broadening
and further diversifying its already substantial user base. The proposed
strategic goals include: (i) providing infrastructure that enables
transformative research and education through open, affordable access to the
nanofabrication and nanocharacterization tools and an expert staff capable of
working with users to adapt and develop new capabilities, with emphasis in the
areas of NanoBioMedicine, NanoPhotonics, and NanoMagnetism; (ii) accelerating
the translation of discoveries and new nanotechnologies to the marketplace; and
(iii) coordinating with other NNCI sites to provide uninterrupted service and
creative solutions to meet evolving user needs. Significant growth is
anticipated in the number and variety of local and regional users in the
academic, government, and industrial sectors. Discoveries made by users of the
SDNI site have the potential to create transformative change in fields as
diverse as medicine, information technology, transportation, homeland security,
and environmental science, leading to improved healthcare, faster
communications, safer transit, and cleaner water and air. To develop a more
diverse and productive scientific workforce, the SDNI site will expand
undergraduate and graduate training programs including REU opportunities to
train 900 students over five years. Through an RET program and other activities,
the site will work to increase the number of students from underrepresented
minority groups who pursue studies and, ultimately, careers in STEM disciplines.