* 1542812
* I-Corps: Commercialization of electrochemical sensor technology for pathogen detection
* TIP,TI
* 05/15/2015,01/31/2016
* Edgar Goluch, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 01/31/2016
* USD 50,000.00

There are ongoing efforts to develop sensors to monitor for wound infections.
The vast majority of smart-bandage research and development is focused on
infection sensors based on general characteristics, such as pH, temperature, and
gases. While simpler to implement, these general characteristics also fluctuate
significantly and can change due to a large number of factors, resulting in
unreliable identification. The current standard to monitor for wound infections
relies on an initial human assessment, either patient or caregiver, of when an
infection is developing. The decision is based on visual inspection, smell of
the wound, and other patient symptoms, such as fever. When an infection is
suspected, samples are collected from the wound and sent to a central facility
for analysis. At the centralized facility, plate culturing is the gold standard
for pathogen identification. The technique is simple, but requires 24 hours or
more for identification.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal aims to create,
test, and disseminate electrochemical sensor technology for quantitative
microbiological studies. Specifically, this approach will utilize micro-
fabricated electrochemical sensors to rapidly and selectively detect molecules
produced by bacteria. The detected molecules are uniquely produced by only
certain species of cells; therefore, by detecting the molecules it is possible
to determine which cells and how many of them are present in a sample. The
proposed technology will allow caregivers to remotely monitor their patients and
provide them with better care. In a hospital post-op or burn ward, rapid
identification is the primary customer need, as wounds are monitored routinely,
but require time-consuming tests when an infection is suspected to identify the
pathogen. In the home, patients must determine on their own if they have an
infection developing or wait until a home healthcare worker visits them. The
proposed product could reduce the visit frequency for home healthcare
professionals if the wounds are monitored remotely, decreasing the workload for
an already overburdened and understaffed system.