* 1542863
* EFRI 2-DARE: Excitonics and Polaritonics using 2D materials (ExPo2D)
* ENG,EFMA
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2020
* Marc Baldo, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* Alias Smith
* 07/31/2020
* USD 2,007,994.00

The exceptional properties of the purely two-dimensional (2D) sheet of carbon
atoms, graphene, has spurred the discovery of a whole host of 2D material
systems with exceptional electronic, mechanical, optical and thermal properties.
These new 2D materials promise a new generation of technologies such as flexible
displays, ultrafast computing, high-efficiency low-cost solar cells, and quantum
information processing. Specifically in the context of optoelectronics, the
unusually large strength of light-matter interaction of 2D materials has made
them highly attractive for practical device applications. However, single-layer
graphene has no direct bandgap, which limits its use in a range of
optoelectronic applications. The recent discovery of 2D atomic crystals based on
transition metal dichalcogenides, many of which have large bandgaps in the
visible and infrared spectrum, now opens entirely new areas of investigation in
optical and optoelectronic devices. &lt;br/&gt;In this program, building blocks
for next generation classical and quantum information processing will be
developed based on precise control of electronic excited states, hybrid half-
light half-matter quasiparticles (exciton-polaritons), and collective
excitations in 2D transition metal dichalcogenides. The motivation is to develop
next generation photonic and electronic systems and sub-systems that exploit the
unique advantages of 2D semiconductors such as large interaction strength with
light, mechanical flexibility, and low fabrication cost. Specifically, (i) low
energy consuming, ultrafast logic gates will be developed using neutral and
charged excitations (ii) Quantum nonlinear devices where even a single photon
can alter the state of the system will be investigated using polaritons and
(iii)Exotic phases of matter that rely on ideas from mathematical topology will
be explored using collective excitations will be developed&lt;br/&gt;In addition
to the technological impact on society, the program will include extensive
Educational and Outreach. CCNY, the lead institution, is a minority-serving
institution and through close collaboration with MIT expects both graduate and
undergraduate students from diverse ethnic and social backgrounds to become part
of the proposed cutting-edge research. The program will also provide educational
opportunities for local underrepresented minority high school students/teachers
and will engage them in summer projects. Outreach efforts for bringing the
science to the general public is another targeted effort under the program.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This program will develop excitonic and polaritonic
(exciton-photon quasiparticles) devices that operate in the visible and near
infrared spectral range based on 2D atomic layers of transition metal
dichalcogenides (MoS2, WS2, WSe2 etc). The 2D materials have an inherently
strong interaction with light and other attractive properties such as valley
polarization and strong spin-orbit coupling. These unique properties open up
avenues for the development of heretofore inaccessible device features with
tremendous potential applications in classical and quantum information
processing. Devices that rely on control of exciton and polariton transport and
localization as well as approaches to emergent topological phases in 2D
materials will be the focus of this program. Specifically, the following
devices/ device concepts using 2D transition metal dichalcogenides and their
heterostructures will be developed: (i) transistors and logic gates that utilize
neutral and charged excitons, (ii) quantum nonlinear optical devices and light
emitters based on exciton polaritons, and (iii) exploratory optoelectronic
device concepts based on topological phases that can be realized in 2D
semiconductors. The device development will be closely guided by growth and
synthesis efforts as well as theoretical efforts to better understand exciton
and polariton transport and for realizing novel topological phases and strain
engineering for electronic band structure manipulation. Development of excitonic
and polaritonic devices based on 2D semiconductors that have the potential to
operate at room temperature presents a unique opportunity to develop practical
devices using previously unexplored fundamental physical concepts.