* 1542358
* RET Site: Research Experience for Teachers in Polymer Engineering
* ENG,EEC
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2020
* Kevin Cavicchi, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* Amelia Greer
* 04/30/2020
* USD 595,460.00

This renewal Research Experiences for Teachers (RET) in Engineering and Computer
Science Site at the University of Akron will focus on polymer engineering
research. Polymers are a key component of many engineering challenges facing
society today and are therefore an excellent intellectual focus to expose
teachers in engineering research. The broad dissemination of the results of this
work through the web, journal publication, local workshops, and national meeting
symposia will have national impact and inform K-12 and College/University
educators of best practices for Research Experiences for Teachers programs. This
work will have a beneficial impact on the teachers, the faculty mentors, and the
graduate student mentors involved. The teachers will gain increased confidence
and knowledge in performing inquiry based science and engineering lessons in
their classrooms. This will help invigorate their classrooms and encourage
students to pursue further science and engineering education in college. The
UAkron mentors will be exposed to a broader range of science practitioners. This
experience will develop long-term relationships between the University and local
high schools that will better serve the education objectives of the United
States. Several of the participating school districts serve a high number of
economically disadvantaged students and have schools rated as needing continuous
improvement by the Ohio Department of Education. Therefore, this program will
directly impact students who are underrepresented in
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This RET Site will offer an intensive eight week
summer research program for a total of 30 secondary STEM teachers over three
years from school districts in the Akron, Ohio area. Faculty members and
graduate students from the College of Polymer Science and Polymer Engineering
and the Departments of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering and Biomedical
Engineering in the College of Engineering will mentor teachers on independent
research projects in the faculty members' laboratories. Teachers will also take
part in professional development activities including academic and industrial
lectures on engineering, field trips to local polymer industry sites, and
activities focused on lesson plan development. The graduate students involved
will participate in a two week classroom teaching boot camp to prepare them to
visit the teachers' classroom during the academic year and assist in the
delivery of the generated lesson plans. The lesson plans will be distributed on
the web. A summer workshop will be held to disseminate results of this work to
local teachers. A symposium at the national American Chemical Society (ACS)
conference will be held each year to disseminate the results to teachers and
academic, government, and industrial scientists and engineers. Evaluation of the
RET site will be performed by a faculty member from Youngstown State University
and submitted for publication in archival journals.