* 1542778
* Climate History and Flow Processes from Physical Analyses of the SPICECORE South Pole Ice Core
* GEO,OPP
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2020
* Richard Alley, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Paul Cutler
* 05/31/2020
* USD 200,000.00

Alley/1542778

This award supports a three-year effort to study physical properties of the
South Pole ice core to help provide a high-time-resolution history of trace
gases and other paleoclimatic indicators from an especially cold site with high
preservation potential for important signals. The physical-properties studies
include visual inspection to identify any flow disturbances and for identifying
annual layers and other features, and combined bubble, grain and ice crystal
orientation studies to better understand the processes occurring in the ice that
affect the climate record and the ice-sheet behavior. Success of these efforts
will provide necessary support for dating and quality control to others studying
the ice core, as well as determining the climate history of the site, flow
state, and key physical processes in ice.

The intellectual merits of the project include better understanding of physical
processes, paleoclimatic reconstruction, dating of the ice, and quality
assurance. Visual inspection of the core will help identify evidence of flow
disturbances that would disrupt the integrity of the climate record and will
reveal volcanic horizons and other features of interest. Annual layer counting
will be conducted to help estimate accumulation rate over time as recorded in
the ice core. Measurements of C-axis fabric, grain size and shapes, and bubble
characteristics will provide information about processes occurring in the ice
sheet as well as the history of ice flow, current flow state and how the ice is
flowing and how easily it will flow in the future. Analysis of this data in
conjunction with microCT data will help to reveal grain-scale processes. The
broader impacts of the project include support for an early-career, post-
doctoral researcher, and improved paleoclimatic data of societal relevance. The
results will be incorporated into the active program of education and outreach
which have educated many students, members of the public and policy makers
through the sharing of information and educational materials about all aspects
of ice core science and paleoclimate.