* 1542220
* Collaborative Research:   Adaptive Responses of Phaeocystis populations in Antarctic Ecosystems
* GEO,OPP
* 04/01/2015,08/31/2017
* Anton Post, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Gast
* 08/31/2017
* USD 191,039.00

Global climate change is having significant effects on areas of the Southern
Ocean, and a better understanding of this ecosystem will permit predictions
about the large-scale implications of these shifts. The haptophyte Phaeocystis
antarctica is an important component of the phytoplankton communities in this
region, but little is known about the factors controlling its distribution.
Preliminary data suggest that P. antarctica posses unique adaptations that allow
it to thrive in regions with dynamic light regimes. This research will extend
these results to identify the physiological and genetic mechanisms that affect
the growth and distribution of P. antarctica. This work will use field and
laboratory-based studies and a suite of modern molecular techniques to better
understand the biogeography and physiology of this key organism. Results will be
widely disseminated through publications as well as through presentations at
national and international meetings. In addition, raw data will be made
available through open-access databases. This project will support the research
and training of two graduate students and will foster an established
international collaboration with Dutch scientists. Researchers on this project
will participate in outreach programs targeting K12 teachers as well as high
school students.