* 1542801
* Integration of Computing with Electronic Textiles to Improve Teaching and Learning of Electronics in Secondary Science
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2019
* Louis Nadelson, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* M. Alejandra Sorto
* 09/30/2019
* USD 1,144,270.00

This project will integrate computational thinking and electronics concepts in
middle and high school classrooms using electronic textiles (e-textiles)
projects for students. The content of the projects includes electricity,
conductive materials, programming and computational thinking. This project
builds on significant work already underway in which e-textiles have been used
in out-of-class situations and are beginning the transition to classroom use.
The primary implementation activity will be providing professional development
to teachers about computational thinking and e-textiles. The project includes
scaling up to a large number of teachers. It also includes rural schools in the
region of the university. The research and development plan includes
collaboration between education faculty and computer science and engineering
faculty. As a STEM+C project it nicely integrates computational thinking within
the context of science classrooms and presents a model for instruction that
could apply to other topics. The STEM+Computing Partnership (STEM+C) program
seeks to advance multidisciplinary integration of computing in STEM teaching and
learning through applied research and development across one or more domains;
integration of STEM in computer science; and broadening participation in
computer science. Investments are made in critical areas of pedagogy, pre-
service and in-service teacher professional
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the project is to create and
deploy e-textile projects for classroom use in middle and high school science
classrooms for electronics concepts. The plan also includes designing
professional development for teachers about the computational thinking concepts
and the e-textiles projects. The mixed methods research design will collect
qualitative artifacts and journal reflections from teachers regarding classroom
implementation and quantitative data in the form of observation instruments and
survey results. The student-level research questions focus on students'
engagement, computing interest, sense of self-concept, and learning gains in
electricity concepts. The teacher-level questions examine instructional
practices teachers use in implementation of e-textiles projects in science
classes. These questions employ both treatment and comparison groups. Data
collection includes surveys of students' interest and self-concept as well as
students' knowledge assessments. The teacher-level question examines
instructional practices using classroom observations with the Reformed Teaching
Observation Protocol, computational thinking frameworks, teacher reflections,
artifacts from classroom implementation, and semi-structured interviews.