* 1542101
* NNCI: Northwest Nanotechnology Infrastructure (NWNI)
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2022
* Daniel Schwartz, University of Washington
* Cooperative Agreement
* Richard Nash
* 08/31/2022
* USD 4,500,000.00

The Northwest Nanotechnology Infrastructure (NWNI) as a NNCI site serves as the
prime resource for nanotechnology researchers and engineers for a large
geographical area from the Pacific Coast to Montana and from southern Oregon to
the Canadian border and beyond. NWNI offers world-class facilities at the
University of Washington (UW) in Seattle and Oregon State University (OSU) in
Corvallis, complemented with unique capabilities at Pacific Northwest National
Laboratory, a Department of Energy site, and the University of British Columbia
in Vancouver, Canada. Anchored at the UW, this site provides critical workhorse
tools, unique instruments and key educational support to a large and distributed
user base with particular attention to the clean energy and biotechnology
fields. The mission of NWNI consists of four core services that can be described
by four M's: Make - Measure - Model - Mentor. The first three M's form the
physical foundation and the fourth serves to coordinate educational efforts with
broad impact beyond the scientific community. The physical infrastructure
consists of the Washington Nanofabrication Facility (WNF, Seattle) and the
Microproducts Breakthrough Institute (MBI, Corvallis) for making, the Molecular
Analysis Facility (MAF, Seattle) and the Materials Synthesis &amp;
Characterization Facility (MaSC, Oregon) for measuring, and distributed
computational resources for modeling in design and analysis. Mentoring is
essential to NWNI. The site's integration with the region's vibrant biotech and
startup community implies immense diversity in users. NWNI offers flexible
access to its facilities, from comprehensive training of local users to
operator-assisted tool access to remote execution of assignments. Whether novice
or seasoned engineer or scientist, whether undergraduate, graduate, postdoc or
community college student or teacher, all users are offered support for their
entire nanotechnology project from initial design to final
analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NWNI serves as a broad-based nanotechnology
resource, though three principal research focus areas are highlighted in which
the site will provide leadership: (i) Integrated Photonics, which aims at
enabling large-scale photonic networks, which are expected to overcome current
limits in speed and bandwidth of electronic circuits. Beyond information
processing, the miniaturization and integration of photonics in medical devices
is facilitating the development of new, minimally invasive health diagnostics;
(ii) Advanced Energy Materials and Devices, which aims at providing the
scientific and engineering basis for clean energy solutions, including the
creation of better batteries or scalable and environmentally benign materials
for solar power; and (iii) Bio-Nano Interfaces and Systems, which provides the
infrastructure and expertise for inventing and demonstrating new devices for
biomedical applications, enabling advances in protein modeling, drug delivery,
sensors, bio-scaffolds and bioelectronics. NWNI features capabilities in
materials and devices including quantum dots, super absorbers for solar cells
and oxide-base transistors for flexible electronics for sensors and displays,
resulting in comprehensive infrastructure and expertise in nanotechnology that
is considered unique within the field. The site provides an array of educational
activities geared towards a broad audience and designed to have a multiplier
effect. Three signature residence programs are offered: (i) Educators-in-
residence gain hands-on laboratory skills for use in teaching their K-12
classes; (ii) Entrepreneurs-in-residence, in coordination with UW Technology
Transfer (CoMotion), work with nanotechnology inventors to explore start-up
opportunities; and (iii) OSU Advantage connect businesses with faculty
expertise, student talent and world-class NWNI facilities to assist in bringing
ideas to market. In a collaboration with the University of British Columbia,
online edX courses are supported that allow students across the country and
around the world to build and test their own nanoscale photonic devices on
multi-project wafers built with electron beam lithography at UW. Worldwide, UW
participates in a network of 15 institutions in America, Asia and Europe that
offer joint summer schools on nanotechnology for future global engineers.