* 1542725
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award: An Integrative Approach To Examining Migration, Community Interaction And Social Diversity
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2017
* Kelly Knudson, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2017
* USD 11,835.00

Migrations, past and present, fundamentally influence human interaction,
community building, and social evolution. Large scale population movement is
particularly pertinent to today's globally mobile society as the effects of
climate-driven migrations continue to gain precedence in international
dialogues. While anthropologists have long been interested in relationships
between episodes of migration and large social transformations, few have
considered the diversity of ways the actions and lives of individual agents
shape these broad social movements. How do diverse migrants differentially
respond to their new social and political environments, and how do their
responses in turn shape new social and political transformations? Archaeology is
particularly well placed to provide insight because it can contextualize the
long-term effects of increasing human mobility and population interaction today
in the study of prehistoric migrations spanning over hundreds or even thousands
of years.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Using innovative biogeochemical analyses, this
project addresses the long-term social transformations triggered by the actions
of diverse individuals living within the prehistoric south central Andes. The
research will be conducted at the site of Omo M10 in the Moquegua Valley of
southern Peru. Omo M10 was at the center of a system of colonies established by
the early expansive Tiwanaku (AD 700-1050) state and marks a unique region of
interaction between contemporaneous Tiwanaku, Wari, and coastal polities. This
interdisciplinary research will use bioarchaeological (sex and age at death
estimates, paleopathology, cranial modification practices, diet, and funerary
rituals) and biogeochemical (isotopic analyses) evidence to reconstruct the
residential mobility and community affiliations of several migrant groups
interred at Omo M10. The isotopic analysis of multiple dental and skeletal
elements from each of 152 individuals will allow this project to reconstruct the
residential mobility of these individuals throughout their lives. This fine-
grained temporal control is inaccessible through traditional lines of
archaeological evidence. The researchers will result in the training of a group
of Peruvian and American undergraduate university students in the
interdisciplinary biogeochemical and osteological methods employed, promoting
future international collaborations and contributing to the participation of
underrepresented groups in science. This project will significantly alter
current understandings of early South American complex polities. Further, the
innovative interdisciplinary approach employed provides future researchers with
the tools necessary to identify the significance of individual actors in large
scale and long-term social transformations.