* 1542974
* PFI:AIR - TT:  Robust and Selective Catalysts Based on Organic-Functionalized Delaminated Zeolites
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2015,05/31/2018
* Alexander Katz, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 05/31/2018
* USD 243,129.00

This PFI:AIR TT project focuses on translating catalyst materials science
research discovery within the area of delaminated zeolites to fill society's
need for more environmentally friendly and economically efficient production of
chemical products. Functionalized delaminated zeolite catalysts are important
because they can result in significant savings in energy due to their higher
efficiency and longer lifetime, ease of catalyst recovery, and recycling during
processing. These catalysts also aim to replace toxic reagents, which can harm
the environment when leaked in the case of an accident, with catalysts that are
environmentally benign and pose minimal danger of leakage due to their solid
nature. All of these reasons ultimately result in cost savings for the
production of key chemical intermediates that go into everyday products such as
plastic containers, coatings, and paints. The project will result in a proof-of-
concept prototype of an organically functionalized delaminated zeolite material,
which can function as a robust catalyst for chemical industry. This
functionalized delaminated zeolite has the following unique features: resistance
to leaching, high activity and selectivity in producing a desired product
outcome of a chemical reaction, and long lifetime with minimal deactivation.
These features provide cost savings, energy efficiency, and minimal
environmental impact, corrosion, and toxicity, when compared to the leading
competing industrial catalysts in this market space.

This project addresses the following technology gaps as it translates from
research discovery toward commercial application. The research specifically
develops structure-function relationships involving catalysis on surfaces. An
understanding of how heteroatom environment influences catalyst activity and
selectivity within the context of delaminated zeolites is provided, which is an
emerging area for this new class of robust solid catalysts. The research also
investigates catalytic effects of confinement within the context of
2-dimensional layered zeolitic structures, a developing frontier that is
distinct conceptually from conventional 3-dimensional confinement within bulk
zeolite structures. In addition, personnel involved in this project, graduates
and post-docs, will receive innovation and technology translation experiences as
part of entrepreneurship activities, and as part of a team that is geared to
conduct the work of this proposal and further technology in the area towards
commercialization.

The project engages industrial partners who are leaders in the production of
chemical products, by aiming to synthesize new materials that will better serve
their needs by decreasing the cost and environmental impact of such production.
These partners will augment research capability by providing testing of new
materials under industrially relevant environments, which will be used to guide
the technology translation effort from research discovery toward commercial
reality.