* 1542820
* Conference on the Ecology and Evolution of Infectious Diseases 2015; Athens, Georgia, May 26-29, 2015
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2015,10/31/2015
* Sonia Altizer, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 10/31/2015
* USD 6,000.00

This award will support participation in the 13th annual conference on the
Ecology and Evolution of Infectious Diseases, to be held May 26-29 in Athens,
GA, USA. This year?s conference focuses on predicting and controlling infectious
disease outbreaks that are directly relevant to human health, the safety of our
food supply, and to the conservation of biological diversity. The five major
themes of the conference are: (1) the dynamics of neglected tropical diseases,
(2) the interface between infectious disease ecology and the social sciences
(economics, policy, human behavior), (3) within-host dynamics and evolution, (4)
the macroecology of infectious diseases, and (5) the dynamics and control of
Ebola virus. Shifts in the prevalence, host range and geographic distribution of
infectious diseases, as a result of ecological, anthropogenic or evolutionary
change, are an ongoing challenge for human health and natural ecosystems.
Scientists have focused extensive attention on the processes driving infectious
disease spread within populations, yet crucial processes operating at other
scales of organization, ranging from molecular and cellular interactions within
hosts to biological diversity within ecosystems also determine infectious
disease outcomes and distributions. This conference explores both small- and
large-scale mechanisms that underlie infectious disease spread and emergence,
and considers how these factors can point towards control strategies for
pathogens that threaten human health, agriculture, and natural ecosystems. The
conference especially encourages student participation by keeping student
registration fees to a minimum, thus allowing graduate students and
undergraduates to participate, meet leading scientists in the field, and network
with each other. A minimum of 70 students will present their work in the form of
a poster presentation or oral talk, thus communicating their research plans and
findings to a relevant audience, and will obtain crucial feedback on their work.
The conference will feature a special lunch session on careers in disease
ecology, especially designed to allow students and post-doctoral scholars the
opportunity to meet and ask questions of researchers and professionals in fields
beyond academic science, including government agencies and science writing and
communication.