* 1542695
* I-Corps: Software and Services to Enable Metabolic Flux Analysis
* TIP,TI
* 05/15/2015,10/31/2016
* Jamey Young, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* lydia mcclure
* 10/31/2016
* USD 50,000.00

Metabolic flux analysis (MFA) allows for the determination of biochemical
reaction rates inside of living cells, which are otherwise impossible to measure
directly. Similar to how Google Maps reports traffic flows within highway
networks, MFA can identify cellular pathway bottlenecks (roadblocks) and
wasteful metabolic processes (detours) within biochemical networks. This
information can be used to engineer improved production systems (e.g., host
organisms and/or cultivation platforms) for use in industrial bioprocesses or
agriculture. The MFA technology can also be used in biomedical research to
identify potential therapeutic targets or diagnostic biomarkers for metabolic
diseases. However, most companies do not have the necessary expertise to assess
their measurements using MFA due to the sophisticated computational algorithms
and data analysis required. At its simplest, the proposed project seeks to
broaden the use of advanced metabolic engineering software and techniques
developed in the PI?s laboratory for applications in the biotechnology and
pharmaceutical industries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Metabolic flux analysis (MFA) is
a complex analysis technique that encompasses molecular biology, chemistry,
biochemistry, cell biology, plant physiology, mathematics, computer science, and
engineering. The proposed approach to MFA will be rigorous because this team
aims to capture as much information as possible from the available measurements
that companies can obtain from their experimental system. Because of this, the
immediate impacts within an organization will be an increase in the quality of
the science performed. This I-Corps team aims to lead by example by creating
testable hypotheses, validating its assumptions, accounting for all sources of
error, and analyzing data with attention to detail. MFA, coupled with the
proposed approach, has the potential to change for the better how companies
perform metabolic engineering. Improved methodologies to assess cellular
metabolism have the potential to drive tremendous advances in not just
manufacturing efficiency, which is useful for everything from biofuels
production to food production, but also for drug discovery and therapeutic
applications in metabolic diseases such as cancer or diabetes.