* 1542922
* Track 2: CS10K: BJC-STARS: Scaling CS Principles through STARS community &amp; leadership development
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2022
* Tiffany Barnes, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Allyson Kennedy
* 09/30/2022
* USD 599,999.00

North Carolina State University proposes BJC-STARS, a CS10K proposal to broaden
access to computing education through engaging colleges and universities to
prepare and support regional communities of high school teachers to teach the
Beauty and Joy of Computing (BJC) Computer Science Principles course. The effort
leverages the STARS Alliance and community to engage new college faculty to
support and recognize high school BJC teachers as change agents who bring about
educational reform, and to provide them with tiered mentoring and
support.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BJC-STARS synthesizes the STARS leadership
development, tiered mentoring, and community building models with the BJC
curriculum and professional development to develop a nationwide community of
universities to support the adoption of CS Principles in schools. Each summer NC
State will conduct a 5-day intensive BJC-STARS professional development (PD)
workshop and BJC-STARS training. The BJC-STARS training will prepare college
faculty from the STARS network and experienced BJC high school teachers to lead
BJC-STARS PD in small clusters with 1 faculty mentor, 1 teacher-leader, and 5
new HS teachers. The BJC-STARS PD will build on the pillars of CS content,
inquiry, equity, community, and leadership, engaging participants as teachers,
learners, and observers. The participants will practice BJC content, develop
pedagogical content knowledge and lesson plans, devise effective recruiting and
retention strategies for women and underrepresented minorities, work with one
another to solve problems and learn CS content, and reflect upon the experience
and how it can be translated to the classroom.