* 1542950
* Development of an Air-droppable Goedetic-seismic Ice Penetrator for Response Studies of Antarctic Ice Shelves and Icebergs to Ocean Forcings
* GEO,OPP
* 03/15/2016,02/28/2019
* Jeffrey Hoffman, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Michael E. Jackson
* 02/28/2019
* USD 269,995.00

Title: Development of an air-droppable geodetic-seismic ice penetrator for
response studies of Antarctic ice shelves and icebergs to ocean
forcings&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical abstract:&lt;br/&gt;The stability of
the entire Antarctic glacial system depends critically on the stability of its
ice shelves. Antarctic ice shelves, the ocean-floating margins of the massive
Antarctic ice sheet, are showing signs of rapid decline. Ice shelf decay leads
to increased discharge of grounded-ice to the ocean, and to mean sea-level rise.
Ice shelf disintegration would drive the continental Antarctic ice sheet, in
particular the West Antarctica section, to eventual collapse. Ocean waves may
provide the tipping force necessary to trigger the failure of a thinned,
mechanically weakened ice shelf. Monitoring how the ice shelves are responding
to changing oceanic and atmospheric conditions is critically needed, but
obtaining such measurements is technologically and logistically challenging.
This award supports the development of novel technologies that can meet the
challenge.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical abstract:&lt;br/&gt;The project aims
to address the observational gap that exists in Antarctic ice-shelf glaciology
for timescales shorter than the few-day ice-fields provided by satellite geodesy
and imagery. Through these efforts, a new scientific instrument will be devised
and prototyped that closes the gap into the high-frequency (from monthly to sub-
seconds) domain where ice shelves respond dynamically to oceanic forcings. This
will be accomplished by integrating state-of-the-art GPS and seismometer sensors
into a single broadband scientific instrument with data download capabilities in
near-real time. This scientific device will be packaged into an ice penetrator
that can be air-dropped onto an ice shelf (and tabular icebergs) from a
helicopter. The technology readiness of this geodetic-seismic ice penetrator
(GSIP) will be assessed based on verification of performance of a functional
prototype through both laboratory and field trials. Having continuous, high-
resolution GSIP observations of Antarctic ice shelves would provide meaningful
constraints to Antarctic ice-shelf decay models, and contribute to an improved
understanding of ice-ocean dynamic interactions. GSIPs would greatly simplify
logistic challenges by expediting deployment, reduce the on-ice footprint in
Antarctica, enhance current capabilities for in situ glaciological observations,
and benefit the broader polar community.