* 1542770
* FEW NSF Workshop: Closing the Human Phosphorus Cycle
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2015,12/31/2017
* James Elser, University of Hawaii at Hilo
* Standard Grant
* Lin He
* 12/31/2017
* USD 87,873.00

The Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program of the Division of
Chemistry is sponsoring this workshop entitled "FEW NSF Workshop: Closing the
Human Phosphorus Cycle" to be held on June 8-9, 2015 in Arlington, Virginia.
Phosphorus is an element that is essential to all life. The human body contains
phosphorus concentrated largely in bones and teeth and in essential
biomolecules, including DNA (genetic materials), phospholipids (a major
component of cell membranes) and ATP (for energy transport in cells). To build
and maintain these materials, humans must ingest at least 0.7 g of phosphorus
each day. Importantly, phosphorus is also essential for crops and livestocks and
thus large amounts of phosphorus have been mobilized to raise soil fertility.
However, great uncertainty surrounds current estimates of phosphate rock
reserves. Ironically, while concerns about phosphorus scarcity have been
increasing in recent years, so have concerns about the accumulation of human
waste and farm-derived fertilizer that stimulates the growth of algae, including
toxic forms that contaminates our drinking water supplies. Prof. Matthew Platz
(University of Hawaii at Hilo) and Prof. James J. Elser (Arizona State
University) co-organize a workshop to advance scalable science and engineering
that will define the underlying science that must be advanced to facilitate more
efficient phosphorus use in food production, as well as economically viable
recovery and recycling of phosphorus at various points in the food system. The
benefits of success of this workshop, and the funding and implementation of the
research agenda so defined, are enormous: fertilizer food security for the 9-10
billion people expected to inhabit the earth later this century and the
protection of freshwater ecosystems necessary for their water
supply.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of the title workshop are to facilitate
the interactions and collaborations of chemists with life-, geo- and social
scientists and engineers and define interdisciplinary research opportunities for
scientists who wish to explore the nexus of food, water and energy as it applies
to the critical issue of closing the phosphorous cycle. The specific objectives
of the workshop include developing a trans-disciplinary understanding of
fundamental chemical processes that transpire in soils, sediments, water
systems, plants and animals and constitute the pathways of phosphorous
utilization and disposal within nature; brainstorming about ways to design,
synthesize and evaluate new chemicals and materials that can sense phosphate
ions and that can sequester and release phosphate ions on demand; and deciding
upon how the stakeholder scientific disciplines (physical sciences, geologic
sciences, engineering, life sciences and social sciences) can collaborate on
computational, experimental, and data mining approaches to solving research
problems.