* 1542731
* P3: Producing Native American PhDs and Professors in Engineering
* ENG,EEC
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2020
* Mounir El Asmar, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Dana L. Denick
* 12/31/2020
* USD 337,651.00

This project is seeking to increase the participation of Native Americans within
the engineering professoriate through better understanding of how and why Native
American engineering students choose to pursue (or not) an academic career path.
The project will address this issue from an institutional perspective,
elucidating the motivations for and barriers to Native American student
recruitment and Native American faculty hiring. Nationwide, the numbers of
Native American engineering faculty are extremely small. According to ASEE data
(2012) there were approximately 60 faculty who identified as Native American
over all ranks out of a total population of over 25,000. There is significant
attrition in the student numbers from undergraduate to graduate education
levels. By documenting barriers and catalysts for these students pursuit of
doctoral degrees, this project will significantly enhance the ability to
increase the diversity of engineering faculties, providing visible role models
for Native American students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, this project
will use case studies and interviews to identify and document the impediments
that prevent Native American students from earning advanced degrees. A similar
qualitative analysis will help understand why students who do earn graduate
degrees do not pursue faculty careers. They will create a replicable program
model consisting of recruitment workshops to increase awareness of, and
preparation for engineering undergraduate and graduate studies. Additionally
they will develop and implement a mentorship program pairing Native American
doctoral students with a trio of mentors that will support their professional
development and successful transition to an academic career. The mentoring
program is particularly strong as it incorporates an assistant professor, a full
professor and a tribal community mentor who has earned an advanced degree. The
intellectual merit of this project lies in its ability to improve understanding
of how to increase the participation of Native Americans on engineering
faculties. An ethnically diverse faculty provides a stronger and richer learning
environment for all students. The broader impact of this project is in its
outreach to Native American students, both pre-college and undergraduate, to
increase their knowledge and preparation for engineering studies.