* 1542256
* I-Corps: Photodynamic Cancer Therapy Innovation
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Matthew Gdovin, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* lydia mcclure
* 05/31/2016
* USD 50,000.00

Triple Negative Breast Cancer (TNBC) represents one of the most aggressive,
deadly forms of breast cancer, and because this cancer lacks estrogen,
progesterone, and Human Epidermal Growth Factor (HER-2) receptors, many existing
pharmacological treatments have a limited effect on patient survival. The
proposed innovation aims to address the lack of targeted therapies for effective
treatment of TNBC, as the lack of an efficient targeted approach represents a
significant barrier for patients diagnosed with TNBC. Because TNBC responds so
poorly to chemotherapy, a mastectomy is often performed to increase overall
survival. The proposed innovation may eliminate the need for mastectomy.
Potential customers include physicians, health care administrators, and
patients. In addition to oncologists that would prescribe our treatment,
customers would also include people who influence the decision to use the
proposed treatment. These customers would include health care providers.

Induction of intracellular acidosis via photo uncaging of protons has until not
been pursued as a technique for inflicting damage to cells. Releasing
significant concentrations of hydrogen ions causes variable disruption to
biological systems, and can be used to cause apoptotic cell death in a focal
region such as within a tumor. This fundamental alteration to cells
intracellular pH is almost impossible to garner a resistance toward, has been
shown to be highly effective in causing significant cancer cell death in vitro
and in vivo, has an acutely focal effect providing limitless potential for
specific cell targeting using a recently developed pH-inducing photodynamic
nanoparticle, and is an abundant and relatively inexpensive chemical compound.
The commercial viability of this intellectual property has tremendous potential,
as the mechanisms of action employed in causing significant death of TNBC cells
in vitro and in vivo is not cancer specific. If developed and entered into the
market, the proposed intracellular acidosis anti-cancer technique has the
potential to rival or surpass current chemotherapeutic, radiation, or surgical
methods of cancer treatment. This I-Corps team intends to establish the current
unmet needs of all principals in the TNBC treatment space, specifically
oncologists, hospital administrators, pharmaceutical companies, patients, and
FDA regulators. The team will also identify needs for pharmacokinetic and
pharmacodynamics studies. At the end of the project this team will draft a
business plan which will include a mission statement, objectives, keys to
success, products and services, management plan, market analysis to include
customers, pricing, competition, and delivery, and measurable milestones of
progress.