* 1542954
* Research on the Development of Computational and Systems Thinking in Middle School Students through Explorations of Complex Earth Systems
* EHR,DRL
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2020
* Gillian Puttick, TERC Inc
* Standard Grant
* Arlene de Strulle
* 08/31/2020
* USD 1,898,239.00

Computing has been a central tool in the development of modern understanding in
many fields of science, technology, engineering and math (STEM). Skills such as
modeling, data visualization, and computational thinking are all necessary for
building a diverse scientific workforce that will secure a strong future for the
United States. As a result, NSF's STEM+Computing Partnership (STEM+C) program
seeks to integrate the use of computational approaches in K-12 STEM teaching and
learning. TERC, Inc., in collaboration with Northeastern University and the
cambridge, Newton, and Lowell, Massachusetts Public School Districts, will
develop and study an education program that integrates computing into middle
school Earth systems science by interweaving computational skills development
into science game design and science content learning. The project aims to
develop skills among diverse groups of young people in two crucial fields
central to national interest and safety. More importantly, the project will
bring these two fields together to create a learning environment in which young
people learn thinking from a systems perspective, essential to solving complex
scientific problems. The project will contribute to practical models for
developing science content learning and computer skills, creating positive
attitudes toward science, and broadening participation in the sciences among
middle school students in diverse settings. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Building
Systems from Scratch project will develop, implement, and study an innovative
intervention that integrates computing into an 8-week Earth systems curriculum
and supporting resources. The program will include: a) a standards-aligned
curriculum focused on systems thinking practices, b) a 52-hour hybrid
online/face-to-face teacher professional development workshop with supporting
materials, c) a teacher leader guide for sustainable implementation of the
program, and d) a website to support program materials, activities, and
communication. Specifically, as students build their own science content games,
they will engage in computational practices such as modeling, abstraction,
management of complexity, and creative design, as well as iterative testing and
debugging. The project seeks to understand how and what young people learn when
they engage in interdisciplinary learning in technology-rich environments. It
further seeks to understand how curricular structural supports influence student
learning and self-efficacy. The project will address specific needs of middle
school students and teachers with regard to relevant disciplinary content,
science practices, and computation as specified in Next Generation Science
Standards and Computer Science Standards. The project will be working with
fifteen 8th grade teachers in three Massachusetts school districts across three
years, reaching approximately 1,840 8th grade students, over half of whom are
from groups underrepresented in STEM and computer science fields.