* 1542377
* Grand Challenges for Engineering Focused RET with Stratified Teams
* ENG,EEC
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2020
* Laura Bottomley, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Amelia Greer
* 08/31/2020
* USD 682,235.00

This Research Experiences for Teachers (RET) in Engineering and Computer Science
Site at North Carolina State University (NCSU)will focus on understanding the
role stratified teaming plays on teacher professional development and eventual
learning of students in the K-12 learning environment. Previous research on
teaming for undergraduate engineering students, graduate students and teachers
has shown dichotomous effects for each participant. In addition to the
traditional products of an RET Site, which include classroom activities and
techniques linked to cutting edge research that can be taken to the K-12
clasroom, this RET will also inform the body of knowledge concerning
partnerships between K-12 schools and universities. The project research will
enumerate the types and depth of effects on each of the six different
constituents of the teams: K-12 teachers, pre-service teachers, community
college faculty, undergraduate engineering students, graduate students in
engineering and university faculty.

The project is a collaborative effort between NCSU College of Engineering and
the University of North Carolina at Charlotte (UNCC). It will target a total of
36 in-service teachers from Durham and Charlotte-Mecklenburg County Public
Schools and pre-service teachers from the Colleges of Education at NCSU and UNCC
over three years. A team consisting of a K-12 teacher, a community college STEM
faculty member, a pre-service teacher and an engineering undergraduate student
will participate in an intensive six week summer research experience in the
laboratory of a partnering engineering faculty member. Research topics will be
focused on one of four sub areas of the Grand Challenges of Engineering:
sustainability (solar energy), health (biomechanics), security (computer network
security), and joy of living (aerospace engineering). Local industry will serve
as both partners and participants in the program. The goals of the Site are to:
1) Create positive benefits for each participant (increased STEM efficacy for
teachers, improved classroom technique for both teachers and faculty, increased
engineering efficacy for undergraduate engineering students and enhanced
retention); 2) Research the impact of participation in the RET on each
participant as they return to their native environment; and 3) Discover elements
of stratified team design that are most efficacious in meeting the above goals
to inform the design of future RET programs.