* 1542807
* EFRI 2-DARE: Quantum Optoelectronics, Magnetoelectronics and Plasmonics in 2-Dimensional Materials Heterostructures
* ENG,EFMA
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Efthimios Kaxiras, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 08/31/2019
* USD 2,099,986.00

Nontechnical Description: Design and engineering the properties of matter at the
atomic level is a new frontier in materials research that seeks to revolutionize
applications employing quantum devices. Examples include electronic and
optoelectronic devices with improved power and bandwidth performance, which can
enable high performance electronics, photonics, and efficient communications.
This vision has received a boost by the discovery of truly two-dimensional
materials, such as graphene, metal dichalcogenides, boron nitride, and their
combinations. These structures provide a compelling material platform for basic
research and applications. Because the two-dimensional materials reach the
ultimate limit of thinness, being essentially one atom thick, they require new
ways of synthesis and assembly into practical devices and they offer new
challenges to our understanding of fundamental and practical aspects of physics
in two dimensions. This research team focuses on fundamental understanding of
the science of atomically thin materials and their stacked structures, seeking
discoveries of novel physical phenomena and exploring new device concepts. The
team also works on education and outreach projects, supporting undergraduates
and public school teachers. Through these research and educational projects,
graduate students and undergraduates are educated in a highly interdisciplinary
environment. The team also develops an active outreach partnership with the
Museum of Science, Boston, to promote public awareness of science and technology
at the nanoscale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: The research focus
of this interdisciplinary team is on the demonstration of new techniques for
designing and assembling two-dimensional van der Waals heterostructures and the
fundamental study of novel emergent properties of these quantum
heterostructures. Through this research, scientists and engineers in this team
develop characterization tools and innovate electronic, plasmonic and optical
devices based on various quantum behaviors, such as resonant tunneling. They
explore new modalities for tunable continuous-wave terahertz generation and
gate-modulation of optical and optoelectronic properties. The research team also
investigates the microscopic electronic and magnetic properties of atomically
thin heterostructures and develops multi-scale modeling of layered
heterostructure devices. The formation of interfaces of unconventional low-
dimensional materials systems and engineering of their electronic,
optoelectronic and magnetic properties, carried out by this interdisciplinary
team, leads to new device paradigms.