* 1542864
* EFRI 2DARE: Thermal Transport in 2D Materials for Next Generation Nanoelectronics- From Fundamentals to Devices
* ENG,EFMA
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2020
* Robert Klie, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Alias Smith
* 07/31/2020
* USD 2,107,942.00

Computers and other current microelectronic devices based on silicon technology
contain central processing units that produce excess heat while performing
calculations and other tasks. This thermal energy migrates to the surface of the
silicon chip and is dissipated by fans or other means (e.g., fluid cooling).
However, as engineers seek to increase the transistor count per chip for greater
computer power, silicon technology reaches its limit, and a different base
material with a different hardware architecture will be needed. Recently, sheets
of material have been developed which are only one atomic layer thick and which
may function as semiconductors (transition metal dichalcogenides), conductors
(graphene), or insulators (boron nitride)?the main elements of any electronic
device. Transistors have already been developed by stacking these different
atomic layers. However, the power density and tendency for such devices to
overheat increase dramatically at such a small scale. Therefore, no practical
devices from these materials will be possible until the physics of heat transfer
at this scale is better understood and the heat dissipation problem is solved.
This proposal seeks to comprehensively study the thermal transport dynamics of
stacks of atomic layers of semiconductors, conductors, and insulators
representative of future nano-electronic devices. The multidisciplinary team
consists of a mechanical engineer, an electrical engineer, a chemist, and two
physicists from three different universities. Each university has special
programs for involving undergraduate and underrepresented minority students in
research. The investigators will engage PhD students and undergraduate minority
students as well as high school students in this combined experimental and
theoretical study aimed at benefiting society through the development of a
comprehensive picture of the dominant contributions and limitations of heat
transport in future 2D devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary goal of this
proposal is to provide the community with a deeper understanding of the limits
set by the kinetics of dissipation and heat removal through various junctions
and interfaces in two-dimensional heterogeneous materials. The team aims to
establish a multiscale thermal transport study through a closely coupled
combination of material synthesis and device-level experiments, atomic-level
characterization, thermal transport and phonon spectroscopy, theoretical
modelling, and computational studies. Transformative synthesis/fabrication
methods, such as chemical vapor deposition and atomic layer deposition, will be
used to produce hetero-structures of interest as fundamental components of any
electronic devices. The in-plane and out-of-plane thermal conductivity of the
synthesized structures will be measured using a custom-designed electrical
thermometry platform. The length scale dependence of thermal conductivity and
the mean free path (MFP) distribution of heat-carrying phonons will also be
measured by heterodyne transient grating technique. In-situ scanning thermal
microscopy characterization will be performed to study self-heating of selected
semiconducting 2D materials at their contact metal electrodes under high-power
operational conditions. Atomic-resolution scanning transmission electron
microscopy will be used to characterize 2D material interfaces and surfaces.
Characterization results will guide molecular dynamics simulations to predict
the atomic structures of interfaces and grain boundaries and to quantify the
effects of small-scale structural variations on thermal transport properties of
the materials. Thermal transport, including the full spectrum of phonon MFPs,
will be calculated using the phonon Boltzmann transport equations including
intrinsic phonon scattering as well as scattering at interfaces. The simulation
results and Boltzmann transport calculations of phonon MFP distributions will be
benchmarked against the transient grating measurements and device level data to
develop a predictive model for thermal dissipation in 2D heterogeneous
materials. The proposed research has a transformative potential and is of high
relevance across many research fields. The broader impacts of this work will be
significant in enabling the design of new classes of 2D heterogeneous materials
for future electronics/optoelectronics from a thermal management perspective.