* 1542736
* Automated, High Resolution Terrain Generation for XSEDE
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2018
* Karen Tomko, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Michael E. Jackson
* 07/31/2018
* USD 400,000.00

A significant body of high resolution satellite imagery has been made available
to the scientific community, which has the potential to transform Earth science
research. While these data are freely available, they are not in a form that an
average user can access. This project will use high performance computing
facilities and new software to convert images to a format that is more easily
accessible to researchers and the public. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Access to high
resolution (sub-meter scale) commercial imagery through NSF-sponsored research
centers is driving a revolution in Earth observation, redefining what can be
measured from space. Currently, however, there is no efficient system for
producing and distributing Digital Elevation Models (DEMs) from the vast amount
of archived imagery, and this impedes utilization by the polar research
community. This project will establish a service for on-demand polar DEM
production and distribution utilizing the XSEDE High Performance Computing
framework and the NSF-funded Polar Geospatial Center (PGC) data services. The
PGC holds a large and rapidly-growing archive of sub-meter WorldView
stereoscopic satellite imagery covering the globe from which high resolution
DEMs can be extracted and openly distributed at no cost. Enabling on-demand
generation of high resolution and precise DEMs at no cost will offer a powerful
new capability for a wide spectrum of scientific, engineering and planning
activities. This project will support both graduate and undergraduate education
in high performance scientific computing and will create Earth science datasets
of high educational value.