* 1542727
* RAPID: Response to the MTBE Spill, Port of Houston, Texas, March 2015
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Kevin Finneran, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* William Cooper
* 05/31/2016
* USD 49,991.00

1542727&lt;br/&gt;Finneran&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;On March 9 two ships collided in
the Port of Houston shipping lane. The Carla Maersk, which was carrying 216,000
barrels of methyl tertiary-butyl ether (MTBE), was ruptured and an estimated
200,000 gallons of MTBE leaked into the Port of Houston. MTBE is extremely water
soluble, and visible sheens were absent within a day or two. Therefore, the
"surface response" of placing hydrophobic oil skimming booms did not contain the
MTBE, and a large volume likely diluted and dispersed within the channel. It is
unlikely that standard "oil spill" responses will attenuate MTBE, and this
research will provide the Port of Houston stakeholders with data to assist in
the short and long term response.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broad objective of
the proposed work is to characterize how the microbial community responds to
MTBE contamination in marine sediment, and to identify specific microbial
processes that will attenuate MTBE with or without engineering intervention.
This is the first time a spill can be tracked from its inception, and the data
will assist in all future efforts related to both MTBE remediation and high
volume spill response. The specific objectives are to: 1) use metagenomic
sequencing and high throughput 16S rRNA gene sequencing to determine both the
shifts in microbial populations, as well as microbial activity related to the
MTBE spill, and 2) quantify the native MTBE attenuation rates, and identify
processes that can increase the rate and extent of biodegradation. These
objectives will be met by testing the following hypotheses: 1) The microbial
community will shift in response to MTBE and be dominated by operable taxonomic
units previously identified in MTBE-degrading enrichment cultures and sediment
incubations; and, 2) Sulfate-reducing microorganisms will dominate all MTBE
degrading microbial reactions. The research will use high throughput sequencing
of microbial DNA extracted from marine sediment in the Port of Houston to
characterize the shift amongst microbial populations as they respond to MTBE
contamination. In addition, the PI will use standard anoxic batch incubations to
determine the rate and extent of MTBE degradation, and the projected pathway of
biodegradation by analyzing known intermediates such as tert-butyl alcohol and
tert-butyl formate. All anoxic incubation techniques have been previously
reported and will be standard anoxic, glass serum bottles sealed with a butyl
rubber stopper and sampled with anoxic-gas flushed syringe and needle setups.
The proposed activity will be felt at the responder and practitioner levels.
These data can and will be used to assist all future engineering responses to
large MTBE spills. In addition, the basic scientific data can be used to
identify specific microbial populations that respond to and possibly degrade
MTBE.