* 1542982
* Development of Computing-Based Science Investigations for Middle and High School Students
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/2015,02/28/2021
* Victor Fay-Wolfe, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Monica Cardella
* 02/28/2021
* USD 2,481,605.00

Computing has become an integral part of everyday practice within modern fields
of science, technology, engineering, and mathematics. As a result, the
STEM+Computing Partnerships (STEM+C) program seeks to advance new
multidisciplinary approaches to, and evidence-based understanding of, the
integration of computing in STEM teaching and learning, and discipline-specific
efforts in computing designed to build an evidence base for teaching and
learning of computer science in K-12, including within diverse populations. This
project addresses that mission by developing and testing computing-based science
investigations for an Advanced Placement (AP) Computer Science Principles
course, and for additional learning modules for use by teachers and students in
middle school and high school not engaged in AP courses. The project will be
implemented through a state-wide network of schools in Rhode Island having
diverse student populations, and will provide professional development
experiences for teachers in participating schools. The learning modules to be
developed will integrate use of data and observations with computing to create
conceptual models that simulate or predict natural phenomena, such as
earthquakes, coastal resiliency, trends in the spread of infectious diseases,
bioaccumulation of toxins in fish, the incidence of radon in homes, or other
phenomena associated with emerging societal issues. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
design and development project will develop at least six proof-of-concept
computing-based scientific investigations for use in science or computing
classes. The investigations will each be grounded in the core science fields
(life sciences, physical sciences, or Earth and space sciences), but the content
and implications of the learning modules will span a broad range of
interdisciplinary topics that focus on societal issues or potential hazards that
require behavioral or engineering solutions. Each topic will require students to
access data from science or engineering publications, or from national data
archives maintained by agencies such as NASA, NIH, NOAA, or USGS, and
incorporate these data into the development or testing of their conceptual or
computer models of natural phenomena. The investigations will be aligned with
performance expectations advocated by the Next Generation Science Standards for
disciplinary core ideas, crosscutting concepts, and science and engineering
practices. Research questions for the project will focus on student and teacher
skills in using computational thinking to understand, learn, or teach; the
influence of computational thinking on attitudes toward science, engineering,
and computing; and factors influencing the learning and teaching of
computational thinking. The learning modules to be developed will first be
piloted within AP courses having diverse student populations at three Career and
Technical Centers, with subsequent implementations in schools throughout the
collaboration network. Data for project research and evaluation activities will
be gathered from higher education partners, assessments embedded within the
investigation activities themselves, and classroom surveys and assessments.