* 1542970
* Track 2 EBP: Toward Using Virtual Identities in Computer Science Learning for Broadening Participation
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2015,12/31/2018
* D. Fox Harrell, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Fay Cobb Payton
* 12/31/2018
* USD 599,941.00

This research examines the role of virtual identities in students' learning core
computational principles. Women and many ethnic minority groups are
underrepresented in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM)
professions in the United States. Increasingly, computational skills are
required for entry into any of the STEM fields. Identifying effective and
innovative means of teaching computational skills is a critical contribution to
this national challenge. This research builds on the evidence that stereotype
threats can undermine the learning process for women and ethnic minorities.
Using computer science learning software developed at MIT with previous NSF
funding, this work examines the role that virtual identities can play in
improving student learning in computer science specifically and broadening
participation in the field generally.

This project uses computational and qualitative methods to study the roles that
virtual identities, avatars, can play in students' learning computer science. It
centers on three core operational pillars: 1) deployment of a computer science
learning intervention for diverse middle and high school students that draws on
students' sociocultural identities and generative themes to agitate awareness of
core concepts, problem solving and thinking in topics including critical
sections of Exploring Computer Science; 2) characterization of the relationship
between students' virtual identities and their actual sociocultural identities
to develop a taxonomy of virtual identity types and a rubric for describing how
students use and relate to their virtual identities; and 3) identification of
the impacts of different avatar types on students' performance.