* 1542228
* RET Site: The Advanced Vehicle Technology Research Experiences for Teachers in Engineering and Computer Science (AVT RET)
* ENG,EEC
* 09/15/2015,05/31/2019
* Brian Fabien, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Mary Poats
* 05/31/2019
* USD 718,275.00

This Research Experiences for Teachers (RET) in Engineering and Computer Science
Site at the University of Washington (UW) involves elementary and middle school
science and mathematics teachers from King County in south Seattle in intensive
six-week summer multidisciplinary and cutting edge research experiences on
environmental sustainabile and green advanced vehicle technology, professional
development, and academic year collaborations. The RET Site involves a
partnership between UW faculty in the College of Engineering (CoE) and the
Institute for Systems Biology's Logan Center for Education (ISB LCE) in program
development and implementation. Teachers participate in three research projects
in of advanced vehicle technology (AVT) that include energy storage system
design and integration, hardware and software-in-the-loop simulation and
testing, Human-Machine Interfacing (HMI) for infotainment and displays, vehicle
connectivity and embedded control systems, powertrain component bench testing,
use of vehicle modeling and simulation tools, and improving aerodynamics. The
RET participants gain first-hand experience in the use of experimental and Maker
space tools, as well as create pedagogically appropriate curriculum enhancements
that align with the Next Generation Science Standards (NGSS) Engineering
Disciplinary Core Ideas (DCI), Practices, and Concepts. The program impacts two
areas that are of direct interest to the United States and the world: increasing
access for K-12 teachers and their students to a deeper understanding of the
STEM disciplines, research, and career opportunities; and inspiring teachers and
students to pursue engineering careers.

Over a three-year period this RET Site offers an intensive summer research and
academic year program for a total of 30 upper elementary and middle school
(grades 4-8) STEM teachers from the south Seattle area. The targeted school
districts are in the Community Center for Educational Results Road Map Project
region, which encompasses King County's most concentrated areas of resource
challenged student population with a high need of STEM education opportunities.
The RET Site leverages the ongoing multidisciplinary EcoCAR 3 program for the
energy efficient design of vehicles. Key features of the program include: 1)
Direct supervision of projects and course material development by UW College of
Engineering and Institute for Systems Biology's Logan Center for Education
faculty mentors and graduate students; 2)Involvement of RET teachers and their
students in timely, cutting-edge research projects in green and sustainable
advanced vehicle technology that are translated into engineering curriculum
enhancements; 3) Academic year program in which teachers engage with UW CoE
students and faculty, industry mentors, and ISB LCE education professionals
through monthly teleconferences and quarterly meetings to implement curriculum
enhancements in classrooms and disseminate enhancements via local, state, and
national networks 4) Recruitment of STEM teachers from high needs school
districts in the south Seattle area; and 5) Research and education activities to
strengthen teachers' engineering design and computer science knowledge and
provide them with effective pedagogical strategies that will help them translate
their research experiences into course modules that will excite their students
about engineering and align with NGSS Engineering Disciplinary Core Ideas (DCI),
Practices, and Concepts.