* 1542756
* Holocene Deglaciation of the Western Ross Embayment: Constraints from East Antarctic Outlet Glaciers
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2022
* Howard Conway, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Paul Cutler
* 07/31/2022
* USD 335,196.00

Reconstructions of past changes in thickness and extent of the Antarctic ice
sheet are important for evaluating past and present sea-level change, and for
validating numerical models necessary to make realistic predictions of changes
under future climate and ocean conditions. Models estimate that the Ross Sea
sector was one of the largest contributors to sea-level rise from Antarctica as
the ice sheet adjusted during the past ten thousand years from the glacial
period to the Holocene. In this sector, ice flow into the embayment comes
through West Antarctic ice streams and through East Antarctic outlet glaciers
that flow through the Transantarctic Mountains. Observational data constrain the
last glacial maximum and the Holocene retreat, but models are necessary to
understand the environmental conditions needed for outlet glaciers to reach
observed high stands, to fit the observed patterns of retreat, and to understand
how the contribution of ice from West Antarctica and from East Antarctica
changed over time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators will use available
geological and geophysical data in combination with forward ice-flow models and
inverse models to investigate the evolution of the four Transantarctic outlet
glaciers where sufficient data exist. The objectives of this new modeling are to
constrain the glaciological conditions necessary for these glaciers to thicken
during the last glacial, thin during the Holocene, and reach their present-day
state. By testing specific hypotheses this work contributes to an
interdisciplinary effort to understand Holocene deglaciation of the Ross Sea
Embayment. In addition, the modeling will address the resolving power of the
available data to answer key questions for each target glacier. Broader impacts
include mentoring a graduate student, public outreach, incorporation of research
into high-school and university classes, and support of an early-career
investigator.