* 1542418
* RET Site:   Collaborative Research:  Sustainable Electronics
* ENG,EEC
* 09/15/2015,07/31/2020
* Inez Hua, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Amelia Greer
* 07/31/2020
* USD 438,582.00

This Research Experiences for Teachers (RET) in Engineering and Computer Science
Site, a collaborative program between Purdue University and Tuskegee University,
will focus on providing high school STEM teachers from Indiana and Alabama with
the knowledge and skills to equip their students to become part of a
technologically adept workforce as well as informed consumers of sustainable
products. The topic of environmentally sustainable electronics provides both
context and application to many scientific and engineering principles. Each
research project will be mapped to specific high school science standards, which
will guide development of high school curricula. Environmental sustainability as
a general context should help broaden female and minority participation in
engineering.

This RET Site will offer an intensive six week summer research program for a
total of 33 high school STEM teachers, over a three year period, from school
districts in Indiana and Alabama. Working alongside the faculty and doctoral
students on research on the entire life cycle of electronics (design,
production, packaging, distribution, use and recycling/reuse), these teachers
will gain firsthand scientific knowledge of the many facets of creating
sustainable electronics. The teachers and faculty will conduct experiments on
such topics as using natural resins such as cellulose, lignin, and soy instead
of petroleum-based resins to build circuit boards, and cost effectively
recovering and reusing electronics instead of sending them to landfills. Field
trips to local electronics recycling centers and to companies that design and
make computers, cell phones and other electronic devices will provide the
participants with insight into real-world aspects of electronics. Teachers will
gain scientific proficiency in these areas and convey their new knowledge to
their STEM students, hopefully arousing interest to pursue a STEM degree and
career after graduation from high school. The teachers also will share their
experiences with peers through district, state and national conferences and
other professional development opportunities, thus helping to disseminate this
knowledge more broadly beyond just their own classrooms. Complementing the
research will be a series of professional development activities to enhance
teacher quality and support to implement new, standards-based curricula into
their science courses at their respective high schools. In addition, the project
will provide opportunities for Purdue and Tuskegee graduate students who follow
up with the teachers in their classrooms in the school year to observe firsthand
the implementation of the principles and knowledge that the graduate students
also are obtaining by working with the RET faculty on sustainable-electronics
research.