* 1542839
* INSPIRE: Exploiting Cross-Disciplinary Synergies For Efficient Perishable Commodity and Information Distribution
* CSE,CNS
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2017
* Krishna Kant, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 06/30/2017
* USD 200,000.00

This INSPIRE award is funded by the Networking Technology and Systems (NeTS) in
the Computer and Network Systems Division (CNS) in the Directorate for Computer
and Information Science and Engineering (CISE), the Chemical, Bioengineering,
Environmental, and Transport Systems (CBET) Division in the Directorate for
Engineering (ENG), and the Office of Integrative Activities.

The disciplines of commodity distribution logistics and information networking
have been studied extensively for many decades but almost exclusively in their
own domains. In the logistics area, the distribution of fresh food and other
perishable commodities is becoming critical but the perishability has not been
well integrated into the logistics. The purpose of this proposal is to expose
synergies between Perishable Commodity Distribution Networks (PCDN) and
Information Networking (IN) involving transport of delay sensitive content, and
exploit them to solve complex problems in both fields. Such a synergistic study
is particularly timely because of (a) rapid infusion of information and
communications technologies (ICT) in the logistics space, and (b) rapidly
increasing carbon footprint in both areas.

The Principal Investigators' (PIs') preliminary examination of perishable
commodity distribution and computing in general have shown a number of synergies
and inspired a number of cross-domain methods that this proposal will examine in
detail. In particular, the content centric networking (CCN) paradigm is being
actively examined in the context of next generation networks, and inspires
similar approaches for the perishable commodity distribution that the proposal
will examine. Bundling and unbundling of packages plays a crucial role in
logistics and inspires not only the examination of bundling of multiple types of
perishable commodities for higher efficiency but also bundling of contents in
data center network via optical networks that are particularly suited for bulk
data transfer. Virtualization is a well-known technique in cloud computing
systems and the project will explore it in the context of PCDN. The much higher
complexity of PCDN not only brings new challenges but also inspires more
sophisticated virtualization schemes for computing involving latency sensitive
processing. Physical constraints in logistics such as human aspects of
scheduling truck drivers and varying produce availability make the efficiency of
PCDN particularly low, estimated to be in the teens. The project not only
examines mechanisms for better accommodation of these constraints but also
examines a new data center optical networking scheme inspired by such solutions.
Finally, the proposal seeks synergies between environmental impact tradeoffs in
PCDNs (e.g., minimizing food spoilage vs. reducing empty truck miles) and data
centers (e.g., minimizing cooling vs. maximizing server usage). This research is
examining these and other issues and developing techniques for them for both
PCDN and IN.

The broader impacts of the research are the development of cross-domain
techniques that can be used for better resource efficiency in both PCDN and IN
areas. These methods have the potential to positively impact the environmental
sustainability in both of these areas. For instance, even in developed
countries, a huge percentage of fresh food (perhaps approaching 50%) is
discarded at some point in the supply chain, which has a huge environmental
impact in terms of agriculture (e.g., water, fertilizer, electricity use,
fertilizer runoff, etc.), food processing, and distribution of the food. Thus an
even small improvement in the management could result in rich environmental
dividends. The IN side also has a consistently increasing carbon footprint as
ICT is infused into all aspects of human life including physical infrastructures
and human health. Thus the efficiencies in the IN domain could also have
significant positive impact.