* 1542475
* RET Site: UC Irvine Research Opportunities for Community College Teachers (ROCCT) in Fighting Drought with Innovation
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2015,11/30/2019
* David Feldman, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Mary Poats
* 11/30/2019
* USD 600,000.00

The worsening water crisis in California comes at a time when engineers are ill
prepared to design and build civil infrastructure responsive to the challenges
that lie ahead. In this Research Experiences for Teachers (RET) in Engineering
and Computer Science Site at the University of California-Irvine (UCI),
community college engineering teachers will be immersed in a multi-disciplinary
research experience to identify and mitigate (through engineering design) human
health concerns associated with capturing, treating, and reusing dry and wet
weather urban runoff. This RET Site will: (1) contribute to the development,
implementation, and monitoring of green technology for treating and reusing
urban runoff; (2) forge new alliances between units within UCI (Engineering,
Social Ecology, Undergraduate Education), and between UCI and local community
colleges and government agencies; (3) catalyze educational innovation in
community colleges that service students from backgrounds traditionally
underrepresented in STEM fields; (4) generate new teaching modules on urban
water sustainability that utilize cutting edge pedagogical techniques designed
to create excitement about STEM education; and (5) bring UCI graduate students
into the community college classroom where they can inspire a new generation of
well-rounded engineers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over three years, 30 community
college teachers (Research Opportunities for Community College Teachers (ROCCT)
Fellows) will take part in a nine-week summer experience at UCI that integrates
hands-on research with team-based curriculum development. ROCCT Fellows will be
recruited from four local community colleges (Cypress College, Fullerton
College, Irvine Valley College, and Saddleback College) ROCCT Fellows will
conduct research in three topic areas: (1) engineering design of natural
treatment systems to remove contaminants (particles, pathogens, and nitrogen)
from urban runoff; (2) microbiological testing of urban runoff water quality
before and after treatment, including culture-based and molecular-based assays;
and (3) governance, economic, and attitudinal barriers to the harvest and use of
urban runoff for non-potable purposes in the home. These research activities
will leverage two major external resources: (1) an NSF Partnership for
International Research and Education (PIRE) funded undergraduate boot-camp on
urban water sustainability; and (2) equipment and staff at a local field
facility run by a government partner (Orange County Watersheds). The ROCCT
Fellows will translate their research experience into context-based learning
approaches that emphasize learning-by-trying activities and everyday life
applications. During one academic quarter (three months) following the summer
program, UCI graduate students will team with former ROCCT Fellows to deliver
lectures and lead field trips for community college students. The ROCCT Fellows
will present their research and curricular innovations at one or more national
conferences (American Society of Engineering Education, Frontiers of Engineering
Education Conference, and National Science Teachers Association). All aspects of
the UCI ROCCT program will undergo formative and summative evaluation.