* 1542728
* Collaborative Research: Increasing Minority Presence within Academia through Continuous Training (IMPACT)
* ENG,EEC
* 10/15/2015,09/30/2018
* Comas Haynes, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Paige Smith
* 09/30/2018
* USD 256,846.00

This broadening participation project utilizes emeriti faculty to provide
mentoring to early career engineering faculty who are from underrepresented
populations. The mentors are renowned engineering faculty who are recently
retired following successful careers in academia at the Georgia Institute of
Technology. They are matched with early career faculty from various institutions
based on their areas of technical expertise. It is believed that the mentors can
provide advocacy for the junior faculty in three specific areas critical to the
success of faculty in STEM fields: networking within the technical community,
highlighting and advertising the junior faculty members' scholarly research
contributions, and coaching on how to successfully navigate their academic
career. This project is unique in that it goes beyond traditional mentoring,
incorporating a professional advocacy piece that capitalizes on the senior
standing the emeriti faculty have achieved as leaders in their professional
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this work is in its
intent to provide an in-depth understanding of the effectiveness of utilizing
emeriti faculty who are equipped to serve as advocates for early career faculty
who are members of underrepresented groups. While still small in numbers,
members of underrepresented groups (women and ethnic/racial minorities) are
slowly growing in the faculty ranks with few having attained senior faculty
status. More traditional mentoring programs create mentoring pairs based on
ethnicity or gender, with the thought that the shared experiences of being in
the minority are essential to a successful mentoring relationship. Instead, this
project will investigate the effectiveness of using emeriti faculty who are
predominantly Caucasian and male, and have been trained to be strategic
advocates for the early career underrepresented faculty. The broader impact of
this project is in its ability to positively affect the career trajectories and
future success of a diverse group of early career faculty members with the goal
of increasing the diversity of engineering faculties. This project has the
ability to be replicated on a large scale, utilizing the expertise of a growing
population of retired faculty and enabling them to continue making valuable
contributions to their institution and the engineering academic community.