* 1542963
* EBP: Bringing AP Computer Science Principles to Students with Learning Disabilities and/or an ADHD: The Hidden Underrepresented Group
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2015,05/31/2018
* Miriam Pike, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Janice Cuny
* 05/31/2018
* USD 693,244.00

This study aims to expand participation in computer science by ensuring that
students with learning differences (students with learning disabilities and/or
an Attention Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD)) can successfully participate
in computer science courses in general, and AP Computer Science Principles (CSP)
courses in particular. An interdisciplinary team from Outlier Research &amp;
Evaluation (a research group at the Center for Elementary Mathematics and
Science Education (CEMSE) at the University of Chicago), and the Wolcott School
(a school in Chicago for students with learning differences) will apply their
expertise in education research, special education, psychology, pedagogy, and
computer science (CS) content to: identify the challenges students with learning
differences face as they engage with computer science concepts and computational
practices; derive solutions for addressing those challenges, and; test
adaptations and accommodations that address those challenges for two AP Computer
Science Principles (CSP )curricula in development: Beauty and Joy of Computing
for New York City (BJC4NYC); and Code.org's CS Principles. Findings from this
project will take a first step toward ensuring that this often overlooked
student population can fully participate in CS education. The project is timely,
as the College Board is preparing to launch the new AP CSP course in the fall of
2016. The findings of this foundational study will be crucial to ensuring that
students who learn differently are not excluded. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To
accomplish this goal, the Outlier and Wolcott School team will pursue the
following research questions: (1) What are the learning and teaching concerns
regarding making high school CS education in general, and AP CSP in particular,
accessible to students with learning differences?; (2) What specific adaptations
and accommodations are needed to make CSP courses in general and BJC4NYC and CS
Principles in particular accessible to students with learning differences?; and
(3) To what extent do students with learning differences successfully complete
the AP CSP course and demonstrate positive attitudes about their experience? To
answer these questions, the project team will: a) identify lesson adaptations
generally associated with specific learning disabilities and an ADHD, and
consider their application in CS education; b) generate and test adaptations and
accommodations for select CSP lessons; c) derive a set of design principles for
teaching CS to students with learning differences; d) work with CSP developers
to permanently incorporate adaptations and accommodations into their materials;
and e) broadly disseminate findings, instructional guidance and other findings
about adjustments for students with learning differences. The team will employ a
mixed-methods research design using data collected through classroom
observations; teacher written feedback and interviews; and student written
feedback, self-assessments, questionnaire responses, focus groups and
interviews. The study will support efforts to generate a wide-scale
infrastructure for high school CS education by taking steps to generate
knowledge about what is needed to include this as yet unreached group in
computer science education, provide specific guidance about ways to include
students who learn differently in CSP, and demonstrate the importance and merits
of working to advance this dimension of broadening participation.