* 1542579
* Relative Paleointensity (RPI) and Age Control in Antarctic Marine Drift Sediments
* GEO,OPP
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2019
* James Channell, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Michael E. Jackson
* 04/30/2019
* USD 131,287.00

During the last interglacial (LIG) warm interval, ~125 thousand years ago, mean
global temperature is estimated to have been only very slightly elevated (by
perhaps 1-2 Â°C), relative to today. At that same time, global sea level was
elevated by ~6-9 m, relative to present, according to studies of exposed corals
in Australia, the Seychelles, and the Caribbean. Such high sea level today would
displace up to 20% of the US population. It is estimated that Greenland glacial
melting could have accounted for ~2 m of sea-level rise, thermal expansion of
the oceans and melting of mountain glaciers could account for ~0.5 m each, but
Antarctica must account for the bulk of it. Where did the melting occur? It has
been speculated that the one particular part of Antarctica (the West Antarctic
Ice Sheet, WAIS) was the site of the inferred melting. The marine sediments that
have accumulated off-shore West Antarctica should provide evidence of this
melting, but the lack of robust age control in Antarctic marine sediments has
stymied their interpretation in terms of past instability of WAIS. This proposal
tests a relatively new method, involving the recording of the past geomagnetic
field by the sediments themselves, that can provide age models for the Antarctic
marine sediments, contribute their interpretation in terms of instability of
WAIS over the last few climate cycles, and hence contribute to our current
climate/sea level dilemma. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over the last 20 years,
relative (geomagnetic) paleointensity (RPI) proxies have been combined with
oxygen isotope data in Quaternary sediments in the North Atlantic with the
objective of implementing RPI as a high-resolution stratigraphic correlation
tool. The relatively rapid rate of change of geomagnetic field intensity
(currently about 5% per century), and the fact that sediments with sedimentation
rates &lt;~50 cm/kyr are likely to record only the main axial dipole component
of the field, means that RPI can be expected to provide a high-resolution global
correlation tool. There are now several examples of tandem correlations
involving RPI and oxygen isotope data over the last few Myrs, implemented
through automated matching protocols such as 'Match'. The results have led to
the generation of temporally calibrated reference stacks for RPI (such as PISO)
that can be used, in conjunction with oxygen isotope data, to provide
improvements in the resolution of Quaternary stratigraphies. This proposal is to
test the use of RPI as a stratigraphic tool in marine sediment drifts off the
Antarctic Peninsula and in the Bellingshausen Sea, using seven piston cores
recovered in early 2015 during cruise JR298 of the RRS James Clark Ross. The
west Antarctic region provides an important test of the stratigraphic role of
relative paleointensity (RPI) proxies because the sedimentation history of
Antarctic sediment drifts is a key to interpreting their sedimentation history
in terms of instability of the West Antarctic Ice Sheet (WAIS) and Antarctic
Peninsula Ice Sheet (APIS). The paucity of foraminiferal carbonate at high
southerly latitudes means that age models in sediments from the region cannot
rely on oxygen isotope data. Age models in these Antarctic drifts have relied on
the association of high biogenic siliceous/carbonate percentage (as well as
proxies for high biogenic content from magnetic susceptibility, wet bulk density
and biogenic Ba content) with interglacial marine isotopic stages. These
methodologies are not ideal because they have low resolution and impose
interpretations on the sediment record. For these reasons, we seek new methods
for determining age in these drift sediment using RPI to interpret sedimentation
rates, XRF core scanning data, and ice-rafting debris (IRD) proxies, in terms of
instability of WAIS and APIS. This project will be assisted by an undergraduate
researcher.