* 1542337
* Group Travel Grant for the Doctoral Consortium at the International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV) 2015; Dec 11 - 18, 2015; Santiago, Chile
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2016
* Dhruv Batra, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Jie Yang
* 07/31/2016
* USD 15,000.00

This grant partially supports the participation of about 20 students from US
institutions in the Doctoral Consortium at the International Conference on
Computer Vision (ICCV) 2015. ICCV is the premier biennial conference in computer
vision with about 2000 senior, junior and student participants. It is attended
by members of the international research community. The goal of the Doctoral
Consortium is to highlight the work of senior PhD students who are who are close
to finishing their degrees, or recent graduates, and to give these students an
opportunity to discuss their research and career options with faculty and
researchers who have relevant expertise. NSF support covers some of the costs
for selected US graduate students to attend the
conference.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this project rests in
the selection of top-quality PhD students whose research is showcased and to
whom feedback is provided by senior researchers. The opportunity to receive
advice on their research work and career plans from experts from different
institutions, and with potentially different perspectives, is often not
available internally at one's own institution. The broader impacts of this
project include supporting the career development of some of the brightest
junior researchers in computer vision, contributing to the research community in
general by drawing attention to an important aspect of graduate student
development, potentially increasing the number of active researchers and
educators in STEM, and ensuring that the computer vision community, through its
recent graduates, makes fast advances in solving problems that will benefit
society as a whole. The Doctoral Consortium aims to have representation from a
diverse group of participants in terms of gender, ethnic background, academic
institution, and geographic location.