* 1542707
* EFRI 2-DARE: Two-dimensional nanopores with electro-optical control for next generation biotechnological applications
* ENG,EFMA
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2021
* Marija Drndic, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 07/31/2021
* USD 2,352,760.00

Two-dimensional nanopores can be used to sequence DNA molecules by recording the
variations in ionic current and photon emission as the molecules thread through
the nanopore. The electronic and optical properties of nanopores in sub-
nanometer thick films will be investigated with the goals to understand the
nanopore interaction with nanometer-sized biological materials, such as DNA,
proteins, and viruses, as well as non-biological materials, such as
nanoparticles and nanorod-shaped metals. Using a combination of techniques, the
nanopore size and composition will be specifically tuned to optimize sensitivity
to a particular analyte. Ultrathin pores in freestanding two-dimensional
atomically thin membranes are expected to yield optimal optical and electrical
signals that will fingerprint specific nanoparticles as they move through the
nanopore. The proposed research will advance knowledge and understanding across
different fields and contribute to a number of National Academy of Engineering
Grand Challenges, including Engineering the Tools of Scientific Discovery, and
Engineering Better Medicines and Advance Health Informatics. Societal impacts
include improvement of underrepresented student retention in engineering and
science, exposure of K-12 students to state-of-the-art techniques in engineering
and science, promoting the participation of women in physics, and training
students to make lifelong contributions to technology challenges at the
interface of biology, materials science and physics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two-
dimensional materials beyond graphene, such as transition metal dichalcogenides,
possess exciting optical, catalytic, electronic and chemical properties. When
these layers contain extended vacancies and form nanoscale nanopores, new and
unprecedented physicochemical phenomena are expected. Compared to other solid
state nanopores, the benefits of these novel two-dimensional materials in
nanoparticle detection, filtration (separation) and analysis, include the
potential for improved signal-to-noise ratio, operation at high bandwidths
(i.e., sub-microsecond temporal resolution), and the prospect that nanopore
perimeters can be bestowed with specific, and potentially reversible,
edge/surface functionalities. For example, the optical activation and specific
chemical functionalization of nanopores opens the possibility of enhanced
control of the particle?s translocation rates. The project will target i) the
controlled synthesis and characterization of nanopores in homo/heterostructures
of two-dimensional materials, ii) the trapping, fragmentation and translocation
of DNA, proteins, and bacteria at specific optical wavelengths and optical
powers, iii) laser-induced nanopore activation to reversibly control
translocation dynamics as well as the native nanopore fluorescence signal to
monitor translocation events, iv) the fabrication of prototype translocation
platforms for DNA, bioparticulate analysis, and nanoparticle quantification, and
v) the elucidation of the trapping/translocation mechanisms for nanopores with
designed edge functionalities.