* 1542911
* PFI:AIR - TT:  Market Driven Innovations and Scaling up of Twitris- A System for Collective Social Intelligence
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2015,03/31/2018
* John Mackay, Wright State University
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 03/31/2018
* USD 224,000.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on translating a technology
for social media monitoring and analysis, known as Twitris, to commercial
application. Twitris' collective social media intelligence technology includes
capabilities well beyond current state-of-the-art social media monitoring and
analysis tools. The Twitris platform can provide collective exploitation of
real-time social media streams, and a variety of relevant knowledge, to
significantly improve decision-making and support timely actions in various
domains of economic, human, and social development. Twitris' unique features
include real-time semantic analysis of social media content along three
dimensions: spatio-temporal-thematic, people-content-network, and sentiment-
emotion-intent. These features result in deeper, contextually-relevant analysis
and actionable insights when compared to the leading competing technology in
this market space.

This project addresses several technology gaps as it transitions Twitris from a
research prototype to a scaled-up technology capable of supporting commercial
applications. Consequently, three areas of research and technology enhancement
will be conducted: 1) enhancing the functionalities of Twitris with a broad
range of location-specific processing that requires addressing the challenge of
scarcity of spatial metadata on Twitter, 2) semantics-enhanced filtering and
improved user experience for automatic and semi-automatic filtering of tweets,
which requires addressing challenges such as content ambiguity and information
overload, and 3) scalable architecture supporting domain-specific, knowledge-
enabled modules to handle high volume, variety and velocity of data.

In addition, the project will also provide a unique education and training
platform for students and recent graduates to prepare them for careers involving
entrepreneurship, business and economic development, and careers in startups.
Specifically, the project (a) bridges basic research with technology development
and intellectual property development that can lead to successful
commercialization and (b) involves close collaboration with successful
entrepreneurs, business partners, and customers. It will also undertake
structured educational activities involving five technical and business courses,
while continuing to foster much-needed diversity in high-tech fields and
computer science. This project engages several business partners in
strategically important markets to carry out trials involving their customers in
an effort to evaluate the efficacy and benefits of research and technology
enhancements involved in this scale-up.