* 1542402
* DIMENSIONS: COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: The evolution of pollination syndrome diversity in Penstemon
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2023
* Lena Hileman, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Kendra McLauchlan
* 07/31/2023
* USD 999,783.00

Ecosystem health and productivity depend on co-evolved species interactions. In
terrestrial ecosystems a key interaction is between flowers and pollinators, and
changes in the relative abundances of different pollinators (e.g., bees, birds)
are thought to impose selective pressures that can shift floral pollination
strategies and shape flowering plant communities. However, multiple forces may
act to constrain the ability of a flowering plant lineage to evolve a new
pollination strategy under changing environmental conditions. This research will
model the rate of pollination strategy transitions in the largest flowering
plant genus endemic to North America (Penstemon), and will determine both
ecological and genetic processes that constrain and shape the rate of
pollination strategy diversification. Understanding the forces that maintain
diversity in pollination strategies informs food security and agricultural
management issues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research integrates phylogenetic,
ecological, and genetic approaches to understand the processes that determine
pollination diversity. The research will test whether Penstemon has reached an
evolutionary equilibrium in the relative frequencies of bee and hummingbird
pollination syndromes. Additionally, the planned experiments will determine
ecological and genetic processes responsible for asymmetries in pollination
syndrome transitions, and in syndrome-specific speciation, and extinction rates.
Field experiments will test whether interactions among floral traits constrain
shifts from hummingbird to bee pollination. Genetic experiments will test
whether loss-of-function mutations critical for shifts to hummingbird
pollination also constrain reverse shifts from hummingbird to bee pollination.
The integration of these experimental approaches will elucidate processes that
determine pollination syndrome diversity in plant community assemblages.