* 1542534
* Dimensions: Landscape Genomics of an Adaptive Radiation using Ultra-High Resolution Genetic, Morphometric, and Spatial Analysis
* BIO,DEB
* 06/15/2016,09/30/2022
* Ian Wang, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 09/30/2022
* USD 1,486,078.00

During adaptive radiation, a group of organisms diversifies into a variety of
forms specialized for different environments or ecological roles. Anolis lizards
(anoles) on the Greater Antillean islands in the Caribbean have undergone
repeated adaptive evolution, resulting in the formation of different species on
different islands that have evolved similar traits for occupying similar parts
of the forest habitat. This is a remarkable case of convergent evolution, in
which separate species independently evolve similar traits, and ecological
divergence, in which species diversify in response to the environment. Thus,
anoles present opportunities to answer several important questions, including
what are the factors that produce diversity in the important ecological traits
of a species? What is the genetic basis for these traits, and are the same genes
involved in the repeated evolution of particular traits in different species?
When do the processes generating variation lead to speciation, in which one
species diversifies into multiple, distinct species? This project will examine
how spatial variation in the environment leads to variation in adaptive physical
traits and variation across the genome both within and between species. The
researchers will use advanced methods in genetic, morphology, and spatial
statistics to analyze individual animals from a dozen species of anoles
collected across different environments. By examining multiple species and many
individual from each species, the researchers will be able to identify the
factors that generate different levels of biodiversity during different stages
of adaptive evolution. This project will also result in the training of two
postdoctoral researchers and numerous graduate and undergraduate students,
including students from traditionally underrepresented backgrounds. The
researchers also plan to integrate the results of the project into classroom
learning modules on the ecology and evolution of adaptive radiations for K-12
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Adaptive radiations, like the replicated
diversification of Anolis lizards on the Greater Antilles into ecomorph classes
through the evolution of novel traits, present excellent systems in which to
study ecological divergence and parallel evolution. The overarching goal of the
proposed research will be to examine how spatial environmental variation
generates adaptive phenotypic diversity (Functional dimension), population
genomic diversity (Genetic dimension), and ecomorphological species diversity
(Phylogenetic dimension) in replicated adaptive radiations of Anolis lizards.
Specifically, this project will test whether patterns of genetic and phenotypic
variation depend upon the spatial structure of the environment or the ecology of
the species; whether parallel phenotypic divergence involves parallel genetic
divergence; whether environmental variation generates heterogeneous genomic
divergence both within and between species; and whether the same regions of the
genome are repeatedly involved in generating ecomorphological diversity. These
questions will be answered by assembling ultra-high resolution environmental,
morphological, and genetic datasets for 12 Anolis species from the Greater
Antilles using cutting-edge data collection methods. This project will use
terrestrial-LiDAR scans of structural habitats and geospatial analysis of
bioclimatic layers in a GIS (Geographical Information System) to generate the
environmental data, exon capture and whole exome sequencing to produce the
genetic data, and micro-CT scanning to generate 3D reconstructions of field-
collected specimens for the morphological data. Innovative analytical approaches
will then be used to integrate these diverse datasets to understand the
processes underlying diversification across different stages of adaptive
radiation.