* 1542596
* Dimensions:  Biodiversity of Iron-Respiring Microorganisms Fueled by a Cryptic Organic Sulfur Cycle
* BIO,DEB
* 11/01/2015,10/31/2017
* Thomas DiChristina, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 10/31/2017
* USD 262,419.00

With a proof-of-concept award, this project will examine the diversity of
microorganisms that breathe iron in place of oxygen. Since oxygen was absent on
early Earth and iron-breathing bacteria are found near the root of the tree of
life, they are likely to represent one of the first life forms that evolved on
our planet. In the modern world, iron-breathing bacteria are important to many
environmental and energy-generating processes, including release of iron
nutrients to organisms residing in ocean and lake waters, degradation of
hazardous pollutants in drinking water supplies, and electricity generation by
bacteria. The biodiversity of iron-breathing bacteria in the environment,
however, is poorly understood. Work by researchers at Georgia Tech will greatly
expand our knowledge of these bacteria, and will test a novel hypothesis about
how they breath iron. Since the iron rust particles are located outside the
cell, generating energy by breathing iron rust particles requires novel
strategies that this project will unravel. The hypothesis is that bacteria
breathe iron rust particles and generate energy by producing sulfur molecules
that are transferred outside the cell to interact with the external iron rust
particles. Interaction between the sulfur compounds and the iron rust particles
outside the cell results in energy production inside the cell. Experiments will
involve examining the biodiversity of iron breathing bacteria in the salt marsh
sediments of Skidaway Island (GA), which represents a coastal marine ecosystem
replete with sulfur and iron. The research will also include training
opportunities for women students from underrepresented groups in science at
Alverno College in Milwaukee, WI.

The proposed research will integrate state-of-the-art taxonomic (phylogenetic),
genetic (metagenomic, metatranscriptomic), and functional (electrochemical,
geochemical) approaches to determine the biodiversity of a previously overlooked
microbial community linking the biogeochemical cycles of iron (Fe) and sulfur
(S) in anaerobic marine and freshwater sediments. Initial geochemical and
genetic findings indicate that bacterially-produced organic S (thiol) compounds
can function as electron shuttles to deliver electrons to extracellular Fe(III)
oxides, but the environmental significance of this activity is unproven. Since
thiols are potent chemical reductants of Fe(III) oxides, yet are not detected in
significant concentrations in sedimentary environments, these findings suggest
that a cryptic organic S cycle fuels widespread microbial Fe(III) reduction
activity in both freshwater and marine sediments. Field collections will be
conducted at the salt marsh sediments of Skidaway Island (GA), which represents
a coastal marine ecosystem replete with organic S and Fe. The overall
experimental approach is divided into three main components: 1) identification
of sediment layers displaying overlapping zones of Fe and organic S redox
signals; 2) correlation of changes in gene expression profiles and the metabolic
activity of organic S-driven Fe(III)-reducing bacteria and in perturbed sediment
incubations; and 3) taxonomic (phylogenetic) and genetic (metagenomic,
metatranscriptomic) analyses to determine the microbial community composition
and functional gene expression patterns of pure (or highly enriched) cultures of
organic S-driven Fe(III)-reducing bacteria. The project has the potential to
transform a broad range of scientific disciplines by establishing a new link
between organic S chemistry and microbial Fe metabolism through exploration of
novel bacterial diversity. Microbial Fe(III) reduction is central to a wide
variety of global processes, including the biogeochemical cycling of Fe (via
reductive mobilization of insoluble Fe(III) oxides) and carbon (via anaerobic
oxidation of organic matter). A large fraction of the flux of organic carbon
remineralization in redox-stratified soils, peats, and freshwater and marine
sediments has been attributed to microbial Fe(III) reduction, while microbially-
catalyzed reductive dissolution of insoluble Fe(III) oxides may act a source of
dissolved Fe to drive primary productivity in marine environments. A novel
connection between the biogeochemical cycles of Fe, S, and C (potentially in a
single bacterial cell) will revolutionize the current dogma concerning pathways
for microbial Fe(III) reduction in the environment and will provide a new model
for interpreting the global biogeochemical importance of microbial Fe(III)
reduction. Microbial Fe(III) reduction is also central to a wide variety of
other significant environmental and energy related processes, including
reductive precipitation of toxic metals and radionuclides and generation of
electricity in microbial fuel cells. If successful, this research will refine
carbon cycling models (in which Fe(III) reduction is traditionally assumed to be
a direct enzymatic process) and identify new diverse microorganisms for use in
alternate strategies for remediation of radionuclide-contaminated aquifers and
increasing power output in microbial fuel cells. Fe(III)-reducing microorganisms
are also deeply rooted and scattered throughout the domains Bacteria and
Archaea, an indication that microbial Fe(III) reduction may represent an ancient
metabolic process. The phylogenetic link between microbial sulfur metabolism and
Fe(III) reduction may therefore also have a significant impact on interpreting
the evolutionary history and biodiversity of microbial respiratory systems. The
research will broaden participation in science via educational opportunities for
undergraduate students who are members of underrepresented groups in science.