* 1542639
* DIMENSIONS: COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Biodiversity Gradients in Obligate Symbiotic Organisms: A Case Study in Lichens in a Global Diversity Hotspot
* BIO,DEB
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2021
* James Lendemer, New York Botanical Garden
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 08/31/2021
* USD 759,872.00

Obligate symbioses are relationships between two or more species that depend
entirely on each other for growth and survival. Such symbioses characterize some
of the most common and ecologically important relationships on Earth, ranging
from human gut bacteria and diseases to corals and specialized plant-pollinator
relationships. Yet, many of these obligate symbioses are imperiled by
unprecedented rates of environmental change and permanent biodiversity losses.
Compared to single branches on the tree of life such as birds, flowering plants,
or mammals, much less is known about the factors that facilitate or limit the
distributions of the obligate symbioses that abound in nature. Moreover,
research on biodiversity distributions has focused largely on abiotic factors
(e.g., temperature, precipitation, elevation) rather than on biotic factors
(i.e., interactions with other organisms) that influence geographical
distributions. This project will uncover the factors that impact diversity and
distributions of obligate symbiotic lichens as a model system. The geographic
focus is the southern Appalachian Mountains of the southeastern U.S. -- a global
lichen diversity hotspot and unique natural laboratory. In addition, this
project will develop human capital and infrastructure in U.S. lichenology
through student training, collaborations, and outreach to resource managers and
the public. It will establish a publicly available, high quality dataset and
improve physical and digital resources that advance lichen conservation for a
global biodiversity hotspot.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite generations of
research on, and proposed theories for factors that generate and maintain
biodiversity, consensus is lacking. Biotic factors have long been proposed as
drivers, but they are rarely studied due to the difficulty of assessing the
multitude of possible interactions. Because of the inherent biotic interaction
between obligate symbionts, lichens offer a unique opportunity to explore both
biotic and abiotic drivers of biodiversity across multiple dimensions. This
project will utilize both field and genomic inventories of lichens in a global
biodiversity hotspot. The research will generate and synthesize data from
multiple symbiotic biodiversity dimensions initiated from a single information
source: a unique museum voucher. Across local, regional, and landscape scales,
the project will record site-specific metrics for phylogenetic (including
taxonomic) and functional diversity together with site-specific metrics for a
mostly unexplored genetic dimension, potential of diversity, that quantifies the
availability of compatible symbiont propagules in the environment. Analysis of
these metrics in light of biotic and abiotic variables enables assessment of
factors that impact the dimensions of biodiversity. These analyses will also
permit understanding of interactions among dimensions, for example, whether all
are positively correlated and predicted by the same sets of variables, or in
what contexts other types of correlations exist. This project is designed to
yield two major conceptual advances in ecology and evolutionary biology. First,
it will reveal new, emergent properties of biodiversity gradients in symbiotic
organisms. Second, deconstructing constraints on individual partners of the
symbiosis and quantifying feedbacks between and among them will make possible a
full analysis, including biotic constraints, of the factors that impact
diversity and distribution of the symbiotic organism as a whole.