* 1542370
* Research Experience for Teachers: Engineering in Precision Agriculture for Rural STEM Educators
* ENG,EEC
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2019
* Alan Kallmeyer, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Standard Grant
* Mary Poats
* 12/31/2019
* USD 587,517.00

This Research Experiences for Teachers (RET) in Engineering Site at North Dakota
State University (NDSU) will enhance STEM education for rural students and their
teachers, through exposure to the engineering field, a subject not generally
taught in rural schools, within an agricultural framework. This Site immerses
'solitary STEM teachers', from North Dakota and western Minnesota, who are the
only STEM teachers for grades 7-12 in their school or district in an intensive
engineering research experience with an agricultural emphasis on biobased
materials. The teachers will be introduced to a multidisciplinary approach to
the design of new biobased materials and precision agriculture technology. Since
the region's economy and way of life are strongly rooted in agriculture, the
focus on solitary STEM teachers will be valuable to the educational community as
well as having potential for nationwide impact on agricultural regions. By
focusing the research and lesson plans on the theme of sustainability in
precision agriculture and biocomposite materials, existing agricultural
producing regions, like North Dakota, can increase teachers and students
abilities to significantly contribute to the future workforce for producing
enough food, fuel, and products for the next several
generations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Site will offer an intensive six week
summer research program for a total of 48 rural STEM teachers over three years
that unites the development of electrical hardware and software with biobased
materials for investigations in sustainable materials and precision agriculture.
The research areas are chemistry, physics, and mathematics based, and are a
natural fit for the economy of these agricultural regions. Research topics
include: biobased resins and composites, testing and evaluating relevant
software, and analyzing soil sensors, among others. Research will be conducted
in teams with an in-service teacher being paired with a pre-service teacher.
Teachers will work closely with Mechanical Engineering Department faculty
mentors, post-doctoral assistants, and graduate students on assigned research
projects. The proposed activities include 8 professional development days during
the summer and academic year including pre-program, post-program, and follow-up
workshops, along with ongoing and substantive interactions with graduate student
mentors in classroom activities.