* 1542213
* EAGER: Exploring the potential for the 1.1 Ga Copper Harbor Conglomerate to yield information on terrestrial environments during the rise of the eukaryotes
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2016
* Aradhna Tripati, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 12/31/2016
* USD 49,999.00

The evolution of marine environments during the Proterozoic is the subject of
intense investigation because of dramatic changes in oxygenation linked to the
origin of complex eukaryotic life. In contrast, little is known about
terrestrial environments or ecosystems. A lack of data and suitably unaltered
successions means that intense speculation surrounds the few hypotheses that
exist regarding environmental conditions on land at this time. The investigators
wish to study rocks that are situated in a unique time and place in the history
of Earth and life, and are ideally placed for exploring the terrestrial
biosphere during the rise of crown group eukaryotes and the composition of the
ancient atmosphere. If the datasets are not compromised by diagenesis (a
question this study will address directly using clumped isotope
paleothermometry), then this succession has the potential to answer several
outstanding questions about the evolution of life and climate. The project has
numerous societal benefits. It will support the career development of at least
two women scientists, the raining of a postdoctoral researcher, and new
collaborations including with an international collaborator. It will be used to
broaden participation and to promote diversity, including outreach activities to
under-represented students. Project participants will conduct outreach to K-12
students. It will also support education as results will be included in lectures
to undergraduate and graduate students.

The investigators propose a brief initial exploratory investigation to determine
the potential of an unburied 1 billion year old succession from Michigan for the
study of terrestrial environments during the rise of the eukaryotes. Carbonates
in the 1.09 Ga Copper Harbor conglomerate of northern Michigan represent a
potentially transformative archive of paleoclimatic and geobiological
information. The succession contains terrestrial stromatolites that developed on
an ancient alluvial fan, as well as lacustrine stromatolites. Researchers will
conduct preliminary analyses of a suite of pilot samples from both facies to
explore preservation and collect pilot data on proxy signatures, including on
clumped isotopes and redox sensitive proxies. This work will allow to assess
preservation and the utility of future in depth study of these rocks to provide
proxy data for a crucial period in Earth's geobiological evolution. If
successful, researchers will follow up with a collaborative, in-depth study of
the succession. The potential rewards from future research are huge - but the
risks of trying to find and identify unaltered rocks from this time period would
preclude a study of this nature from being funded through traditional NSF
programs until a suite of pilot data is collected.