* 1542333
* "RET Site" Research Experience for Teachers in Alternative Energy and Automotive Engineering (AEAE):  Energizing K-12 Teaching and Learning
* ENG,EEC
* 10/01/2015,06/30/2019
* Krzystof Kobus, Oakland University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Poats
* 06/30/2019
* USD 575,979.00

This Research Experiences for Teachers (RET) in Engineering and Computer Science
Site at Oakland University (OU) will involve middle and high school science and
mathematics teachers and pre-service teachers from the metro-Detroit area in
multidisciplinary and cutting edge research on alternative energy and automotive
engineering. The multidisciplinary aspects of this research will allow STEM
teachers to strengthen their engineering knowledge and to incorporate their
experiences into project based curricular modules that will excite and interest
their students. The topics covered range from biodiesel, Lithium-ion batteries,
and fuel cells to internal combustion engines, automotive tribology, optical
diagnostics, autonomous vehicles and ergonomics for automotive applications.
Through this program the RET participants will not only gain first-hand
experience in the use of experimental, simulation and fabrications tools, as
well as the analysis of research results, but will also receive a strong
foundation in the pedagogical tools of inquiry-based teaching and learning. The
program will impact two areas that are of direct interest to the United States
and the world: increasing access for underrepresented K-12 teachers and their
students to a deeper understanding of the STEM disciplines, research and career
opportunities; and inspiring teachers and students to pursue engineering
careers.

Over a three year period this RET Site will offer an intensive six week summer
research program for a total of 36 middle and high school science and
mathematics teachers and pre-service teachers from the metro-Detroit area. Key
features of the program include: 1) Direct supervision of projects and course
material development by OU School of Engineering and Computer Science (SECS)and
School of Education and Human Services (SEHS) faculty mentors and graduate
students; 2) Involvement of RET teachers and their students in timely, cutting-
edge research projects in the area of alternative energy and automotive
engineering: 3) Recruitment of STEM teachers from high needs school districts in
metro-Detroit as well as pre-service teachers from southeastern Michigan; 4)
Research and education activities and seminars to strengthen teachers'
engineering knowledge and provide them with effective pedagogical strategies
that will help them translate their research experiences into course modules
that will excite their students about STEM fields and align with state and
national standards; 5) Thoughtful follow-up plans including site visits by
faculty and graduate student mentors to the RET participants' classrooms,
teacher training workshops and seminars, industry tours, and development of a
program website for dissemination of research and teachers' experiences.