* 1542210
* NNCI: The Montana Nanotechnology Facility (MONT)
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2021
* Recep Avci, Montana State University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 08/31/2021
* USD 3,000,000.00

Nanotechnology, which gives us the ability to manipulate and interrogate
physical systems on a length scale of nanometers to microns, has become
pervasive in many fields of scientific inquiry and engineering. Access to basic
nanotechnology tools has therefore become increasingly important, not only for
so-called nanotechnologists but for scientists and engineers from many academic
disciplines and from industry. The Montana Nanotechnology Facility (MONT), a
NNCI site at Montana State University, promotes discovery, education and
outreach related to nanotechnology by providing access to shared-use
instruments, expert training on their safe and effective use, and broad-based
education about nanoscale science and technology for learners at all levels who
come from diverse communities. The MONT site serves both regional users in the
northern Rocky Mountains and Great Plains and users from across the U.S. who
need the specific expertise and equipment found at Montana State University.
Those users are pursuing diverse objectives related to advances in health care
diagnostics and surgical solutions, sources of clean energy, remediation
strategies for contaminated soils, and technologies related to optical
telecommunications, imaging systems and advanced computing. By enhancing our
service to external users and building on its unique fabrication and
characterization strengths MONT will help to meet a national need for access to
nanotechnology, for training of the workforce that will develop the
nanotechnology of the future, and for education and outreach that engages and
informs students and teachers from kindergarten to graduate school, industrial
users and the general public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;MONT helps meet the growing
need faced by regional and national researchers for access to nanofabrication
tools and processes at the interdisciplinary frontiers, with local expertise
related to microelectromechanical systems (MEMS) and micro-opto-
electromechanical systems (MOEMS), microfluidics, nanostructured materials with
unique optical, mechanical or thermal properties, ceramic materials, bio-
inspired and bio-derived nanostructures, and bacteria or bacterial biofilms
incorporated into micro- or nano-engineered substrates. he goals of the MONT
site are: (i) to increase the number of external users served; (ii) to increase
the collective research output of MONT users; (iii) to enhance the MONT site's
capabilities in the areas of its research strengths through heavily leveraged
capital investment; and (iv) to create best-in-class educational opportunities
for facility users, STEM educators and the general public. These goals are
accomplished through specific initiatives that will add laboratory personnel to
enhance training, assistance and advocacy for external users, establish a user
grant program for external users to help address costs of facility use as well
as local housing, invest in new tools and capabilities, and expand both on-site
and web-based instructional and outreach activities related to nano-fabrication,
nano-characterization and the ethics and societal impacts of nanotechnology. The
project specifically improves access to nanotechnology infrastructure in the
northern Rockies/Great Plains region, and it promotes discovery, education and
outreach in emerging fields where nanotechnology is impacting the life sciences,
health care, energy, the environment, and a number of important technology
sectors.