* 1542423
* Symposium:  NMR Spectroscopy of Polymers and Biobased Materials  Pacifichem Conference
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Louis Madsen, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Freddy Khoury
* 05/31/2016
* USD 5,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL AND TECHNICAL ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;This proposal requests funding in
the amount of $ 5,000 in support of the attendance and participation of young
US-based scientists in the "Symposium: NMR (Nuclear Magnetic Resonance)
Spectroscopy of Polymers and Biobased Materials Pacific Conference" to be held
in Honolulu HI, December 15-20, 2015. The funds will cover approximately three
full, and four student registration fees, as well as five housing grants. NMR
spectroscopy is a premier technique for the study of polymers as well as
biobased polymeric materials, i.e. polymers designed based on naturally
occurring materials. The main purpose of this international conference is to
report on the latest developments in NMR spectroscopy and their impact on the
determination of the fundamental molecular and structural characteristics of
polymers and their properties as well as in their specialized functions in a
multitude of technological applications. Both fundamental and applied aspects
will be covered is a planned set of eight session topics: (1) Polymer dynamics,
interphases and crystallinity. (2) Diffusion and flow in polymers. (3) Blends,
surfaces, and confined environments. (4) Polymer-focused advances in NMR
instrumentation and methodology. (5) Solid state polymer structure. (6) Polymers
in energy fields-batteries, fuel cells, biomass. (7) Polymers in solution phase.
(8) Integration of NMR w/other techniques). The talks will be geared so that
general polymer scientists can comprehend and exploit the studies presented.