* 1542150
* RAPID: Increasing fire severity and the loss of legacy carbon from boreal ecosystems
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2015,12/31/2016
* Michelle Mack, Northern Arizona University
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 12/31/2016
* USD 49,999.00

One of the most rapid ways climate warming could alter the carbon balance of
high northern latitude conifer forests and peatlands is through more intense
wildfires. Most of the carbon that can burn occurs in thick soil layers often
hundreds to thousands of years old that are a legacy of past wildfires, and
combustion of these layers accounts for the largest source of carbon released
during fires. In the summer of 2014, wildfires burned 3.4 million hectares of
forested lands of the Northwest Territories (NWT), Canada, eight times greater
than the average annual area burned, and twice as much area as burned in United
States wildfires that year. This project will study the impacts of these fires
on the combustion of legacy carbon. Researchers will also join a rapid-response
Canadian team to greatly facilitate access via floatplane and helicopter, and to
gain access to geospatial data. Results will be shared with land and fire
managers in collaboration with the NWT Division of Forestry and the Alaska Fire
Science Symposium and through a winter webinar. The project will also provide
new international research experience for a PI, postdoctoral researcher and
undergraduate student.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to
develop a mechanistic understanding of fire characteristics that control legacy
carbon loss in these ecosystems. More intense fires result in deeper burning and
ultimately determine whether more intense fires will accelerate climate warming
via the carbon cycle, as has been proposed. They also could rapidly shift
ecosystems across a threshold from net accumulation of carbon from the
atmosphere over multiple fire cycles to net loss. High fire intensity across
large and varied landscapes and multiple, spatially independent fire scars will
enable a study design with replicate natural fire severity gradients across key
landscape positions. A novel application of radiocarbon dating will be combined
with widely used and scalable metrics of organic matter combustion to quantify
the magnitude of legacy carbon loss on a site-specific basis. Permanent plots
will be established for long-term monitoring of permafrost and vegetation, key
controls over the carbon cycle in this biome. An early campaign will enable the
best estimates of site-specific carbon emissions, legacy losses, initial
subsidence of permafrost and ensuing changes in site drainage, and dispersal of
semi-serotinous seeds. This research will contribute to emerging ecosystem
theory on cross-time scale linkages and interactions and the role these may play
in the resilience or vulnerability of ecosystem processes to shifting
disturbance regimes.