* 1542697
* Collaborative Research:   An ultra-high-resolution record of drought, flood, and coupled ocean-atmosphere climate oscillations in Holocene and late Quaternary Californian sediments
* GEO,OCE
* 02/11/2015,08/31/2018
* Linda Hinnov, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Candace Major
* 08/31/2018
* USD 48,246.00

This research-- a collaborative effort between scientists from the University of
Michigan, Johns Hopkins University, the University of California San Diego
Scripps Institute of Oceanography, and the University of Minnesota Duluth-- will
reconstruct annual rainfall in Southern California during targeted climate
intervals over the last 750,000 years. Using existing cores from the Santa
Barbara Basin-- a system that receives sediment-laden river discharge following
rainfall events, with minimal subsequent bioturbation-- the project will employ
scanning X-ray fluorescence to detect siliciclastic material as a proxy for
river runoff. Pollen in sediments will be analyzed to further verify wet vs. dry
climate conditions. The frequency of multi-year droughts and floods will be
determined for key climate intervals, capturing interannual (El Ni√±o-Southern
Ocean) and decadal (Pacific Decadal Oscillation) climate modes. Results will be
used to assess the response of these climate modes to forcings such as changing
CO2 concentrations and variations in orbital cycles. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
study will extend the regional climate record well beyond the time period
covered by instrumental data, improving our capacity to understand and predict
future hydrologic and climate changes. Graduate students will be involved in all
aspects of the research, including meeting with collaborators, presenting at
national meetings, and publishing papers. The web-based platform Earthguide will
host educational materials based on this project for use in primary and
secondary school curricula.