* 1542161
* Facilitating Remote Participation at International Scientific Conferences
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2015,01/31/2017
* Jonathan Barnes, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* William Badecker
* 01/31/2017
* USD 25,500.00

Effective dissemination of the results of scientific research is critically
important to progress in all areas of inquiry. Isolation from one another slows
progress, creating expensive redundant effort around the globe. Open exchange of
findings is a cornerstone of the scientific community, and for the individual
scientist, in linguistics and beyond, participation in that exchange grows more
important, but also more challenging, as cutting-edge research becomes both more
interdisciplinary, and more international, than at any time in history. The
number and diversity of workshops and conferences that active researchers feel a
responsibility to participate in is exploding around the world. This is by and
large positive, of course, but it also places an increasingly unsustainable
burden on many scientists that by all rights should be included in these
critical conversations. International travel, rewarding as it may be, is also
time-consuming and expensive. For those with disabilities, it may be
prohibitively difficult. For scholars from institutions with fewer resources, or
from less wealthy parts of the world, finances may derail otherwise sound travel
plans. Other commitments, such as those to family, or local academic and
administrative responsibilities, further compete for the time necessary to
attend meetings. Visa restrictions add to this expense and effort, and sheer
geographic remoteness is often sufficient to convince would-be conference
attendees to stay home instead. In some cases, technology already exists to
allow participants to bridge the travel issue and participate remotely in
scientific gatherings. At least in linguistics, however, these technologies,
owing in large part to their expense and unfamiliarity, tend to be deployed, if
at all, in a limited fashion, around the margins of most meetings. Remote
participants therefore miss out on most of the key scientific discussion taking
place at these meetings. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal presents a plan to
pilot, at the upcoming Speech Prosody 2016 conference at Boston University, a
suite of solutions that will enable members of the scientific community to
participate in conference activities as fully from remote locations as from the
host location itself. Data will be collected concerning the usability and
attractiveness of each technology, and will be used to devise a future budget
model whereby such remote participation strategies can one day become self-
funding. Specifically, this project will implement remote participation
solutions for the following scenarios: 1) discussion and Q&amp;A during oral
sessions; 2) remote presentation of posters; 3) active attendance and
interaction during poster sessions, and 4) "passive" attendance at oral and
poster sessions, both in real time, and after the fact via digital archives of
the proceedings. Solutions include streaming video, stationary iPads at posters,
and mobile telepresence robots. A dynamic post-conference proceedings package
featuring video archiving and asynchronous discussion forums will promote
sustained interaction after the conference. Ultimately, this works aims to move
not just linguistics, but other fields as well, toward a standard of remote
participation that can become the norm at meetings, workshops, and conferences
around the world.