* 1542221
* Conference:  2015 Gordon Research Seminar and Conference on Epigenetics, to be held August 1-7, 2015 at Bentley University, Waltham, MA
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2015,12/31/2015
* William Kelly, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Karen Cone
* 12/31/2015
* USD 7,000.00

This project supports the 2015 Gordon Research Seminar and Conference on
Epigenetics, which will be held August 1-7, 2015 at Bentley University in
Waltham, MA. The scientific program of talks and poster sessions, combined with
the small size of the meeting, will encourage informal discussion and networking
and will catalyze stimulating interactions and sharing of the most exciting
research in the field of epigenetics. Concerted efforts to include and broaden
participation by early-career scientists will diversify engagement by young
researchers, some of whom will become the next generation of leaders in the
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Epigenetics Gordon Research Seminar, which
precedes the Conference, is entitled "Mechanisms of Mitotic and Meiotic
Epigenetic Inheritance" and has been organized by two graduate students. It will
feature a keynote address from a leader in the field, talks selected from the
abstracts, and a panel discussion centered on careers in science. The
Epigenetics Gordon Research Conference is entitled "Epigenetic Dynamics: Roles
in Development, Inheritance and Responses to the Environment." Co-organized by
two leading researchers in the field, the program features talks and poster
sessions addressing a range of topics, including: RNA-dependent modes of
epigenetic regulation, new epigenetic phenomena, epigenetic control of
development and dosage, epigenetic control of genome integrity, epigenetics and
nuclear organization, dynamics and inheritance of epigenetics states, and
targeted epigenetic modifications.