* 1542196
* EAGER: Biomimetic Materials for Improving Abiotic-Biotic Signal Transduction in Brain-Machine Interfaces
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2017
* Christopher Bettinger, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 07/31/2017
* USD 300,000.00

Non-technical&lt;br/&gt;There are many interesting and open-ended questions
regarding the function of the brain and the nervous system. The key signal
transduction pathway lies between the electrical signals that are generated from
excitable tissue and synthetic devices (e.g. computers and sensors) that can
translate, interpret, and record this valuable information. However, the primary
roadblock to seamless integration between the nervous system and computers is
related to the lack of materials that can link these two disparate computing
systems. The brain is soft, hydrated, and composed of neurons that use ions to
communicate with one another. Conversely, silicon-based electronics are rigid,
hermetically sealed, and use electrons to process information. This project will
invent new biomimetic materials innovations that have the potential to bridge
the tissue-device interface. These novel materials can match the mechanical
properties of the brain and convert between ionic and electronic signals. Taken
together, the improved electrode materials resulting from this project will
create bioelectronics interfaces to learn more about the function of the brain.
This project will also serve as an invaluable framework for training the next
generation of materials scientists and electrical engineers. Students involved
in this interdisciplinary project will receive training in polymer science,
bioelectronics, and microelectronic device
fabrication.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical&lt;br/&gt;This project will design
and synthesize two classes of materials to improve the miniaturization of
multielectrode arrays for use in brain-machine interfaces. Specifically, two
materials innovations will be explored to increase charge injection limits and
improve the chemical stealth of cortical brain-machine interfaces. First,
nanoscale melanin films will increase the charge injection limit and promote
electronic/ionic signal transduction. The rationale for this approach is based
on the unique combination of nanoscale architecture, redox active chemistry, and
biocompatibility that suggests that melanins can transduce ionic and electronic
currents efficiently. Second, a class of ultra-compliant zwitterionic conducting
hydrogel networks will be synthesized that will promote seamless mechanical,
chemical, and electronic integration between electronically active implants and
excitable tissue. Taken together, the materials innovations proposed herein will
improve both the stimulation and recording of neural tissue using cortical
brain-machine interfaces.