* 1542962
* Water Mass Structure and Bottom Water Formation in the Ice-age Southern Ocean
* GEO,OPP
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2020
* Martin Fleisher, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Michael E. Jackson
* 05/31/2020
* USD 278,469.00

Scientists established more than 30 years ago that the climate-related
variability of carbon dioxide levels in the atmosphere over Earth's ice-age
cycles was regulated by the ocean. Hypotheses to explain how the ocean regulates
atmospheric carbon dioxide have long been debated, but they have proven to be
difficult to test. Work proposed here will test one leading hypothesis,
specifically that the ocean experienced greater density stratification during
the ice ages. That is, with greater stratification during the ice ages and
slower replacement of deep water by cold dense water formed near the poles, the
deep ocean would have held more carbon dioxide, which is produced by biological
respiration of the organic carbon that constantly rains to the abyss in the form
of dead organisms and organic debris that sink from the sunlit surface ocean. To
test this hypothesis, the degree of ocean stratification during the last ice age
and the rate of deep-water replacement will be constrained by comparing the
radiocarbon ages of organisms that grew in the surface ocean and at the sea
floor within a critical region around Antarctica, where most of the replacement
of deep waters occurs. Completing this work will contribute toward improved
models of future climate change. Climate scientists rely on models to estimate
the amount of fossil fuel carbon dioxide that will be absorbed by the ocean in
the future. Currently the ocean absorbs about 25% of the carbon dioxide produced
by burning fossil fuels. Most of this carbon is absorbed in the Southern Ocean
(the region around Antarctica). How this will change in the future is poorly
known. Models have difficulty representing physical conditions in the Southern
Ocean accurately, thereby adding substantial uncertainty to projections of
future ocean uptake of carbon dioxide. Results of the proposed study will
provide a benchmark to test the ability of models to simulate ocean processes
under climate conditions distinctly different from those that occur today,
ultimately leading to improvement of the models and to more reliable projections
of future absorption of carbon dioxide by the ocean. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed work will add a research component to an existing scientific expedition
to the Southern Ocean, in the region between the Ross Sea and New Zealand, that
will collect sediment cores at three to five locations down the northern flank
of the Pacific-Antarctic Ridge at approximately 170Â°W. The goal is to collect
sediments at each location deposited since early in the peak of the last ice
age. This region is unusual in the Southern Ocean in that sediments deposited
during the last ice age contain foraminifera, tiny organisms with calcium
carbonate shells, in much greater abundance than in other regions of the
Southern Ocean. Foraminifera are widely used as an archive of several
geochemical tracers of past ocean conditions. In the proposed work the
radiocarbon age of foraminifera that inhabited the surface ocean will be
compared with the age of contemporary specimens that grew on the seabed. The
difference in age between surface and deep-swelling organisms will be used to
discriminate between two proposed mechanisms of deep water renewal during the
ice age: formation in coastal polynyas around the edge of Antarctica, much as
occurs today, versus formation by open-ocean convection in deep-water regions
far from the continent. If the latter mechanism prevails, then it is expected
that surface and deep-dwelling foraminifera will exhibit similar radiocarbon
ages. In the case of dominance of deep-water formation in coastal polynyas, one
expects to find very different radiocarbon ages in the two populations of
foraminifera. In the extreme case of greater ocean stratification during the
last ice age, one even expects the surface dwellers to appear to be older than
contemporary bottom dwellers because the targeted core sites lie directly under
the region where the oldest deep waters return to the surface following their
long circuitous transit through the deep ocean. The primary objective of the
proposed work is to reconstruct the water mass age structure of the Southern
Ocean during the last ice age, which, in turn, is a primary factor that controls
the amount of carbon dioxide stored in the deep sea. In addition, the presence
of foraminifera in the cores to be recovered provides a valuable resource for
many other paleoceanographic applications, such as: 1) the application of
nitrogen isotopes to constrain the level of nutrient utilization in the Southern
Ocean and, thus, the efficiency of the ocean?s biological pump, 2) the
application of neodymium isotopes to constrain the transport history of deep
water masses, 3) the application of boron isotopes and boron/calcium ratios to
constrain the pH and inorganic carbon system parameters of ice-age seawater, and
4) the exploitation of metal/calcium ratios in foraminifera to reconstruct the
temperature (Mg/Ca) and nutrient content (Cd/Ca) of deep waters during the last
ice age at a location near their source near Antarcitca.