* 1542765
* PFI:AIR - TT:  Development and Commercialization of the HAOPs Water Treatment Process
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2015,02/28/2018
* Mark Benjamin, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 02/28/2018
* USD 206,026.00

This Accelerating Innovation Research: Technology Translation project focuses on
translating a novel water treatment process from the laboratory ("proof-of-
concept") stage to a stage where it can be tested at municipal water treatment
plants. Both the developed and developing worlds face a critical need to produce
clean, healthy water, cheaply, in the face of diminishing quantities and quality
of water from current sources. One of the most promising developments in
drinking water supply over the past two decades is the improvement in membrane-
based treatment processes. However, these systems still operate well below their
potential because the membrane pores are easily plugged (fouled). The process
being developed in this project uses a new type of particle (heated aluminum
oxide particles, or HAOPs) to collect contaminants and deploys the particles in
an unconventional way (depositing an extremely thin layer of the particles on a
support and passing the water through that layer), and thereby removes far more
of the material that plugs the pores of membranes than can be removed using
currently available processes. Furthermore, the process appears likely to use
less energy and be less costly than current technology. The outcome of the
project will be a design for a pilot-scale system that can be tested at an
operating drinking water treatment plant.

The technical issues requiring investigation for the new treatment process to be
successful include the development of a new module containing substantial
surface area onto which the HAOPs can be deposited, while still maintaining a
relatively small footprint. The proposed design is a monolithic, but porous,
cylinder containing multiple small, cylindrical channels penetrating the full
axial length. The HAOPs layer will be deposited along the walls of these
channels, so that feed water must pass through the layer and then through the
porous solid before exiting. The module must capture the HAOPs efficiently at
the beginning of a treatment cycle and then release them equally efficiently at
the end. Both the deposition and release steps require optimal choices and
careful control of the water flow patterns, and that optimization step will be a
major focus of the project. In addition, the approaches for dewatering and
compacting sludge from the process will be explored, and a cost-benefit analysis
of the overall process will be carried out. Finally, undergraduate and graduate
students, as well as a postdoctoral researcher, will receive entrepreneurship
and technology translation experiences through mentorship by a partner on the
research team who has co-founded three companies in the energy efficiency and
water treatment sectors, and by participation in meetings with potential
manufacturers of the equipment and investors in the technology.