* 1542065
* NSF/FDA SIR: Fabrication and Evaluation of Bioactive and Biodegradable 3D Printed Polymer Scaffolds
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2015,05/31/2017
* Abraham Joy, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 05/31/2017
* USD 100,000.00

Non-technical Abstract: This NSF/FDA Scholar-in-Residence program award by the
Biomaterials Program in the Division of Materials Research to University of
Akron is aimed towards the optimization of a set of polymeric substrates that
will be encapsulated with therapeutics. This project will examine how the
incorporation of therapeutics within the 3D printing materials will affect their
printing process and the printed structures. 3D printing has caught the
imagination of scientists and non-scientists alike. It is now conceivable that
future manufacturing protocols will include 3D printing as a method to
manufacture engineering and medical products. The power of 3D printing becomes
all the more relevant for medical products, where it may be possible to create
personalized synthetic 'organs' to replace damaged or diseased organs. Such
devices may also be used to deliver therapeutics at personalized dosages.
However to facilitate the translation of such 3D printed devices to the clinic,
several aspects need to be addressed. In addition, these studies will also
examine the degradation of these polymeric structures and the rates at which the
therapeutic is released. These studies will be carried out at FDA using
standardized protocols that will be relevant for future FDA regulatory
examinations of 3D printed scaffolds. In addition, the award will provide
training opportunities to graduate students and will prepare them for careers in
engineering and science. The award will also expose undergraduate and high
school students to the field of 3D printing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract: 3D printing is rapidly emerging as an efficient
method for the fabrication of personalized medical scaffolds. 3D printing
medical devices addresses several desired implant features such as the need to
print irregular feature shapes and sizes and the need for implant porosity and
the ability to incorporate or encapsulate bioactive molecules. A critical need
in this area is for polymeric materials having the right set of properties that
enable their printing and integration into the physiological environment. In
addition, to enable optimal integration of synthetic materials in a biological
environment, it is often necessary to encapsulate them with bioactive molecules.
Upon printing they will be cross-linked to 'fix' the printed scaffolds. Such
viscoelastic polyesters will be encapsulated with dexamethasone, an anti-
inflammatory corticosteroid. Alternatively, the polyesters will be encapsulated
with bone morphogenetic proteins. Earlier studies have demonstrated clinical
relevance of these therapeutics. This award will examine the effect of such
therapeutics on the printing process and on the printed structures, the
reproducibility, biocompatibility and biodegradation of the printed structures.
In addition, this study will also examine the release profile of the
encapsulated bioactive materials. The methodologies adopted for the evaluation
of these scaffolds will be carried out in collaboration with the FDA, and these
studies are expected to help FDA in establishing protocols for analysis and
evaluation of 3D printed scaffolds in general.