* 1542776
* CAREER: Coupling Quantum Monte Carlo with implicit solvent models for materials in energy and information technologies
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2015,05/31/2017
* Richard Hennig, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 05/31/2017
* USD 157,216.00

Technical Summary

This CAREER award is funded through the Division Materials Research and the
Office of Cyberinfrasructure. It supports computational and theoretical research
and education to develop a computational approach for interfaces, particularly
between solid and liquid. The PI will develop a technique that combines quantum
Monte Carlo methods with an implicit solvent description based on the
electrostatic interaction between the liquid and the solid. The accuracy of the
method will be tested by comparison with experimental data and previous
computational studies. To establish its range of applicability, the method will
address three material problems that present difficulties for existing methods,
are important for energy and information technologies and can answer fundamental
questions of how solvents affect materials properties. The problems are: (1) How
does the electrolyte change the rate of oxidation of organic molecules on fuel
cell catalysts, (2) how do organic solvents modify the dispersion interaction of
carbon nanostructures, and (3) how are optical excitations of trap states in
organic electronic materials affected by the surrounding molecules.

Understanding the fundamental principles of how to incorporate solvent effects
into quantum Monte Carlo methods will enable the quantitative study of solvent
effects on reaction rates, dispersion interactions and electronic excitations.
This will ultimately enable better control of catalysis, improve the design of
materials for self-assembly and enhance the performance of organic electronic
materials. The PI aims to provide advanced computational concepts and an
alternative approach to quantum chemistry and density functional techniques. The
methods developed and the knowledge gained in this work can directly be
transferred to other technologically important materials that are controlled by
their interfaces, such as biomolecular systems and hydrogen storage materials.
The project will build a solid knowledge base that will enable future
fundamental work on these and other materials systems. The methods will be made
available to the broad community by implementation into widely used codes.

This research program, through integration of computation and experimental
collaborations across the scientific disciplines of materials science,
electrochemistry, organic chemistry and condensed-matter physics, will provide a
unique educational experience for students of all levels and prepare them for
careers in the growing area of computational materials science. The primary
educational objectives of this program are to introduce K-12, undergraduate, and
graduate students to the interdisciplinary field of computational materials
science and to broaden the participation of underrepresented minorities. The PI
will train undergraduate and graduate students for future jobs in materials
science, both through mentoring students from freshman to graduate level in
research and by integrating the research into undergraduate and graduate level
courses. To attract young students, particularly underrepresented minorities, to
STEM disciplines the PI will build an extended outreach program Science with
random numbers for middle and high-school students and distribute it to racially
diverse inner-city schools in Syracuse and New York City and add it into a
workshop for Cornell University's Expanding Your Horizon program for middle
school girls. For the development, evaluation and distribution of the teaching
module, the PI will work with the platforms provided by the Cornell Center for
Materials Research and the College of Engineering Diversity Programs Office.

Non-Technical Summary

This CAREER award is funded through the Division Materials Research and the
Office of Cyberinfrasructure. It supports computational and theoretical research
and education to develop techniques for computers to solve materials problems
involving interfaces, specifically interfaces of solid materials with liquids.
Interfaces, particularly between solids and liquids, challenge many
computational approaches due to their heterogeneity, the statistical nature of
the liquid, the importance of both strong and weak forces among molecules and
the high atomic density on both sides. The PI aims to develop a novel
computational method for solid/liquid interfaces, establish its accuracy and
apply it to selective materials problems. This computational materials science
program addresses essential fundamental questions on the effects of solvents on
fundamental physical and chemical processes. The PI will develop a computational
approach that combines random sampling methods for solving the equations of
quantum mechanics with a model for the solvent based on the electrostatic
interaction between the liquid and the solid. The accuracy of the method will be
tested by comparison with experimental data and previous computational studies.
To establish its range of applicability, the method will be used to address
three material problems that present difficulties for existing methods, are
important for energy and information technologies and can answer fundamental
questions of how solvents affect materials properties. This research advances
the use of computers and computation to predict the properties of materials to
advance fundamental understanding and develop new technologies.

This research program, through integration of computation and experimental
collaborations across the scientific disciplines of materials science,
electrochemistry, organic chemistry and condensed-matter physics, will provide a
unique educational experience for students of all levels and prepare them for
careers in the growing area of computational materials science. The primary
educational objectives of this program are to introduce K-12, undergraduate, and
graduate students to the interdisciplinary field of computational materials
science and to broaden the participation of underrepresented minorities. The PI
will train undergraduate and graduate students for future jobs in materials
science, both through mentoring students from freshman to graduate level in
research and by integrating the research into undergraduate and graduate level
courses. To attract young students, particularly underrepresented minorities, to
STEM disciplines the PI will build an extended outreach program Science with
random numbers for middle and high-school students and distribute it to racially
diverse inner-city schools in Syracuse and New York City and add it into a
workshop for Cornell University's Expanding Your Horizon program for middle
school girls. For the development, evaluation and distribution of the teaching
module, the PI will work with the platforms provided by the Cornell Center for
Materials Research and the College of Engineering Diversity Programs Office.