* 1542306
* Workshop:  An Interdisciplinary Conference on Using Social   Science to Improve Health Outcomes
* SBE,SES
* 11/01/2015,10/31/2016
* Kenneth Kollman, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 10/31/2016
* USD 47,216.00

General Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed conference will bring together
social scientists who specialize in the analysis of human communication and
decision-making from the fields of health communication and the social sciences.
Health information is often conveyed in tense, conflict-laden environments.
People may be anxious about long-term illness or the prospect of death, or may
question the motives of health practitioners. Social scientists who study
communication, learning, and decision making in political environments have
documented learning outcomes in similar environments. Social scientists have
studied many situations where receivers of information use a cognitive process
distorted by their prior beliefs or attitudes to distort, frame, or interpret
new information to suit their perceived needs. Yet, few public health or medical
communicators are aware of this knowledge base and almost none integrate it into
their communication strategies. Also problematic is the fact that journalists
and political advocates, interested in advancing their own agendas, present
themselves as knowing as much or more than trained researchers about critical
topics such as vaccination. This complicates the processing of new information
for many audience members. The conference will focus on how to improve
communication of critical medical and public health information to non-academic
audiences, bringing together experts on science communication, scholars working
to improve public health messaging, and social scientists who study the
psychological foundations of how people learn. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our conference will both leverage what health
scientists know and also assist them in their work through their interactions
with leading social scientists. Bringing the social sciences into conversations
about medicine and public health may be critical to improving the nation's
health and reducing strains on its health care system. Public health researchers
who specialize in research about mass health behavior and communicating findings
to non-scientific audiences have experiences that they can share with social
scientists, including discussions to do two things: change mass attitudes about
health-related behaviors, and improve the means by which health practitioners
communicate with patients. This proposed workshop focuses on how to improve
communication of critical medical and public health information to non-academic
audiences, bringing together experts on science communication, scholars working
to improve public health messaging, and social scientists who focus on the
psychological foundations of how people learn. The PIs invite 25-30 people to
participate actively in the conference. The workshop includes eight sessions
with two presenters and a keynote address. Session topics include communication
of science findings, challenges in improving public health, scientific
communication in decision making, what information elicits trust across and
between groups of people, social scientific literacy, and improving public
health and social science processes.