* 1542555
* Dimensions: Links Between Spectral Irradiance and Cryptophyte Biodiversity in Environments from Ponds to Oceans
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2021
* Jeffry Dudycha, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Michael Sieracki
* 08/31/2021
* USD 1,960,535.00

In aquatic environments, microscopic algae known as phytoplankton are important
primary producers. Through photosynthesis, these organisms fix carbon dioxide
into the organic carbon molecules that fuel life in ponds, rivers, lakes and
oceans. The color of light available for photosynthesis varies among
environments, e.g., the deep blue ocean vs. a black water river. In order to
live in a particular environment, phytoplankton must have photosynthetic
pigments that are tuned to absorbing the colors of light available. This project
focuses on the cryptophytes, a relatively uncharacterized group of
phytoplankton, that are abundant in a wide range of aquatic habitats ranging
from small ponds to oceans. Cryptophytes use phycobilin pigments to capture
light energy; these pigments allow cryptophytes to photosynthesize in light
environments that are poorly exploited by other types of algae. The project
goals are: (1) to characterize the ecological distribution and taxonomic
diversification of cryptophyte species, (2) to determine the effectiveness of
their light capture in different light environments, and (3) to characterize the
molecular evolutionary pathways of critical light capture genes. Understanding
these links is important to predicting how changes in land-use (like
deforestation and urbanization, both of which impact the color of light in
downstream watersheds) will affect aquatic productivity. This project will
provide training for a post-doc, 2-4 graduate students, and 10 undergraduates.
Through a partnership with Morris College and other University of South Carolina
programs, underrepresented minorities will be recruited into summer fellowships.
Novel cryptophyte strains will be deposited in living culture collections for
use by other researchers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project's central question
is deceptively simple: How do functional, genetic, and phylogenetic diversity
interact in the ecological diversification of cryptophytes with respect to light
environment? The researchers will conduct an integrative research program on the
biodiversity of cryptophytes to understand how environmental variation in
spectral irradiance is associated with the physiological diversity of light
capture in cryptophytes in the context of their historical diversification. This
work integrates several components: (1) Field sampling in water bodies ranging
from small ponds to oceans to identify the specific light environments in which
strains live, to determine the pigments that cryptophytes produce in those
habitats, and to identify novel species; (2) Phenotypic studies to determine how
variation in spectral irradiance (light color) influences light capture,
photosynthesis, and growth of diverse taxa. These will also determine spectral
absorption of phycobilins in strains throughout the cryptophyta; (3)
Construction of a well-supported phylogeny based on sequencing nucleomorph
genomes of ~200 strains; (4) Analyses of molecular evolution of key light
capture genes, in particular those that encode the alpha and beta subunits of
the cryptophyte phycobiliproteins, and those involved in the phycobilin
synthesis pathway; (5) Experimental evolution to test the ability of diverse
strains of cryptophytes to evolve into new light niches; (6) Experimental
transcriptomics to identify the functional responses of diverse strains to
variation in spectral irradiance; and (7) Phylogenetically-informed tests of the
associations between habitat, molecular evolution, organismal performance, and
spectral absorbance. Ultimately, this work should be a transformative
contribution to our understanding of the diversification of photosynthesis and
the role of that diversification in the ecological distribution of cryptophytes.