* 1542439
* RET Site: Research Experiences for Teachers in Computer Vision and Bio-Medical Imaging
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2019
* Mubarak Shah, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Allyson Kennedy
* 12/31/2019
* USD 600,000.00

This funding establishes a new Research Experience for Teachers (RET) Site at
the University of Central Florida (UCF). The primary objective of this RET site
is to engage high school teachers in summer research experiences in computer
vision and bio-medical engineering. The teachers will develop classroom modules
and materials which will be implemented in their classrooms during the academic
year. The UCF RET team has an outstanding track record of achievements in
computer vision research, education, outreach, and K-12 educational initiatives,
including hosting the longest continually active CISE Research Experiences for
Undergraduates Site. The team plans to provide research and professional
development opportunities to high school teachers from the greater Orlando area.
They particularly focus on teachers teaching Pre-Calculus, AP Calculus, AP
Computer Science, AP Statistics, AP Physics, and AP or IB Biology, and the
teachers interested in promoting Science Fair activities in their schools. The
project will develop a community of teachers who are passionate about computer
vision and imaging and who can translated this excitement to their students
through engaging, high-quality inquiry learning
experiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is anchored by a research area
this is compelling and exciting for teachers and K-12 students and by an
exceptional faculty team that has demonstrated expertise in both research and
K-12 outreach. The site features projects that are teacher accessible as well as
connected to current research and practice. The RET site includes sound
evaluation and dissemination plans that may provide models for integrating
computing and computer vision fundamentals and research into advanced high
school subjects, filling an important disciplinary gap. The project will provide
professional development to teachers from a local metropolitan region. Teachers
will develop and hone their research, communication, and presentation skills,
all of which are essential to their professional growth and success. The project
will build the technical capacity of teachers so they are capable of developing
and implementing new, exciting inquiry-based learning activities at their
schools. The project team will disseminate the project materials through the
TeachEngineering digital library and build a local Curriculum Web that will be
shared with a wider audience of teachers and annual workshops. The team will
also disseminate project results through high-quality journals and professional
meetings.