* 1542851
* MATH:EAGER: Improving Algebra Web-Native Learning Material via Real-Life Applications and Games
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Frank Vahid, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Karen Keene
* 08/31/2018
* USD 247,779.00

One of the hurdles students often face when they enter college is to be able to
navigate through algebra and/or developmental mathematics, and a large number of
students across the country are enrolled in these courses in each year. This
project will develop new algebra and developmental mathematics learning material
and approaches specifically targeted to lower division college students. The
project will build on a new web-native approach already shown to improve
college-student learning and success outcomes. That approach involves material
having less text and fewer video lectures, and, instead, includes more
animations, extensive learning questions, and tools for
exploring/tinkering/practicing with auto-generated, auto-graded challenge
activities seamlessly integrated throughout the material. The project will focus
on creating and integrating real-life applications of concepts relevant to
college students. The project also will create and integrate web-based
activities that help students to master skills and build intuition of
mathematical concepts. Research has shown that student engagement with real-life
applications in competition-like settings can improve mathematics learning
outcomes substantially. This project will create and integrate those aspects
into state-of-the-art mathematics learning material, garner adoption of the
material by numerous colleges, and evaluate and conduct research on the
material's effectiveness via multiple studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
will develop applications that speak to college students in several ways,
including relevance to: (1) college students' current and near-future personal
lives (such as renting an apartment or deciding among mobile phone plans); (2)
students' future careers (for example, performing basic accounting or
understanding results of controlled studies); and (3) students' understanding of
real-world issues (such as environmental change, the value of a college
education, or world poverty). The project will develop learning activities both
suitable and engaging for college-age students - self or small group competitive
settings that foster students' skills, intuition, and deep understanding related
to fundamental core concepts. The project will conduct controlled randomized
studies, as well as cross-semester analyses, to determine the impact of such
applications and learning environments on student learning and success as well
as on student attitudes versus more traditional learning material and
approaches. The materials and approaches will be designed to promote the
facility of wide adoption, consequently enhancing the potential for overall
student success in college through the improvement of student learning in
algebra and developmental mathematics.