* 1542132
* Workshop: What's Next for LIGO to be held in Silver Spring, MD; May 7-8, 2015.
* MPS,PHY
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2016
* Peter Shawhan, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 04/30/2016
* USD 9,987.00

The Laser Interferometer Gravitational-wave Observatory (LIGO), funded primarily
by NSF, is at the forefront of the worldwide effort to directly detect
gravitational waves for the first time and to use them to answer fundamental
questions in physics and astronomy. The detection of LIGO's first gravitational
wave will be a transformational event, opening new avenues for astrophysical
exploration, opportunities to build more powerful detectors directed at known
source populations and data analysis enhancements informed by direct detection.
This award will support a workshop entitled "What's Next for LIGO?", which will
explore the prospects for advancing the field over the next several years,
informed by the data and findings that will be obtained. Participants in this
workshop will discuss how the first few detections might influence which paths
offer the best opportunities, and how the community can be prepared with
appropriate plans, including international networks and outreach of
gravitational wave science to the broad scientific community. A cohort of
gravitational wave scientists, astronomers, and astrophysicists will participate
in this discussion, with brief, visionary presentations followed by ample time
for open discussion. Focus panels will summarize discussions and write up
conclusions after the meeting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop will be held in
Silver Spring, Maryland on May 7-8, 2015. The workshop will have five sessions,
one for each of the following topics: Multi-messenger astronomy, Data analysis,
Advanced LIGO improvements, the international detector network and Gravitational
Wave Science in the broader context of U.S. science. A tentative list of
speakers and panelists has been prepared, and 6 of the 21 people on the
tentative list are women. The organizing committee will give special
consideration to women and members of minority groups, as well as early-career
scientists.