* 1542249
* I-Corps Teams: Pathways to Market for ICARUS Algae Cultivation and Harvesting Technology
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2015,12/31/2016
* Daniel Yeh, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 12/31/2016
* USD 50,000.00

The days of global dependence on fossil fuels are numbered, as supply cannot
sustainably keep up with demand. Next generation fuels must be developed to
protect our quality of life, environment, and wallets. Although microalgal
biofuels are a promising alternative to fossil fuels, many bottlenecks in large
scale cultivation and processing are holding back the industry. These technical
challenges include reducing culture collapse due to the invasion of grazers,
providing economically viable nutrients, taking advantage of marginal land, and
increasing culture density to reduce processing costs. To address these issues,
this I-Corps team has developed a cultivation method called the "Isolated
Cultivation of Algal Resource Utilizing Selectivity (ICARUS)." ICARUS is a
membrane-based method for cultivating microalgae using wastewater, a method that
overcomes many of the challenges of large-scale
production.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed technology has the potential to
impact the public sector (wastewater treatment plants), the private sector
(large-scale algal production facilities, biomass processing facilities, biofuel
facilities), and academia (R&amp;D of new algal strains). The hybrid technology
will encourage an integration of the synergistic goals of the USEPA (wastewater
treatment) and the USDOE (development of algae biofuel), meanwhile creating new
opportunities for a cutting edge workforce trained in multiple sectors essential
to the national economy. Successful commercialization of the proposed technology
could make wastewater treatment net energy positive, while making algal biofuels
cost-competitive with fossil fuels. ICARUS also provides a platform for a unique
public-private business model for algae biofuel production, where typically
risk-averse treatment plants may benefit from efficient technology providing
additional treatment.