* 1542471
* RET Site:  Berkeley Engineering RET plus Computing (BERET+C)
* ENG,EEC
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2019
* George Johnson, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Mary Poats
* 12/31/2019
* USD 599,120.00

This Research Experiences for Teachers (RET) in Engineering and Computer Science
Site at the University of California Berkeley seeks to strengthen K-12 education
in the STEM disciplines by involving a total of a total of 27 science and
mathematics teachers and 27 pre-service teachers from the Oakland and San
Francisco Unified Schools Districts in an intensive eight-week summer
engineering research experiences in computing and computational methods in
engineering. The RET Site will involve a partnership between UC Berkeley faculty
in engineering departments and centers as well as the UC Berkeley Cal Teach
program in recruitment, program development, and implementation. The RET
participants will gain first-hand multidisciplinary experiences to foster their
development of the necessary pedagogical content knowledge to engage their own
K-12 students in authentic experiences in science and engineering. The program
will impact two areas that are of direct interest to the United States and the
world: increasing access for K-12 teachers and their students to a deeper
understanding of the STEM disciplines, research, and career opportunities; and
inspiring teachers and students to pursue engineering careers.

Over a three-year period this RET Site will offer an intensive summer research
program for a total of 54 K-12 STEM in-service and pre-service teachers in high
needs school districts in Oakland and San Francisco. The multidisciplinary
aspects of this research allows STEM teachers to strengthen their engineering
design and computing knowledge and to incorporate their experiences into
inquiry-based learning that will excite and interest their students. They will
partner with the NSF Engineering Research Centers (ERCs) Nanomanfucturing
Systems for Mobile computing and Mobile Energy Technologies (NASCENT) and
Reinventing the Nation?s Urban Water Infrastructure (ReNUWIt) and other major
research centers at UCB to leverage the faculty, resources, and infrastructure
to support the RET Site program. Key features of the program include: 1) Direct
supervision of projects and course material development by faculty mentors and
graduate students; 2) Involvement of RET teachers and their students in timely,
cutting-edge research projects in mobile computing and energy and urban water
infrastructure that are translated into inquiry-based engineering curriculum
enhancements; 3) Academic year engagement activities; and 4) Recruitment of STEM
teachers from high needs school districts in the Oakland and San Francisco.