* 1542848
* INSPIRE: Neural and Genetic Factors Underlying Individual and Phylogenetic Variation in Communication
* SBE,SMA
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2020
* Chet Sherwood, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 12/31/2020
* USD 1,006,694.00

This INSPIRE award is partially funded by the Perception, Action, and Cognition
Program and the Biological Anthropology Program in the Division of Behavioral
and Cognitive Sciences in the Directorate for Social, Behavioral, and Economic
Sciences, and the Office of Integrative Activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Humans
naturally learn to speak and use language. It is one of the defining features of
our species. Understanding the biology of this extraordinary capacity is
relevant to the fields of neuroscience, linguistics, genetics, psychology, and
anthropology. Human speech and language involve intertwined processes, including
the perception of signals (i.e., sounds, words, manual gestures, signs in sign
language), the learning of phased movements of the mouth, tongue, and larynx to
produce combinations of sound elements, as well as the higher-level cognitive
aspects of word meaning, language structure, and the understanding of the
discourse in which communication occurs. As each of these components may have
separate neural and genetic bases, a focus on individual aspects of language
helps dissect this complex socio-cognitive behavior. Studies of humans with
speech and language disorders have provided insight into candidate genes (FOXP2
and KIAA0319) and brain structures implicated in different elements of language
function. However, it is not yet understood the degree to which these genetic
and neural building blocks of language are present and vary in nonhuman animals.
This research project encompasses an innovative and interdisciplinary approach
to investigate this question among humans' closest living relatives, the
chimpanzees. A better understanding of these complex interactions will further
our knowledge of the neurodevelopmental foundation of disorders affecting
language in humans, such as autism spectrum disorder, dyslexia, and verbal
dyspraxia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project includes a multifaceted examination
of individual differences in vocal learning, motor control, and sound-symbol
learning in relation to genetic variation, neuroanatomical structure, and
molecular expression in the brain. Chimpanzees show marked variation in
orofacial motor control that allows some individuals, but not others, to
flexibly learn novel vocalizations. To understand the neurobiological
differences among chimpanzees related to vocal learning ability, this project
will use several cutting-edge analytic approaches, combining detailed MRI brain
imagery, sophisticated measurements of microanatomical structure and cellular
composition (from an existing histological collection), and innovative computer
science-based methods. In addition, genomic analyses will include FOXP2, a gene
that plays a critical role in establishing the brain circuitry required for the
development of language in humans. However, the function of FOXP2 in
communication and orofacial motor control is essentially unknown in primates:
this project will be the first to characterize variation in FOXP2 across
chimpanzees and examine associations with individual differences in brain
structure, gene expression, and vocal learning (behavioral tests that involve
minimal encouragement of the chimpanzees and reinforcement with food rewards,
without involving any anesthesia, pain, or distress). Another important
dimension of human language is the ability to understand words and their
meaning, in both the auditory and visual domains. In humans, the gene KIAA0319,
which is involved in brain development and dyslexia, is thought to play a key
role in this sound-symbol learning. This project will examine how variation in
KIAA0319 underlies differences in brain organization and sound-symbol learning
in chimpanzees (housed at the Yerkes National Primate Center and the MD Anderson
Cancer Center). All DNA samples, MRI scans, and brain tissue to be used in the
study has previously been acquired. The combination of these multiple techniques
will result in unique data sets that will transform our ability to compare brain
structures and behavioral abilities relevant to language and brain function in
chimpanzees and humans.