* 1542001
* Support for a workshop and related activities aimed at exploring and facilitating scientific frontiers, infrastructure, and educational needs in Tectonics
* GEO,EAR
* 05/15/2015,04/30/2019
* Yvette Kuiper, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 04/30/2019
* USD 99,600.00

This project provides funding to bring together members of the tectonics
community to conduct a workshop and related activities that are aimed at
producing a white paper that will develop ideas regarding future challenges in
the fields of tectonics and and related disciplines. The last such endeavor was
over twelve years ago and the new workshop will reflect changes that have
occurred during the past decade, as well as identifying pertinent and promising
new areas of scientific research. In addition, the workshop will address and
prioritize infrastructure needs and data systems that will be needed to
facilitate future research in tectonics, and promising directions and needs in
related geoscience education. The workshop will involve representatives of the
community and will seek input from interested individuals at all stages of
development of the document. The workshop will be held at the University of
Wisconsin on July 22-14, 2014 will bring together a diverse group of scientists
whose research addresses various aspects of tectonics. A series of follow-on
activities will engage members of the community that are not able to attend the
workshop, including post-workshop discussion groups and town hall meetings at
professional society meetings. These meetings will be followed by an open
comment period. A white paper synthesizing results of these activities will be
completed in 2016. The white paper will specify the support needed to sustain or
increase productivity in critical areas, which will facilitate communication
with funding agencies, policy makers, and university administrators at all
levels, and it will articulate the importance and relevance of research in
tectonics research to society.

It has been over a decade since the last white paper summarizing important
research challenges in tectonics and structural geology was produced. In the
intervening time, there have been significant changes in: 1) Priorities in the
relevance and significance of scientific topics; 2) Field and laboratory
research methods and emerging technologies; 3) Challenges and opportunities in
infrastructure and data systems; and 4) Relevance and impact of research in
tectonics on societal issues. These changes underscore the fact that this is an
opportune time to revisit and assess the future of tectonics as a community. The
overarching goal of this project is to identify pertinent and promising areas of
new scientific research, recognize and prioritize infrastructure needs that are
necessary to making scientific progress, and articulate the societal relevance
of research in tectonics. A further goal is to make this workshop a community
building activity, in which the community is actively involved and engaged.