* 1542744
* Exploring Advanced Placement Opportunities in Engineering: A Workshop on Designing a Universal, Exchangeable and Transferable (DUET) Credit
* ENG,EEC
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2017
* Leigh Abts, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Mary Poats
* 09/30/2017
* USD 287,842.00

This project provides support for Exploring Advanced Placement Opportunities in
Engineering: A Workshop on Designing a Universal, Exchangeable and Transferable
(DUET) Credit, to be held at the University of Maryland College Park (UMD) in
the Spring of 2016. The overall goal is to contribute to the development of a
secondary-school level course in design that would expose students interested in
engineering and architecture to the design process. The workshop will explore
issues and barriers associated with realizing this goal. Follow-on to the
workshop will be a series of interviews to calibrate the issues and barriers
against the experience of practitioners and policy makers. The workshop would
initiate research that could ultimately open the credit doorways for expertise
earned across formal and informal design activities covering a range of programs
from PLTW to Maker Spaces. Creating an equivalency process for design across
learning and practice settings (e.g. engineering, education, architecture) has
the potential to broaden the diversity of students, encouraging them to take the
first steps towards understanding and practicing design; and to receive
recognition. Aligning the pathways for credit to be earned and universally
accepted, in the context of the formal and informal learning environments
available for design, would open many academic and career pathways for all
students, teachers and practitioners. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This workshop will
create a unique opportunity for leaders from the education, engineering,
workforce and policy communities to convene and share ideas on how to achieve
universal acceptance of earned credits for the introductory study of design. The
workshop will draw approximately fifty participants from six different sectors:
K-12, community colleges, four-year institutions of higher education, industry
and not-for-profits, government and policy, and non-government funders and
foundations affected and impacted by a transferable credit for design that have
applied design thinking within their occupations. The proposed one-and-a-half-
day workshop will be organized and conducted by UMD in collaboration with Morgan
State University and followed up by individual interviews documenting 1) core
design Knowledge, Skills, and Abilities (KSAs) for a universally accepted credit
for design; 2) identification of the critical pathways and barriers within these
pathways for a universally accepted credit for design; and 3) use of Logic
Modeling to organize the findings.