* 1542153
* NNCI: Mid-Atlantic Nanotechnology Hub (MANTH) for Research, Education, &amp; Innovation
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2021
* Mark Allen, University of Pennsylvania
* Cooperative Agreement
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 08/31/2021
* USD 5,000,000.00

Nanotechnology, the exploitation of the science of the very small, has the
potential to revolutionize lives - a few examples include faster electronics,
smaller biomedical implants, better batteries, materials with high strength or
the ability to self-clean, and small machines that can sense the physical world.
Often, nanotechnology development requires access to a large fabrication and
characterization infrastructure and the related scientific expertise to allow
users to build and measure such nanomaterials and nanodevices. This project
establishes a Mid-Atlantic Nanotechnology Hub (MANTH) for Research, Education,
and Innovation at the University of Pennsylvania as a NNCI site. This site will
allow users in the mid-Atlantic region, the nation's fifth largest economic
area, to access the Singh Center for Nanotechnology, where they can perform
nanofabrication and measurement tasks, and interact with nanotechnology experts.
The Singh Center is located at the University of Pennsylvania in downtown
Philadelphia, and is highly accessible to over 100 regional academic
institutions and the industry-rich mid-Atlantic region. The Singh Center will
also host education programs to introduce high school students, college
undergraduates, and the Philadelphia area community to nanotechnology. These
potential future nanotechnologists will have the opportunity to participate in
Nano Day and Summer Research Experiences for Undergraduates programs held on-
site; view nanotechnology contributions to community outreach programs such as
Philly Materials Day and the Philadelphia Science Festival; and participate in
workforce training activities for nanotechnology technicians carried out in
partnership with the Community College of Philadelphia.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;MANTH will enable access to leading-edge research and
development facilities and expertise for academic, government, and industry
researchers conducting activities within all disciplines of nanoscale science,
engineering, and technology. Examples of its capabilities include: electron-
beam, photo-, imprint- and soft-lithographies; material deposition and etching;
multiscale 3D printing; laser micromachining; electron and scanning probe
microscopy; tip-based nanofabrication; and ion and electron beam milling. This
NNCI site will foster intellectual collaboration by assisting users in
addressing their nanoscience and application needs; providing a forum for
intellectual exchange between academic and industry users; and developing new
fabrication processes that not only contribute to the users end application but
also further the fields of nanofabrication and nanomanufacturing. Users will
also benefit from interaction with Penn faculty and staff, possessing
significant expertise in nanofabrication; flexible/stretchable nanodevices;
MEMS; microfluidics, photonics, and electronics; fabrication and exploitation of
nanostructured soft materials systems; multiple low-dimensional materials;
characterization and integration of beyond-silicon material systems; and
investigations at the nano-bio interface, from medical devices to enabling the
understanding of biological systems. In addition to serving existing
researchers, MANTH will engage potential future nanotechnologists through on-
site research reviews, summer research experiences, and outreach to local
Philadelphia high schools. By acting as a catalyst for growth of nanotechnology
in this region, significant opportunities for nanotechnologists at all levels
will be created, from technicians through a workforce development partnership
with the Community College of Philadelphia to Ph.D. researchers.