* 1542737
* CS10K: Prioritizing & Expanding Access to Computer Science Instruction in High-needs High Schools
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2019
* Ruthie Ousley, Teach For America
* Standard Grant
* Allyson Kennedy
* 09/30/2019
* USD 1,000,000.00

Teach For America (TFA) proposes to recruit and support a diverse group of
teachers to teach computer science (CS) in high-needs public high schools. Often
students at low-resourced schools--frequently low-income students and students
of color--do not receive the high-quality, rigorous computer science instruction
needed for success in college and beyond. This CS10K proposal aims to increase
access to CS for students of color, low-income students, female students, and
students with intersections of these identities. TFA is well positioned to
accomplish this as its organizational vision focuses on improving educational
opportunities for all children, particularly low-income children and children of
color. TFA placement schools serve students historically underrepresented in
computing by socioeconomic status (>80% eligible for free/reduced price lunch)
and racial/ethnic backgrounds (>80% identify as African American or Latino/a).

The proposed work will implement the Exploring Computer Science (ECS) course in
urban and rural public high schools in 10 Teach For America (TFA) regions over
the next three years, beginning with New York City, South Carolina, Kansas City,
and the Rio Grande Valley. Specifically, TFA proposes to prepare 83 teachers,
designated as ECS Fellows for at least a three-year period. In their first year
as ECS Fellows, participating teachers will advocate for CS instruction in their
schools. In their second and third years, they will teach the ECS curriculum,
and in their third year and beyond, they will have the opportunity to become ECS
Professional Development Facilitators. The long-term outcomes of this project
are three-fold: more students in high needs areas will have access to ECS; a
talent pipeline of CS10K educators will be created to serve high-needs
populations, become advocates for increased access to CS, and prepare future ECS
teachers in high-needs communities; and school leaders in high-needs high
schools will commit to broadening participation in CS activities. This CS10K
proposal plans to directly address existing CS education inequities and expands
the research base in the following ways:

-- Recruit diverse leaders to teach CS in high-needs public high schools --
Partner with school and district leaders to ensure high-needs high schools
prioritize ECS in their course offerings and provide them with teachers who are
qualified to teach ECS -- Work with the ECS team to prepare and support 83 ECS
Fellows to deliver the ECS curriculum to nearly 2,000 9th-12th grade students in
high-needs urban and rural high schools

In evaluating this work, TFA will partner with SRI International to conduct a
rigorous evaluation to answer the following questions of interest to both TFA
and the broader CS education field: What is the impact of this project on CS
learning and broadening participation in CS among students participating in the
ECS courses led by ECS Fellows? What are the impacts of this project on teacher
capacity and teacher leadership in CS? What are administrators? views on
offering CS? How do they prioritize CS and navigate barriers?