* 1542310
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award:  Lithic Minimalization And Ecological Risk
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2017
* John Shea, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2017
* USD 25,546.00

This project evaluates the role of climatic variability in the evolution of
small tool technologies. Small tool technologies are a novel and cyclical
feature in Homo sapiens societies. Nanotechnologies such as have revolutionized
biomedical sciences, engineering and computer systems are now considered
hallmarks of the "digital age." Yet, the practice of producing small tools
emerged in African and Eurasia over 100 000 years ago. These tools are known as
microliths. Archaeologists link microliths to such distinctive human behaviors
as the production of composite tools (e.g. projectile weapons), the construction
of ecological niches, extensive social networking, and global human dispersals.
Anthropologists have long recognized a link between microlithic technologies and
ecological risk, or the frequency and severity of economic loss due to
insufficient recovery of energy from their environment. Long-term comparative
research on processes of toolkit microlithization as a response to ecological
risk is hampered by variable definitions for microliths; uncertainty about how
microliths were made; and a lack of data on how microlith production methods
were culturally transmitted. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will use a
comparative technological approach to the rich southern African MIS 2 (c. 29 -
12 ka) archaeological record to address these obstacles. First, it will
establish statistical guidelines for defining microliths to overcome their
variable definitions. Second, it will obtain detailed technological information
from experiments on siliceous rocks and quartz minerals to compare two primary
microlith production strategies: bipolar and freehand reduction. Third, it will
track evidence for the cultural transmission of these production strategies
using attributes of core modification and flake morphology to indicate lithic
process vs. product copying. Technological data will be combined with modern
climatic, paleoenvironmental and spatial data to assess the role of ecological
risk in the uptake and spread of microlithic technologies in southern Africa.
These relationship will be assessed on stone tools at three southern African
rockshelters: Sehonghong, Ntloana T'oana and Boomplaas. The southern African MIS
2 archaeological record is uniquely positioned to offer insights into the
operation of analogous microlithic technological systems in other areas of the
world, and thus human behavioral evolution more broadly. Rapid climate change is
a concern shared by all of humanity past and present. Although the role of
climate change in our future is yet to be determined, how our late Pleistocene
ancestors dealt with climate change is a story written in stone. Our future
survival depends on understanding this story.