* 1542342
* RET Site: Colorado School of Mines WE2NG: Water-Energy Education for the Next Generation
* ENG,EEC
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2019
* Terri Hogue, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Mary Poats
* 09/30/2019
* USD 599,849.00

The water-energy nexus, and the relationship to food production, is a growing
national priority. Water use for energy production has increased dramatically in
the last decade and is expected to increase. This Research Experiences for
Teachers (RET) in Engineering and Computer Science Site at the Colorado School
of Mines (CSM), Water-Energy Education for the Next Generation (WE2NG), offers a
unique and experiential program focused on the water-energy nexus for STEM
teachers at one of the world's leading science and engineering schools with a
long-standing and successful relationship with industry partners. WE2NG will be
one of the first RET programs to advance the dialogue on the water-energy nexus
through integration of teachers, and ultimately their students with cutting-edge
water-energy research and technology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over three years,
the RET Site will target 30 K-12 STEM teachers and students from the Jefferson
County School District for participation in an eight week intensive summer
research program related to water and energy mentored by faculty and graduate
students. The WE2NG program will: 1) Build science proficiency in the water-
energy nexus in the regional K-12 system; 2) Enhance science lessons and
curriculum that address state science standards; 3) Improve science literacy in
the Colorado community through teachers and their students; 4) Promote interest
in STEM careers in teacher-student groups through interactions with world class
researchers at a top-tier science and engineering school; 5) Provide teacher
connections to local industry for long-term partnerships; and 6) Develop long-
term infrastructure for sustainable teacher-engineer-scientist interactions at
CSM. The WE2NG RET Site program has extensive broader impacts, including
explicit and sustainable professional development and the creation of
educational materials in the water-energy nexus for Colorado school districts.