* 1542208
* Workshop: Connecting Alaska Native Communities and U.S. Northwest Coastal Tribes to the Yakut and Evenk Peoples of the Sakha Republic through WIN.
* GEO,OPP
* 01/15/2016,06/30/2017
* Jonathan Waterhouse, Oregon Health & Science University
* Standard Grant
* Anna M. Kerttula
* 06/30/2017
* USD 48,729.00

This award will support a series of workshops focused on connecting the Water
Indigenous Network (WIN) of the US North West Coastal Tribes and Alaska Native
communities with the Yakut and Evenk Peoples who reside in the Sakha Republic of
Russia along the Lena River. The Lena River is the 11th longest river in the
world, has the 9th largest watershed, and provides fresh water to the Arctic
Ocean. WIN scientists are creating a program by which global watersheds can be
monitored year round by local people, something not possible by field scientists
because most can only visit their research sites in the summer season for a few
weeks. WIN will train local people in scientific methodologies for monitoring
the health and production of the Lena River Watershed. Local monitoring will
provide data on one of the world?s largest watersheds; information critical to
understanding the Arctic Ocean ecosystem and how it is changing.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;In collaboration with scientists from Oregon Health and Science
Universities Science and Technology Center for Coastal Margin Observation and
Prediction (CMOP) and the Woods Hole Research Center, with this award WIN will
organize workshops among the Yakut and Evenk Peoples to bring scientists and
indigenous communities together to explore issues that affect indigenous
people?s knowledge and culture along the world?s rivers. The workshops will
include training in GIS Mapping of watersheds, digital database construction and
archiving, video documentation, photo documentation, water quality sampling
protocols and techniques, and traditional knowledge story telling and
documentation. The workshops will also give the WIN team the opportunity to meet
with local and regional leaders and government representatives to gain their
support for local participation in network activities.