* 1542276
* Symposium on Modeling and Theory Driven Design of Soft Materials (Boston, MA, Nov. 29-Dec. 4, 2015)
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2015,03/31/2016
* Meenakshi Dutt, Materials Research Society
* Standard Grant
* Dimitrios Papavassiliou
* 03/31/2016
* USD 15,000.00

PI: Dutt, Meenakshi&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1542276 &lt;br/&gt;Institution:
Materials Research Society&lt;br/&gt;Title: Symposium on Modeling and Theory
Driven Design of Soft Materials (Boston, MA, Nov 29 ? Dec 4,
2015)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal seeks funds to partially support the
attendance (which includes the registration, travel and subsistence) of early
career scientists (junior faculty, postdoctoral researchers, graduate and
undergraduate students) and partial registration support for the invited
speakers to the symposium "Modeling and Theory Driven Design of Soft Materials,"
to be held at Boston, MA, between Nov. 29 and Dec. 4, 2015. This symposium is
motivated by the growing importance of soft materials ? these encompass a wide
range of materials, such as polymers, colloids, foams, gels, composites,
bioinspired materials, and functional organic-inorganic structures, whose
predominant physical behavior occurs around room
temperature.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The symposium will be attended by both
prominent and young scientists. The aim of the symposium is to bring together
researchers from academia, industry and federal laboratories who are exploring
both simulation and theory to explore and validate the design of synthetic and
organic soft materials to enable the dissemination of state-of-art developments
in the field along with educating the next generation of young scientists. The
organizers will encourage the participation by prioritizing the travel,
subsistence and registration support for women and underrepresented minority
researchers.