* 1542505
* EAGER: SusChEM: Investigating the Structure-Property Relationships of Sugar-Derived Block Copolymers
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2017
* Thomas Epps, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 07/31/2017
* USD 276,542.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aim of this proposal is to
design and study novel materials from sugar-derived natural resources that would
have special molecular architectures and properties. Such properties would
include tunable, temperature-responsive behavior in water solutions. The
materials will consist of different types of polymers linked together ("block
copolymers") whose two components can have different molecular architectures,
molecular lengths, chemical structures, etc. The effects of all these parameters
will be investigated on the self-assembly of these molecules and on the
structure-property relationships of the resulting materials. The major outcomes
of this research effort may lead to new paradigms for polymer design, synthesis,
and self-assembly through the use of highly abundant natural resources.
Additionally, the project includes a major focus on educational and outreach
activities. The team of investigators will collaborate with the Institute for
School Partnership of Washington University to develop outreach and education
activities for underrepresented and underprivileged students in the St. Louis
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The long-term research goal of this project is to
enable technologies for the design and synthesis of high-performance and
renewable polymeric materials that exploit various sugars produced by
lignocellulosic cell-wall carbohydrate depolymerization. Sugars obtained from
lignocellulose represent an abundant and renewable feedstock that potentially
could reduce reliance on petroleum-based resources. To this end, the PIs will
design and synthesize renewable sugar-derived block copolymers (BCP) that
exhibit tunable temperature-responsive behavior in aqueous solution. Specific
aims will involve developing tailorable BCPs from designer, sugar-derived, and
stereo-specific monomers through controlled polymerization; then examining the
self-assembly and structure-property relationships associated with the design of
solution-assembled amphiphilic BCPs for tunable and temperature-responsive
solution applications. Design parameters to be explored include: pendant
topological structure (i.e., linear vs. branched sugar derivative); pendant
chemical structure (i.e., hydrophobicity and hydrophilicity); block volume
fractions and compositions; and overall molecular weight. The project is
integrated with a strong educational and outreach component aimed at broadening
participation of underrepresented groups.