* 1542383
* RET Site: PLACE- Promoting Learning About Computational tools and the Environment
* ENG,EEC
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2019
* Noel Urban, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Poats
* 12/31/2019
* USD 631,590.00

This Research Experiences for Teachers (RET) in Engineering and Computer Science
Site at Michigan Technological University (MTU) will focus on the application of
computational tools for researching environmental engineering systems, an area
of research and teaching emphasis at MTU. The research experiences will build on
collaborative, well-established, and broad based multidisciplinary research
activities at MTU. Teachers will gain an understanding of how to apply state of
the art computational tools to research environmental systems and how to solve
environmental problems. The tools and research projects have relevant
applications in high school science (earth sciences, biology, chemistry,
physics), math, and social studies. Through this RET Site teachers and their
students would be provided an understanding of the discipline of environmental
engineering and the research process, which is a field that requires growth and
growing interest from future practitioners. This is especially societally
relevant as 3 of the 14 grand challenges for engineering (National Academy of
Engineering, 2015) directly relate to the field of environmental engineering.

This RET Site will offer an intensive six week summer research program for a
total of 30 rural secondary STEM teachers over three years from school districts
in the Upper Peninsula of Michigan, several which include significant numbers of
Native American students. The proposed activities for each cohort of teachers
consist of: 1) participation of RET and PhD students in a 6-week pre-research
experience institute. Teachers participating via teleconference will be
introduced to the goals of the RET program, provided with background on research
projects, and asked to share their experience about research, inquiry-based
teaching, and learning. PhD student mentors will be introduced to secondary
school teaching environment and standards, inquiry-based teaching, and mentoring
skills based on the Wisconsin Mentoring Seminar; 2) participation in a 6-week
summer program at MTU where teachers and PhD mentors work on research projects
culminating in final poster presentations; and 3) participation, during the
academic year following the summer research program, in developing,
implementing, and disseminating curricular materials in collaboration with PhD
students and senior personnel with experience in lesson plan development. The
project will achieve the following objectives: (a) secondary school teachers
will: gain an understanding of the discipline of environmental engineering and
the research process; learn new computational tools that they can use with their
students and; gain confidence in teaching about research and science (b)
secondary school students will: gain awareness of the discipline of
environmental engineering; gain an understanding of how models and other
computational tools are used in engineering and science and; broaden their
interest in STEM careers; (c) PhD students will: deepen their understanding of
research design through teaching that skill to others; gain an understanding of
how to translate research to science teaching and communication and; gain
experience in mentoring and team building.



.