* 1542902
* High Resolution Underway Observations in Drake Passage: Ocean Physics
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Janet Sprintall, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Peter Milne
* 08/31/2020
* USD 530,448.00

The Antarctic Circumpolar Current (ACC) is the strongest ocean current in the
world, with a flow rate more than 100 times greater than all the rivers on Earth
combined. This project continues a long-term study of ocean properties and
variability in the ACC by repeat transects across the Drake Passage from Punta
Arenas to Palmer Station using the USAP supply ship RV/AS LMGould. This project
will provide information about long term trends and variability in Southern
Ocean fronts, surface water mass properties, heat, and salinity budgets. This
study will contribute to understanding the response of the ACC to atmospheric
forcing on climate relevant time scales, and its role in driving the meridional
overturning circulation of the Southern Ocean. These data represent the only
year-round shipboard measurements in the Southern Ocean.

This project will continue high-resolution, near-repeat XBT/XCTD/ADCP transect
sampling in Drake Passage in order to study modes of variability in ocean
temperature, salinity, currents and backscatter in the Antarctic Circumpolar
Current (ACC). The data will capture variability on time scales from seasonal to
interannual and on spatial scales from current cores to eddies. With almost two
decades of data now available, the primary science objectives are to analyze the
Drake Passage time series and (1) describe and relate the seasonal and long-term
ocean energy distribution to wind, buoyancy and topographic forcing and sinks,
and (2) describe and relate seasonal and long-term changes in the ACC fronts,
water masses and upwelling to biogeochemical variability. The continued data
collection, quality control and dissemination of the Drake Passage data sets to
the broader oceanographic community are critical components of the project.