* 1542842
* Investigating Conceptual Foundations for a Transdisciplinary Model Integrating Computer Science into the Elementary STEM Curriculum
* EDU,DRL
* 01/01/2016,07/31/2019
* Lisa Milenkovic, School Board of Broward County Florida
* Standard Grant
* Arlene de Strulle
* 07/31/2019
* USD 1,499,615.00

Computing has become an integral part of the practice of in modern science,
technology engineering, and mathematics (STEM) fields. As a result, the
STEM+Computing Partnership (STEM+C) program seeks to integrate the use of
computational approaches in K-12 STEM teaching and learning and understand how
this integration can improve STEM learning, engagement, and persistence.
Computational Thinking (CT) is a relatively new educational focus and a clear
need for learners as a 21st century skill. This prokect will address this
challenging new area for young learners, an area greatly in need of research and
learning materials. Broward County Schools' literacy and curriculum coordinator
team will work with their staff and teachers to develop Problem Based Learning
(PBL) integrated Computer Science (CS) and science, technology, engineering and
mathematics (STEM) modules, and professional development materials around these
modules. A University of Chicago research team will conduct strong research
studies to evaluate the effectiveness of these materials and what contributes to
that effectiveness. The collaboration with the well known non profit Code.org
leads to strong potential for wide dissemination of materials, as the Code.org
site is used very frequently by teachers and after-school/informal educators to
obtain instructional materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In a partnership between
Broward County Public Schools (FL), researchers at the University of Chicago,
and Code.org, the Principal Investigators propose to integrate Computer Science
(CS) and science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) at the grade
3-5 level within the literacy block of the school day. This period is when the
science curriculum is covered, in units that currently cover integrated content
in science, technology, engineering and mathematics. They plan to add 6 Problem
Based Learning (PBL) units to this curriculum that integrate CS and STEM. They
will reach 84 grade 3 - 5 classrooms at 14 schools. They will pilot the modules
14 schools, and later, conduct an efficacy trial with approximately 84 teachers
and 1680 students in each condition (modules, no modules). They will measure
both achievement and attitudes towards STEM and CS.