* 1542320
* AGU Chapman Conference  - The MADE Challenge for Groundwater Transport in Highly Heterogeneous Aquifers: Modeling and Characterization at the Field Scale and Promising Future Direc
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* James Butler, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Torgersen
* 05/31/2016
* USD 45,120.00

An AGU Chapman conference on transport in highly heterogeneous porous media,
with a particular focus on the MADE site (MS, USA), will be held at the
Universitat Politecnica de Valencia October 5-8, 2015. Transport of contaminants
and other compounds in groundwater systems remains a serious research question
as well as a pressing societal problem. This meeting will convene researchers in
transport in highly heterogeneous aquifers at the field scale with those
interested in aquifer characterization and solute transport modeling to: 1)
discuss the latest advances in subsurface characterization and modeling
research, 2) define unresolved questions about aquifer characterization and
modeling in highly heterogeneous aquifers, and 3) identify promising avenues for
future research in these areas.

Dealing with heterogeneity, particularly high multi-scale degrees of
heterogeneity, in flow and transport properties is one of the grand challenges
in groundwater hydrology. Experiments and modeling on the Macrodispersion
Experiment (MADE) site, have yielded significant advances. However, many
questions and challenges remain regarding transport in highly heterogeneous
media, the scale for characterization of subsurface heterogeneity, and the
effectiveness of various models to predict transport in such systems. There is
an urgent need to gather the research community to synthesize the state of
current knowledge, This conference will synthesize what has been learned,
identify and prioritize key future challenges in this field, determine promising
avenues for improved aquifer characterization and modeling efforts, and, most
importantly, catalyze collaborative and synergistic research by bringing
together researchers with a diverse range of expertise to focus on common goals.