* 1542752
* Workshop on mapping class groups of surfaces and outer automorphism groups of free groups
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/2015,05/31/2016
* Alan Reid, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 05/31/2016
* USD 30,000.00

The "Workshop on Mapping Class Groups and Out(F_N)" will be held at the
University of Texas, Austin, May 25-30, 2015. This conference brings together
experts studying two of the cornerstones of modern geometric group theory and
low-dimensional topology: mapping class groups of surfaces and outer
automorphism groups of free groups. The ubiquity of these groups throughout
mathematics has motivated their study from many perspectives, drawing on and
contributing to the development of numerous diverse fields. The workshop will
feature six introductory mini-course lectures and 16 research talks by the
world's leading experts, describing cutting edge techniques and the latest
results in the field. This award partially supports workshop speakers and early
career mathematicians.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mapping class groups and outer
automorphism groups of free groups have evolved hand-in-hand throughout their
long and rich history because of the similarities in their definitions and
structure, and because they share much of the same robustness in their
individual elements. The imperfect analogy between the two groups has led to
many striking developments on one side, which in turn motivate problems on the
other. In addition, abstracting the ideas and techniques from the setting of
these groups has led to generalizations with applications in many other classes
of groups and geometric situations. The lectures will cover a wide array of
topics, such as hyperbolicity of associated complexes, quasi-isometric
embeddings and distance formulas, connections to right-angled Artin groups and
to outer automorphism group of other groups, and algebraic and homological
properties, to name a few. Speakers and conference participants will be asked to
provide links to topics related to the conference, which will be posted to the
website: http://www.math.uiuc.edu/~clein/modoutsched.html