* 1542865
* Student Support for the 2015 User Modeling, Adaptation and Personalization Conference
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2018
* Bamshad Mobasher, DePaul University
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 05/31/2018
* USD 14,088.00

This is funding to support travel for up to 5 students enrolled in PhD programs
in U.S. institutions, to present their accepted papers and posters and/or to
attend the Doctoral Consortium associated with the 23rd International Conference
on User Modeling, Adaptation and Personalization (UMAP 2015), to be held in
Dublin, Ireland, June 29 through July 3. User interfaces that adapt themselves
to available user information (such as special needs or individual preferences)
are becoming increasingly important, so much so that adaptability has become a
selling point for software products. A system with the ability to construct and
consult a user model (an explicit representation of properties of a particular
user or group of users) can adapt diverse aspects of its performance and enhance
its effectiveness, usability and/or acceptance in a variety of situations (e.g.,
to reduce information overload, to improve the quality of information retrieval,
filtering and annotation, and to generate useful information visualizations).
Applications for user modeling range from electronic commerce and intelligent
learning environments to health care and assistive technologies. Relevant
platforms for user modeling include mobile and wearable systems and smart
environments, as well as individual desktop systems, groupware, adaptive
hypermedia, and other web-based systems. The annual UMAP conference is the
premier forum at which academic and industrial researchers from all these fields
gather to exchange their complementary insights on user modeling issues. More
information about the conference is available online at
http://www.um.org/umap2015/.

Attending and presenting their work at UMAP will have a significant impact on
the careers of the future generation of user modeling, adaptation, and
personalization researchers. First, they will have the opportunity to present
their work to a knowledgeable audience and through lively discussions get useful
comments at an early stage of their research when it will be most useful. Just
as importantly, they will have a chance to meet established researchers and
other graduate students doing similar work, to exchange ideas and to make
contacts that will be invaluable to them as they progress in their scientific
careers. Interacting with young researchers is also beneficial to experienced
investigators, by providing fresh ideas and new perspectives. Thus, the Doctoral
Consortium is a great confidence builder for the students involved, and highly
stimulating to the senior researchers as well. Many past participants in the
UMAP Doctoral Consortium have gone on to become well-regarded researchers and
practitioners in the field. Students whose work has been selected for
presentation at the Doctoral Consortium will benefit from that experience in a
number of additional ways. They will be invited to write a paper that will be
published in the UMAP 2015 conference proceedings. They will have 15 minutes to
present their work (which may include a short demonstration if appropriate), to
be followed by an additional 15 minutes for questions and discussion. During
both the question/discussion period and in subsequent informal interactions,
organizing committee members and other participants will provide constructive
comments on each student's work and attempt to address aspects on which the
student has requested advice. The organizers have reaffirmed the long-standing
and demonstrated UMAP commitment to diversity; to this end, they will make
special efforts to recruit participants who are women and members of under-
represented groups, and they will ensure institutional diversity by supporting
no more than one student from any given university.