* 1542202
* NNCI: Midwest Nano Infrastructure Corrider (MINIC)
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2015,05/31/2022
* Stephen Campbell, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Cooperative Agreement
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 05/31/2022
* USD 4,500,000.00

Recent advances in technology allow the fabrication of very small structures
with highly desirable capabilities. This enables new physical and chemical
understanding (nanoscience) as well as new structures and devices that are of
interest to many industries (nanotechnology). The Midwest Nano Infrastructure
Corridor (MINIC) National Nanotechnology Coordinated Infrastructure (NNCI) site
at the University of Minnesota will accelerate these advances by providing
access to leading edge micro and nano fabrication capabilities for the research
and development of nanoscience and technology. The MINIC core facilities
represent more than $50M in labs and equipment as well as more than 400 man-
years of staff expertise. Academic researchers can use these capabilities on an
equal basis with University of Minnesota faculty. Students will travel to MINIC
facilities to gain valuable hands-on experience. Entrepreneurs will enjoy low-
cost access to try new ideas without having to make long-term capital equipment
commitments. MINIC will support a broad spectrum of nano R&amp;D, however it
will target researchers in two new areas: the application of two-dimensional
materials and the use of nano in biology and medicine. By partnering with North
Dakota State University, MINIC will also enable the packaging of nano devices.
This allows researchers to perform reliability testing and to incorporate these
devices into complex electronic systems. MINIC will also reach out to
underserved communities to increase their participation in this rapidly growing
field. It will also support micro and nano laboratories at smaller schools
throughout the Midwest to enable the development of nanotechnology over a broad
geographic area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;MINIC will provide support to micro and
nano researchers throughout the country. MINIC offers researchers access to
multiple clean rooms with a full suite of fabrication equipment including state-
of-the-art electron beam lithography, and extensive staff support to enable them
to carry out difficult fabrication projects in a timely and cost-effective
manner. To better recruit and serve external users, MINIC will add three new
process Focus Areas. The first will support the deposition of a broad variety of
2D thin films, beginning with graphene and the transition metal dichalcogenides.
Users will be able to build devices on top of their own substrates without the
low yield and variability associated with exfoliation. MINIC will also provide
new modeling tools to support this area. The second Focus Area will be led by
North Dakota State University's Packaging Center, which has long-standing
expertise in the area. This will enable researchers in academia and industry to
economically package nanoscale devices, including difficult applications such as
RF devices, MEMS, power devices, and 3D multichips. MINIC's third Focus Area
will support external users working in bio nanotechnology by providing all the
facilities and equipment needed to form nanoparticle suspensions, perform sizing
and zeta potential measurements, use them to expose cell cultures in a BSL2
environment, and characterize the result with confocal and fluorescence
microscopy. MINIC will also develop a novel outreach program to support nano
science and technology labs throughout the upper Midwest.