* 1542815
* EFRI 2-DARE: Few-layer and Thin-film Black Phosphorus for Photonic Applications
* ENG,EFMA
* 08/01/2015,01/31/2020
* Mildred Dresselhaus, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 01/31/2020
* USD 2,040,000.00

Photonic technologies have become ubiquitous in our modern society: infrared
photodetectors and modulators enable optical communications and the internet,
compact cameras in mobile devices make the instantaneous recording of precious
moments possible, and solar cells provide environmentally-friendly electricity.
Traditional photonics technologies often use a specific material to cover a
particular wavelength range, with integration of multiple types 0f photonic
materials to cover a broader range highly challenging. This EFRI team will
investigate fundamental optical sciences and explore practical photonic
applications of a novel two-dimensional (2D) material, black phosphorus (BP),
which can cover a broad wavelength range from visible to mid-infrared and can be
easily integrated with other photonic platforms due to its layered structure.
The team will develop approaches for large-scale black phosphorus synthesis,
material characterization, and BP device realization and testing, thus
establishing the foundation for black phosphorus based photonic technologies.
This project will transform many technological areas relying on optical imaging,
sensing and communications, contributing to the National Photonics Initiative
(NPI). The team consists of five investigators from four universities (Yale
University, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, University of Southern
California, and Washington University in St. Louis) and covers multiple
disciplines including material sciences, physics, and engineering. This EFRI
program will also provide students at different levels, especially those from
underrepresented groups, and postdocs with multidisciplinary research experience
fostered by the EFRI team, as well as through interactions with the industrial
and international partners. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will leverage
recently rediscovered 2D layered black phosphorus to develop novel photonic
devices for optical communications and infrared imaging, while exploring its
integration with other 2D (e.g. graphene) and bulk (e.g. silicon) materials. In
particular, the team will utilize BP?s widely tunable bandgap with layer number
and its robust, anisotropic excitons to explore new optical sciences and to
transform present photonic technologies. Establishing the theory, synthesis,
encapsulation, and characterization approaches of few-layer and thin-film BP, as
well as the fabrication and benchmarking of BP photonic device performance will
build the foundation of this paradigm shift in photonic devices. Scientifically,
exploration of anisotropic excitons and their tunability by electric field in
few-layer BP will advance our basic understanding of many body physics in
materials with low crystalline symmetry. Technologically, high carrier mobility,
direct bandgap and strong light-BP interaction will enable the realization of a
number of high performance BP photonics devices especially in strategically
critical near- and mid-infrared wavelength range.