* 1542164
* NNCI:The Kentucky Multi-scale Manufacturing and Nano Integration Node (MMNIN)
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2021
* Kevin Walsh, University of Louisville Research Foundation Inc
* Cooperative Agreement
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 08/31/2021
* USD 3,672,164.00

The National Nanotechnology Coordinated Infrastructure (NNCI) Kentucky Multi-
scale Manufacturing and Nano Integration Node (MMNIN) is a collaboration between
the University of Louisville and the University of Kentucky focused on
integrating manufacturing technology over widely different length scales. With
nanotechnology now integral to scientific discovery and engineering, there is a
pressing need for infrastructure that supports the rapid and effective
prototyping of nano-scale devices in macro-scale systems. The goal of the MMNIN
is to combine micro/nano fabrication processes with the latest in 3D additive
manufacturing technology to allow researchers to explore nanotechnology
solutions to real-life problems in healthcare, energy, the environment,
communication, and security. In addition to having access to state-of-the-art
tools and expertise, MMNIN participants will conduct novel research addressing
multi-scale manufacturing and integration challenges with a particular focus on
the interfaces between different length scales, materials and manufacturing
processes. The MMNIN's state-of-the-art multidisciplinary infrastructure will
serve a growing user base whose home institutions include high schools,
university laboratories, government facilities, startup ventures, and Fortune
100 companies. Through new educational and seed research programs, MMNIN will
offer unique opportunities to users from traditionally underrepresented regions
and groups, including the Appalachian region of the United States. The MMNIN's
unique focus and central location (60% of the US population within a day's
drive) will greatly encourage external usage. Through these efforts MMNIN seeks
to transform the interfaces between the nano-scale and the human scale and
impact society by rapidly providing new multi-scale technological solutions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The MMNIN will be the first open user facility nationwide
with a focus on 3D micro/nano fabrication and true multi-scale integration.
Users will have access to design, simulation, and fabrication resources that
span the nanometer to meter scales, and the expertise to effectively integrate
these processes. At the nano-scale, MMNIN will provide rapid prototyping
capabilities based on election- and ion-beam induced processes and two-photon
polymerization along with the expertise to convert the prototyped structures to
functional devices. At the micro-scale, users will have access to a variety of
unique fabrication processes including stress engineered thin-film deposition
for self-programmed 2D to 3D fabrication, 128 level grayscale lithography for
rapid prototyping of complex 3D structures, micro aerosol jet 3D printing using
conductive, resistive, dielectric and biological materials, as well as a
diversity of traditional semiconductor and MEMS fabrication processes using
MMNIN's new class 100 $30M, 10,000 sq. ft. cleanroom facility. At the
meso/macro-scale, MMNIN offers automated roll-to-roll manufacturing processes
and the latest in additive manufacturing tools for 3D printing custom structures
and enclosures using metals and/or polymers. MMNIN also offers a variety of
characterization techniques ranging from transmission electron microscopy to
squid magnetometry. All of these efforts involve exciting research challenges,
not only on the processes themselves, but also on the integration of these
processes to make reliable electrical, mechanical, optical, and fluidic
interfaces between the length scales. As a result, users will be able to create
systems such as nano-scale sensors in biocompatible enclosures, artificial
crystalline optical filters with high density interconnects, and nano-
electronics that expand from the substrate to interact with the external world.
Ultimately, these capabilities, combined with the MMNIN faculty expertise in
multi-scale manufacturing and integration, will allow users to rapidly and
economically produce products and solutions addressing society's pressing
challenges.