* 1542322
* Biomedical Engineering Society(BMES) Joint Cellular and Molecular Bioengineering(CMBE) and Advanced Biomanufacturing(ABioM) Conference; New Orleans, Louisiana; January 5-10, 2016
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2016
* Roland Kaunas, Biomedical Engineering Society
* Standard Grant
* David Fyhrie
* 08/31/2016
* USD 15,000.00

This award provides funds to support travel awards for student/fellows and young
independent investigators (Rising Stars) for the Biomedical Engineering Society
(BMES) Joint Cellular and Molecular Bioengineering (CMBE) and Advanced
Biomanufacturing (ABioM) Conference; New Orleans, Louisiana Jan. 6-10, 2016.
Advanced Biomanufacturing is an emerging field and focuses on studying theories
and technologies of manufacturing bio-related products for medicine and
industry. A primary part of biomanufacture is mechanobiology, directly relevant
to the Biomechanics and Mechanobiology program (BMMB)of the NSF. Using living
cells in advanced manufacturing will require a much improved understanding of
mechanobiology to produce appropriate products. Supporting the development of
young investigators in this area is of fundamental importance to successful
future research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The advanced manufacturing theme of the
2016 conference is related to the mission of the Biomechanics and Mechanobiology
program and also is directly in line with the mission of Biomedical Engineering
which is partially supporting this request. Graduate students/postdoctoral
fellows will be selected by the organizing committee to receive Student/Fellow
Awards and to present short talks, which will be integrated into the sessions.
In addition, the junior independent investigators will be selected for a special
Rising Star session, which will take place on the first day of the meeting in
order to showcase their work. The award will be used to provide partial support
to students, post-doctoral fellows, young investigators (Rising Stars), and
under-represented minorities.