* 1542798
* EFRI 2-DARE: Engineering novel topological interface states in 2D chalcogenide heterostructures
* ENG,EFMA
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2020
* Norman Armitage, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Alias Smith
* 09/30/2020
* USD 2,000,000.00

Terahertz sensing and imaging is a ?grand challenge? that impacts medical
imaging and national security. Tremendous progress has been made on materials
and device fabrication of terahertz/infrared detection in the past decades.
However, the conventional technologies only allow detection of single wave
lengths with one active element in device, severely hampering the miniature and
functionality of terahertz/infrared sensors. This EFRI team will harness
topological insulator, a recent breakthrough in condensed matter physics. The
team aims to engineer topological interface states residing at the boundary
between a topological insulator and a conventional semiconductor. Such interface
states are robust against imperfection due to topologically non-trivial
electronic structure of topological insulator. Furthermore, topological
interface states host rich spin-texture in momentum space, which opens the
possibility of tuning their hybridization with electrical voltage (gating) and
magnetic field. The team will address the challenges of materials synthesis,
realization of optoelectronic and spintronic devices, and their
characterizations. The device concepts envisioned in this project are
potentially game-changing technologies, directly addressing the grand challenge
and national need on the terahertz/infrared technological areas. Education and
training of students is seamlessly integrated to the research activities, which
enable them to learn fundamental material science, to master advanced
microscopic techniques, and more importantly, to learn independent thinking.
This project also integrates education and training of under-represented
undergraduate students through various programs at Rutgers, RPI and John
Hopkins, and of high school students through the Partner in Science program of
Liberty Science Center. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Topological insulators are novel
quantum states of matter, which host helical Dirac surface states within their
bulk band gap. These robust topological surface states are immune to
backscattering because of their spin-momentum locking, in contrast to the
conventional 2-dimensional electron gases (2DEG) that reside at interfaces in
conventional heterostructures. The objective of this project is to explore novel
device applications by engineering the topological states at the interfaces of
topological insulators with semiconductors. Preliminary theoretical work shows
that these topological interface states can be qualitatively different from the
surface states of the free surfaces in that they have completely different
textures of spin-momentum locking. With the guidance of advanced first principle
theory and modeling (Zhang+West), high quality thin films and heterostructures
of topological insulators will be synthesized with state-of-the-art MBE (Oh),
and characterized with transport (Oh), scanning tunneling microscopy and
spectroscopy (Wu) and THz and optical spectroscopy (Armitage). The intimate
feedback between theory, synthesis and characterization promises novel device
physics and applications. The specific goals of the proposed work include two
specific devices in the form of a tunable THz range photon detector and a source
of fully polarized spin polarized current. These are both game changing
technologies. Although many possible devices have been proposed for this class
of materials, little has been actually realized thus far. With recent advances
by these PIs and their areas of expertise, the time is ripe for a concerted push
in these applications of topological insulators.