* 1542959
* PFI:AIR - TT:  Microgrid Energy Manager (MEM) using wireless networks and cloud computing
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2015,02/28/2018
* Giri Venkataramanan, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 02/28/2018
* USD 257,370.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project, Microgrid Energy Manager (MEM),
focuses on translating the technology of electrical power control using wireless
computing to fill the need for cost effectively matching supply and demand of
electricity in microgrids. The MEM is important because it will enable the
widespread adoption of microgrids, which in-turn enables the widespread adoption
of distributed renewable energy resources. This leads to environmental benefits
and reduced energy costs to consumers and businesses. The AIR-TT project will
result in a field-tested MEM that will be ready for commercial adoption by
energy service and integration companies. MEM has the following unique features:
(a) wireless operation; (b) smart user-interfaces; (c) low power consumption;
(d) internet of things; and (e) cloud computing. Together, these features will
remove the hassle for the energy users from having to frequently negotiate the
nuances of microgrids, and will provide a consumer experience wherein
intelligent control with smart phone and/or web interfaces become useful for
realizing reduced energy costs and improving end-use comfort
simultaneously.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses the following key
technology gap while translating the research discovery into commercial
applications. The gap is a lack of design-oriented models that predict system-
level interactions among power networks, wireless networks, embedded computing
devices and cloud systems when they are deployed together. This project helps
address this key technology gap by (a) building a definitive test-bed; (b)
field-deploying the test beds to obtain performance data and (c) empirically
identifying and refining design-oriented models. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
addition, personnel involved in this project, including undergraduate and
graduate students from engineering and business schools, will receive course-
work and project-based learning in the areas of entrepreneurship and technology
translation through (a) interdisciplinary special topics courses (b) the
Wisconsin Entrepreneurship Bootcamp (c) the business plan competitions such as
the Wisconsin Energy and Sustainability Challenge, and (d) various fieldwork
demonstrations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project engages the City of Madison and
Seventhwave (formerly the Energy Center of Wisconsin), to provide a test
environment, guide commercialization aspects, and provide partnership in
consulting to develop field deployment so as to translate this research
discovery into a commercial reality.