* 1542081
* NNCI: Cornell Nanoscale Science and Technology Facility (CNF)
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2021
* Daniel Ralph, Cornell University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 08/31/2021
* USD 8,200,000.00

The Cornell Nanoscale Science and Technology Facility (CNF) will provide the
nation's researchers with rapid, affordable, hands-on shared access to advanced
nanofabrication tools and associated staff expertise that are too expensive for
individual universities or small companies to operate and maintain. Under this
National Nanotechnology Coordinated Infrastructure (NNCI) site award, hundreds
of engineers and scientists nationwide, from throughout academia, industry, and
government, will utilize CNF's unique toolset and technical staff. The new
research and technology development that the CNF makes possible will transform
many fields of engineering and science, spanning sensor and actuator arrays for
probing how the brain works; improved photovoltaics, batteries, and fuel cells
for economical renewable energy; new types of electronic devices that surmount
limitations of silicon; fabrication of living tissues and organs; distributed
measurement networks for geosciences; microbiome characterization and
manipulation; on-chip signal processing with light; precision agriculture using
new sensors; low-cost medical diagnoses; and improved quantum devices for
utilizing entanglement, to name just a few. The CNF will also organize education
and outreach programs targeting a wide range of researchers, undergraduates, and
K-12 students and their families, with the broader goals of providing a hands-on
research education to a new generation of diverse engineering and science
students, facilitating the commercialization of nanotechnology for societal
benefit, extending the benefits of nanofabrication to less-traditional areas of
research, and interesting more young students in technology and
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The unique nanofabrication capabilities that the
CNF will make available to the nation's researchers include world-leading
electron-beam lithography, advanced optical lithography, dedicated facilities
for soft lithography, and direct-write tools for rapid prototype development,
along with the flexibility to accommodate diverse projects through the ability
to deposit and etch a very wide variety of materials. In addition, CNF's
experienced, expert technical staff will be solely dedicated to user support.
Engineers and scientists from throughout academia, industry, and government will
utilize CNF's resources to fabricate structures and systems ranging from the
centimeter scale down to the nanometer scale. The new research that the CNF
makes possible will advance research and development across many fields,
spanning electronics, optics, magnetics, mechanical devices, thermal and energy
systems, electrochemical devices, fluidics, and the life sciences and
bioengineering. Educational and outreach programs are designed to benefit
several target audiences. CNF will teach new nanotechnology researchers to
quickly operate at the research frontier through hands-on training on state-of-
the-art tools, in-depth minicourses, and subject-area workshops. Experienced
nanotechnology researchers will benefit from advanced technical workshops in
partnership with leading tool vendors. Undergraduate students will participate
in blended courses with regional universities and unique summer research
experiences. Young K-12 students and their families will be encouraged to become
excited about technology and science through CNF's highly-popular Nanooze
science magazine and a new partnership with 4-H.