* 1542446
* RET Site: Rural Educators Engaged in Bioanalytical Engineering Research and Teaching
* ENG,EEC
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2020
* Patricia Hardre, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Amelia Greer
* 08/31/2020
* USD 599,997.00

This Research Experiences for Teachers (RET) in Engineering and Computer Science
at the University of Oklahoma (OU) Norman will involve rural high school science
and mathematics teachers and regional community college instructors in
bioanalytical engineering research, to help them improve STEM teaching in their
classrooms, and to have them participate in a sustainable professional network
that will increase the number of rural students who select and successfully
graduate from higher education STEM fields. Bioanalytical engineering
encompasses the design and manipulation of biomolecules, viruses, bacteria and
cells, as well as the fabrication of innovative analytical devices for the
detection and monitoring of these biomaterials. These efforts directly address
pertinent problems related to medicine, public health, petroleum and biofuel
production, bioremediation of groundwater, and designing target-specific
pharmaceuticals. Because these are important and relevant topics for Oklahoma
rural communities, integrating these topics into STEM education will: strengthen
rural education, build a network of educators (ranging from rural high school
teachers and regional community college instructors to university research
faculty), and promote a career-preparation pathway for rural youth in Oklahoma.
This effort will increase the Oklahoma workforce, which needs highly trained
professionals in these areas. In the long-term, the knowledge and results gained
from this RET program will help build sustainable education initiatives to reach
rural students and teachers, and as a result, will support sustainable rural
communities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over three years, 48 rural Oklahoma educators
(high school teachers and regional community college instructors) will conduct
bioanalytical engineering research (for seven weeks each summer) at the
University of Oklahoma (OU) in collaboration with eight faculty associated with
the OU Center for Bioanalysis (CBA). The summer research experience will be
designed according to the SUCCESS Framework to maximize RET educators' sense of
efficacy for conducting research and to increase their motivation to transfer
these experiences into their classrooms. The SUCCESS Framework guides teachers,
designers and instructors at all levels and in all contexts, providing a
structure for integrating theory-based motivational features into any type of
instruction. Educators will be recruited from three regions of rural Oklahoma
that are typically overlooked because of their distance from urban centers and
major universities. Educators from the same or adjacent rural districts will be
paired to facilitate collaboration in the development and implementation of
authentic, guided-inquiry curricula that utilize fundamental STEM concepts,
apply bioanalytical engineering, and address issues of rural interest and
relevance. The SUCCESS Framework will be integrated into the curricular design
to improve the students' motivation in learning and the educators' teaching
efficacy. This collaboration will establish a professional rural educator
network that includes interactions with faculty research mentors and graduate
students through classroom visits, field trips, sampling trips, virtual
presentations and interactions. The professional rural educator network will be
further strengthened and expanded upon by dissemination of curricular materials
and motivational design methods through workshops for rural STEM educators at
the annual OU K20 Center's Innovative Learning Institute, annual sessions on
rural STEM education at the National Rural Education Association, and educator-
student poster sessions and presentations at the annual CBA symposium.