* 1543788
* CAREER: Reconfigurable Traveling Wave Silicon Integrated Circuits for Millimeter-Wave Testing
* ENG,ECCS
* 01/01/2015,01/31/2017
* James Buckwalter, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* chengshan xiao
* 01/31/2017
* USD 288,306.00

The objective of this research is to demonstrate a millimeter-wave network
analysis system that operates at frequencies between 100 and 300 GHz where
existing test and measurement solutions are difficult and costly. The approach
is to develop wideband, reconfigurable high-frequency circuits that employ a
recently discovered traveling wave circuit technique called constructive wave
amplification. By introducing localized shunt feedback networks along a single
transmission line, traveling wave propagation may be altered through changes to
the shunt feedback network. Waves traveling in either direction may be amplified
over a wide range of frequencies.

The intellectual merit of this project includes the invention of reconfigurable,
millimeter-wave circuits that advance both the state-of-the-art for millimeter-
wave circuit design as well as test capabilities. Constructive wave
amplification is a transformative aspect to this research because it relaxes
known high-frequency transistor limitations. The research effort includes the
theoretical analysis of the proposed approaches as well as experimental
verification using silicon integrated circuit processes.

The broader impacts of this project include the development of enabling
technologies for new scientific, medical, and industrial applications at
millimeter-wave frequencies. The proposed monolithic integration of high-
frequency circuitry could lead to substantially reduced cost of network
analysis. The integrated educational plan includes incorporation of principles
of millimeter-wave circuit design and measurement into undergraduate and
graduate level courses. To bring the research outcomes to a broader audience,
the principal investigator will create a series of instructional videos
available online that introduce students at the high-school, undergraduate, and
graduate levels to radio frequency circuit design, test, and measurement.