* 1543187
* Collaborative Research: Characterizing Brittle Failure and Fracture Propagation in Fast Ice Sliding with Dynamic Rupture Models based on Whillans Ice Stream Seismic/Geodetic Data
* GEO,OPP
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2019
* Susan Schwartz, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Paul Cutler
* 03/31/2019
* USD 39,886.00

This project investigates a rapidly moving section of the West Antarctic Ice
Sheet known as the Whillans Ice Stream. Ice streams and outlet glaciers are the
major pathways for ice discharge from ice sheets into the ocean. Consequently,
understanding ice stream dynamics, specifically the processes controlling the
frictional resistance of ice sliding on sediments at its base, is essential for
predictive modeling of how Earth's ice sheets will respond to a changing
climate. Rather than flowing smoothly, Whillans Ice Stream advances in stick-
slip cycles: brief periods of rapid sliding, equivalent to magnitude 7
earthquakes, alternating with much longer periods of repose. The PIs will
perform simulations of these stick-slip cycles using computer codes originally
developed for modeling tectonic earthquakes. By matching observed ice motions,
the PIs will constrain the range of frictional processes acting at the base of
the ice stream. An additional focus of the project is on brittle fracture
processes in ice, expressed through seismic waves radiated by faulting and/or
crevassing episodes that accompany the large-scale sliding events. An
understanding of ice fracture provides a basis for assessing the susceptibility
of ice shelves to rifting and catastrophic disintegration. Project results will
be incorporated into outreach activities (from elementary school to community
college events) as well as a polar science class for the California State Summer
School for Mathematics and Science (COSMOS) program for high school
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Simulations of the stick-slip cycle will employ
3D dynamic rupture models that simultaneously solve for the seismic wavefield
and rupture process, consistent with elastodynamic material response and
friction laws on the ice stream bed. Stresses and frictional properties will be
varied to achieve consistency with surface GPS and broadband seismic data as
well as borehole seismograms from the WISSARD project. The results will be
interpreted using laboratory till friction experiments, which link velocity-
weakening/strengthening behavior to temperature and water content, and to
related experiments quantifying basal drag from ice flow over rough beds. The
source mechanism of seismicity accompanying the slip events (shear faulting
versus crevassing) will be determined using 3D waveform modeling in conjunction
with mechanical models of the seismic source processes. This proposal does not
require fieldwork in the Antarctic.