* 1543876
* International Workshop on Domain Decomposition Methods for PDEs
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2017
* Hansong Tang, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 08/31/2017
* USD 8,000.00

Domain decomposition (DD) is an important and powerful methodology to solve
partial differential equations arising from science and engineering. An
international workshop on "Domain Decomposition Methods for Partial Differential
Equations" will be held at Dalhousie University at Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada
during August 3-8, 2015. Driven by the urgent need to develop robust and
efficient numerical techniques to simulate challenging problems, this workshop
strives to bring together researchers in theory and application. It will provide
a platform of interaction and collaboration between computational mathematicians
and application researchers. The workshop will disseminate recent progress in DD
research and promote its further development. This award provides support to
defray expenses of US-based participants, including students and junior
researchers, particularly those from under-represented groups. The workshop
consists of three distinct but uniquely connected components. The first
component is a two-day short course on DD methods for partial differential
equations. The second one features research level talks given by mathematicians
specialized in theory and researchers from application fields. The third
component presents breakout interactive sessions for the short-course
participants, DD experts, and applied researchers. The US-based participants
from mathematics and engineering will attend the workshop and give
presentations. The activities of the workshop, including abstracts, short-course
notes, and talk slides will be made available on the workshop website:
www.math.mun.ca/anasc/ddworkshop.html.