* 1543826
* RAPID: The social psychology of judicial decisions affecting stigmatized groups
* SBE,BCS
* 06/15/2015,05/31/2017
* Kyle Ratner, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 05/31/2017
* USD 120,703.00

People can feel stigmatized and discriminated against for a variety of reasons,
including religious expression, political ideology, socioeconomic status, race,
gender, ethnicity, and sexual orientation. Although research has examined the
structural implications (economic, educational, healthcare, legal) of high
profile judicial decisions for members of stigmatized social groups, very little
work has studied the psychological consequences. Perhaps the most high profile
social issue currently debated in the courts is whether marriage rights should
extend to same-sex couples. This is a complex issue with heartfelt viewpoints
expressed by people on both sides. The Supreme Court is currently considering
the legality of same-sex marriage bans. This case promises to be a significant
moment in American history regardless of the direction of the verdict. Given
that many gay and lesbian individuals feel stigmatized by prohibitions against
same-sex marriage, the current research is designed to examine the social
psychological effects of this ruling (whichever way it turns out) on gay and
lesbian individuals and a heterosexual comparison group. Drawing on social
psychological theories of stigma and discrimination, a mediational model will be
tested in which the court ruling may lead to changes in well-being by shifting
individuals' perceptions of their stigmatized identity and subjective feelings
of discrimination-related stress. The knowledge gained from this research will
contribute to our understanding of the effect of historic government-level
decisions on health-relevant psychological processes of Americans.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To examine these questions, 1000 participants (500 self-
identified gay and lesbian individuals and 500 heterosexual comparisons) will be
recruited for a longitudinal study in which they complete a research survey
prior to the Supreme Court ruling on same-sex marriage, 2 months post-ruling,
and 6 months post-ruling. Changes in psychological variables related to social
attitudes and how participants experience their social identities will be
examined, as well as the effects of these changes on psychological and physical
well-being. This study will inform our understanding of the social psychological
factors involved in people's responses to judicial decisions that are relevant
to their standing in society. These results are likely to extend beyond this
specific issue and provide a platform for understanding how other judicial
decisions might have similar or different psychological consequences.