* 1543056
* PFI:AIR - TT:  Novel Nanoprinting for Oral Delivery of Poorly Soluble Drugs
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2015,03/31/2017
* Vladimir Torchilin, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 03/31/2017
* USD 210,653.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on translating nanoscale 3D
printing technology to enable oral preparation of poorly soluble drugs. The
novel drug 3D nanoprinting process, developed at the NSF Center for High Rate
Nanomanufacturing, is important because it will enable oral administration of
various promising drug candidates that currently can only be given
intravenously. This will increase patient compliance and decrease the time and
cost involved in therapy, while enhancing drug safety from the development-to-
patient process. The project will result in a proof-of-concept for an entirely
new drug nanoprinting technology for controlled and effective delivery of poorly
soluble drugs via oral administration.

This technology has the following unique features. The research will print drug-
loaded polymeric micelles into 100nm or smaller size nanorods with well-defined
shapes. The precise control of the size and shape of the nanorods will provide a
sufficiently high and fixed drug dosage in the blood to get a desired
therapeutic response. The 3-D drug-loaded nanorods will be embedded into a
unique polymer that can only dissolve at a specific basic pH that can be chosen
based on the desired location for the drug release in the body. For example, the
drug nanorods can be released in the intestine after passing through the
stomach, and this also eliminates the stability issue due to pH variation in the
GI track. Due to their small size, these nanorods will have a high permeability,
thus enabling effective transport through the intestinal wall as compared to
spheres or other shapes. In addition, the drug nanorods are expected to
penetrate tumors more efficiently and much faster than spherical drug
nanoparticles. This should lead to a better bioavailability of the drug with
reduced toxicity and side effects. The printing technique will also enable the
preparation of multi-drug nanorods, where the nanorods can be composed of
several poorly soluble drugs to overcome multi-drug resistance. These features
will enable effective intracellular penetration through the intestine and
controlled oral administration of poorly soluble drugs when compared to drugs
such as micellar paclitaxel and free paclitaxel in this market space.

This project addresses the following technology gap(s) as it translates from
research discovery toward commercial application. Various sub 100nm diameter
nanorods will be characterized for their in vitro permeability to develop a
fundamental understanding of the effect of nanorod size and aspect ratio on the
cell penetration. The proposed research will evaluate and characterize in vitro
cytotoxicity of the printed drug-loaded micellar nanorods in cancer cells to
determine the sufficiently high level of these drugs in the blood to get a
desired therapeutic response. The research will also investigate the effect of
size and shape of the nanorods on internalization by the cancer cells. In
addition, personnel involved in this project, undergraduates and graduates
students, will receive innovation, educational and entrepreneurial experiences
through interaction with pharmaceutical companies, mentoring sessions, and
entrepreneurship courses provided at Northeastern University.