* 1543267
* Collaborative Research: Kr-86 as a Proxy for Barometric Pressure Variability and Movement of the SH Westerlies during the last Deglaciation
* GEO,OPP
* 04/15/2016,03/31/2020
* Edward Brook, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Cutler
* 03/31/2020
* USD 159,999.00

Brook 1543267

Approximately half of the human caused carbon dioxide emissions to the
atmosphere are absorbed by the ocean, which reduces the amount of global warming
associated with these emissions. Much of this carbon uptake occurs in the
Southern Ocean around Antarctica, where water from the deep ocean comes to the
surface. How much water "up-wells," and therefore how much carbon is absorbed,
is believed to depend on the strength and location of the major westerly winds
in the southern hemisphere. These wind patterns have been shifting southward in
recent decades, and future changes could impact the global carbon cycle and
promote the circulation of relatively warm water from the deep ocean on to the
continental shelf, which contributes to enhanced Antarctic ice melt and sea
level rise. Understanding of the westerly winds and their role in controlling
atmospheric carbon dioxide levels and the circulation of ocean water is
therefore very important. The work supported by this award will study past
movement of the SH westerlies in response to natural climate variations. Of
particular interest is the last deglaciation (20,000 to 10,000 years ago), when
the global climate made a transition from an ice age climate to the current warm
period. During this period, atmospheric carbon dioxide rose from about 180 ppm
to 270 parts per million, and one leading hypothesis is that the rise in carbon
dioxide was driven by a southward movement of the southern hemisphere
westerlies. The broader impacts of the work include a perspective on past
movement of the southern hemisphere westerlies and their link to atmospheric
carbon dioxide, which could guide projections of future oceanic carbon dioxide
uptake, with strong societal benefits; international collaboration with German
scientists; training of a postdoctoral investigator; and outreach to public
schools. This project will investigate whether the abundance of a noble gas,
krypton-86, trapped in Antarctic ice cores, records atmospheric pressure
variability, and whether or not this pressure variability can be used to infer
past movement of the Southern Hemisphere westerly winds. The rationale for the
project is that models of air movement in the snow pack (firn) in Antarctica
indicate that pressure variations drive air movement that disturbs the normal
enrichment in krypton-86 caused by gravitational settling of gases. Calculations
predict that the krypton-86 deviation from gravitational equilibrium reflects
the magnitude of pressure variations. In turn, atmospheric data show that
pressure variability over Antarctica is linked to the position of the southern
hemisphere westerly winds. Preliminary data from the West Antarctic Ice Sheet
(WAIS) Divide ice core show a large excursion in krypton-86 during the
transition from the last ice age to the current warm period. The investigators
will perform krypton-86 analysis on ice core and firn air samples to establish
whether the Kr-86 deviation is linked to pressure variability, refine the record
of krypton isotopes from the WAIS Divide ice core, investigate the role of
pressure variability in firn air transport using firn air models, and
investigate how barometric pressure variability in Antarctica is linked to the
position/strength of the SH westerlies in past and present climates.