* 1543022
* Integration of Environmental Chemistry and Computing to Advance Evidence-based Reasoning, Problem Solving, and Computational Thinking in Middle School Students
* EHR,DRL
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2019
* Victor Sampson, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Arlene de Strulle
* 08/31/2019
* USD 1,250,000.00

Computing has become an integral part of everyday practice within modern fields
of science, technology, engineering, and math (STEM). As a result, the
STEM+Computing Partnerships (STEM+C) program seeks to advance new approaches to,
and evidence-based understanding of, the integration of computing in STEM
teaching and learning. Computational Thinking (CT) is an intellectual skill
rooted in the ability to conceive of meaningful, information-based
representations that can be effectively manipulated by a computer. Integrating
CT into core science instruction addresses practical constraints in K-12
education, in that there is no room in the curriculum to teach it directly to
everyone. But, more importantly, integrating CT into core science provides a
synergistic opportunity to deepen instruction in both. STEM education programs
that effectively foster development of CT skills as an essential competency are
among the most successful in preparing a future STEM workforce that can leverage
computational methods to advance basic science and engineering research and
design innovative approaches for using data-rich resources to solve complex,
societally-relevant problems. Similarly, a science-literate society increasingly
needs to appreciate how advances in scientific knowledge are inter-woven with
the use of big data, modeling, and simulations, if they are to make informed,
evidence-based decisions. This project will explore the integration of core
chemistry topics and computational thinking through student interaction with and
manipulation of models that visually represent chemical systems, such as the
carbon cycle. When a student examines a visual, runnable model, makes a
prediction, changes the programming code, and then runs the model again, the
computer provides feedback to the student that demands explanation. The process
of anticipating, interpreting, and testing the computer's feedback, when coupled
with a structured argumentation process, supports a student's abilities to think
and act like a scientist as they explore and learn about both the computational
and physical world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Virginia Tech and the University of
Texas at Austin will investigate a method of broadening access to CT thinking by
providing it in a context that all students take: 8th Grade Integrated Science.
Targeted chemistry topics will be embedded into editable, runnable computational
models that are themselves embedded within a pedagogy of structured scientific
argumentation focused on the production of evidence-based reasoning. Students
will learn about chemical systems, as well as key concepts such as equilibrium
and reaction rates, through interacting with models as they are represented
visually and about CT through modifying and adapting the code to better
represent aspects of the chemical systems. Four computational chemistry tasks,
including computer models and associated standards-aligned curricula, will be
developed and refined using participatory, design-based research techniques, in
partnership with four Austin, TX teachers serving ~300 students from a variety
of socio-economic settings. A curricular framework called Argument Driven
Computational Thinking and two associated assessment tools - the Performance
Assessment of Computational Thinking and the Computing Attitudes Test - will be
developed and validated. Quantitative and qualitative analysis of videotaped
classroom instructional activities, student artifacts, and computer-use logs
will be used to document the effectiveness and broad utility of this new model
for integrating chemistry and computing. A post-doctoral fellow and two graduate
students will be trained through this project.