* 1543217
* What Features of the Exploring Computer Science Course Equitably Inspire Students to Pursue Further Computer Science Coursework?
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2019
* Alan Mather, The Learning Partnership
* Standard Grant
* Fay Cobb Payton
* 09/30/2019
* USD 615,986.00

This project identifies the factors of the Exploring Computer Science curriculum
that affect students? future trajectory in computer science. Exploring Computer
Science (ECS) is a curriculum and professional development program that was
developed at UCLA, with NSF support, with the goal of broadening of
participation of underrepresented groups in in computer science and establishing
a national framework for public school computer science education. The ECS
professional development program is designed to prepare teachers to implement
the inquiry-based activities while guiding teachers to build a classroom culture
that is inclusive of all students. This project investigates the extent to which
the ECS curriculum and professional development program is achieving its basic
outcome goal. This project addresses two research questions: (1) Does the
quality of ECS implementation influence the probability that female and minority
students will pursue and succeed in further computer science coursework in high
school?; and (2) How do the components of ECS work together to contribute
towards the probability that female and minority students will pursue and
succeed in further computer science coursework in high
school?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project extends current research on the
relationship between teaching practices, student perceptions of teaching
practice, student aspirations, and actual course selection. It provides an
empirical investigation of the underlying logic model of ECS. The research
involves case studies in Chicago Public Schools that have participated in the
ECS professional development program and are implementing ECS. The empirical
evidence from this project will be used to make enhancements to the ECS
curriculum and professional development program as well as provide validation of
whether the ECS program is meeting its stated goal of contributing to broadening
the participation of underrepresented groups in computer science. The NSF
supported ECS curriculum is the largest national effort to establish secondary
school level computer science education. This work contributes to a much larger
national effort.