* 1543721
* Assessing phylogeny and biogeography in a megadiverse tropical plant family (Melastomataceae)
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2015,09/30/2017
* Darin Penneys, University of North Carolina at Wilmington
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 09/30/2017
* USD 105,947.00

Princess flowers (Melastomataceae) are one of the largest families of plants,
forming prevalent components of many tropical biodiversity hotspots. They serve
as a major food source for bees and seed dispersers such as birds and mammals,
and play a critical successional role in the regeneration of disturbed forests.
Through a combination of field work in targeted regions, molecular phylogenetic
techniques, and scanning electron microscopy, the investigators aim to improve
the classification of Melastomataceae, develop means to easily identify its
major groupings (genera and tribes), track how diagnostic characters in the
family have evolved, test ideas on how pollination systems have evolved in
tropical ecosystems, evaluate models of ancient climate change, and provide new
data to inform and direct conservation priorities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research will strengthen collaborations with foreign colleagues and
institutions, build capacity in tropical developing countries, and help train
the next generation of scientists. The researchers will mentor high school,
undergraduate, and graduate students in project-related research and lead a
workshop on the biology of Melastomataceae. Results will be disseminated to
other scientists through print or web-based journals and made available to the
general public through websites and exhibits at the California Academy of
Sciences and the New York Botanical Garden.