* 1543790
* CIF: Student Travel Support: Workshop on Sensing and Analysis of High-Dimensional Data
* CSE,CCF
* 06/15/2015,02/29/2016
* Henry Pfister, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* richard brown
* 02/29/2016
* USD 15,000.00

The 2015 Workshop on Sensing and Analysis of High-Dimensional Data (SAHD) will
take place&lt;br/&gt;July 27-29 at the Washington Duke Inn, which is adjacent to
Duke University. This award offers financial support for selected students and
post-doctoral fellows from the United States. The awardees are chosen based on
financial need and ability to benefit from attending the workshop by learning
from senior colleagues, presenting their own research in poster sessions, and
expanding their network within their community and with potential collaborators
outside their immediate discipline. Each award covers the local expenses of the
participant (registration &amp; accommodation) and reasonable travel
expenses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop brings together world-class
researchers from the fields of mathematics, statistics, engineering, and
computer science. The workshop is focused on the dissemination of recent results
to a diverse set of researchers from a broad range of academic backgrounds. The
workshop is also designed to encourage interaction between researchers via
innovative whiteboard presentation sessions. These sessions foster new
collaborations between researchers, which can lead to new breakthroughs and
innovations of value to the scientific community. For students, the workshop
provides an opportunity to present in posters or whiteboard sessions and to meet
and interact with senior researchers.