* 1543627
* Collaborative Research: Deformation Thermometry and Water Weakening of Quartz Tectonites - Case Studies from the Himalaya and the Caledonides of NW Scotland
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2015,07/31/2016
* Jay Thomas, Syracuse University
* Continuing Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 07/31/2016
* USD 29,162.00

Quantitative determination of the ambient temperatures at which rocks deform
under different tectonic settings in the earth's crust is of critical importance
for constraining thermo-mechanical modeling of the earth's tectonic plates, and
their mechanical and thermal evolution. Ambient deformation temperatures control
the physical processes that govern deformation and the rates at which
deformation occurs. Pressure-Temperature-time (PTt) histories of rocks can be
obtained from the compositions of minerals and mineral assemblages, through
reaction equilibrium relations, but these determinations bear on the PT
conditions of the mineral reactions, not necessarily those of deformation.
Development of thermometers that directly constrain conditions of deformation is
important because temperatures indicated by deformation features and those
indicated by equilibrium mineral assemblages may differ, recording different
intervals of a rock's PTt history. In quartz-rich continental crust, two types
of deformation thermometers (based on quartz recrystallization processes and
crystallographic fabrics) have been used as analytical tools over the last two
decades in a wide range of tectonic studies, assuming that temperature is the
primary controlling factor in recrystallization regime and fabric development.
However, recrystallization regimes and fabric development may also be influenced
by trace levels of water, and the effects of water on deformation mechanisms and
fabric development may be of comparable importance to temperature. We propose to
test, refine, and validate the deformation thermometers for quartz-bearing rocks
and to examine those conditions under which water contents or variations in
deformation rate need to be evaluated. We have chosen Himalayan and NW Scotland
field areas as case studies because one of us has already collected extensive
suites of appropriate oriented quartz-rich tectonites from these areas under
prior NSF funding. These samples have been deformed under a wide range of
tectonic settings and deformation thermometry, together with more restricted
compositionally based thermometry, have already been completed on many of these
samples. Deformation temperatures indicated by recrystallization regime and
crystallographic fabrics in individual samples will be independently
compared/tested by titanium-in-quartz thermometry, while the potential influence
of water on recrystallization and crystallographic fabrics will be investigated
by infrared spectroscopy and transmission electron microscopy.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Integration of theoretical concepts and analytical
techniques developed in Geosciences and Materials Science over the last half
century has led to major advances in our understanding of both the mechanisms by
which rocks deform/flow and the influence of environmental factors such as
temperature on flow in the earth's crust. However the most commonly applied
analytical techniques for determining the temperatures at which rocks now
exposed at the earth's surface have been deformed are known to also be sensitive
to fluctuations in chemically-induced weakening that may have occurred during
deformation in the mineral grains making up the rock. Thus, deformation
temperatures calculated using these thermometers may be in error, and
thermomechanical numerical models developed to simulate flow in the crust using
such temperature data may give unrealistic results. This project is designed to
test the validity of these thermometers using a recently developed thermometer
that takes such chemical processes in to account. Rock samples collected under
previous NSF funding from ancient mountain belts in the Himalaya and Scotland
have been chosen as case studies, and the potential role of chemical weakening
in these samples will also be evaluated using complementary analytical
techniques. These studies have important applications to plate tectonics and the
results may change our understanding of the mechanical and thermal character of
plates. Plate thickness and strength were originally considered to be due solely
to temperature and the geothermal gradient in the earth. Our study addresses
this concept and tests whether the internal strength of plates may also be
influenced by water content, in addition to temperature. The project is a
collaborative effort between researchers at Virginia Tech, Texas A&amp;M
University and Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute. In addition to the scientific
goals of the project, this research is contributing to the training of Ph.D.
students at Virginia Tech and Texas A&amp;M, and providing support for an early
career post-doctoral researcher at RPI. Undergraduate students at all of the
participating institutions will be involved in the research.