* 1543830
* CPS: Breakthrough: An Entropy Framework for Communications and Dynamics Interdependency in Cyber Physical Systems: Analysis, Design and Implementation
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2019
* Husheng Li, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 08/31/2019
* USD 395,432.00

Many practical systems such as smart grid, unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) and
robotic networks can be categorized as cyber physical systems (CPS). A typical
CPS consists of physical dynamics, sensors, communication network and
controllers. The communication network is of key importance in CPS, since it
mimics the nerve system in the human body. Hence, it is critical to study how
the communication network in CPS should be analyzed and designed. Essentially,
communications stem from the uncertainty of system under consideration; random
perturbations increase the system uncertainty, which is reduced by the control
actions in CPS. It is well known that entropy is a measure of system
uncertainty. A unified framework of entropy is used for CPS, in which random
perturbations create entropy while communications and controls provide negative
entropy to compensate the entropy generation. The intellectual merits are the
novel framework of entropy for bridging the communications and control in CPS
and the new design criterion based on the entropy of system state for CPS. The
project's broader significance and importance are the education of various
levels of students, the dissemination of results to public, and the impact on
everyday life such as the improved agility and robustness of power
grids.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project applies the framework of entropy to
study the interdependencies of communications and control, thus facilitating the
analysis and design of communications in CPS. The following tasks are tackled in
the project: (a) Entropy Flow Based Communication Capacity Analysis in which
communications in CPS is analyzed by studying the entropy fields in the physical
dynamics, thus providing an estimation on the scale (bits/second) of
communication capacity budget; (b) Communication Network Topology Design in
which the design of the network topology (either physical or logical) is tackled
through both optimization-based or heuristic approaches; (c) Online Network
Resource Scheduling which refines the network resource scheduling during the
operation using both optimization-based and heuristic approaches, within the
framework of entropy fields; (d) Hardware Emulation Testbed which delivers a co-
simulation testbed based on real time digital power simulator (RTDS) and a
communication simulator, in the context of smart grids. Based on the research,
new courses are developed. K-12 outreach and various levels of
undergraduate/graduate educations are incorporated into the research.