* 1543934
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award: Rural Land Use Practice In Response To Political Change
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2016
* Stacie King, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2016
* USD 21,788.00

Ph.D. candidate Alex Elvis Badillo of Indiana University will document long-term
changes in the ways humans modify and use land in the mountainous rural region
of Quiechapa, Oaxaca, Mexico. The major goal of the research is to determine how
political and economic transformations and conflict in neighboring urban areas
affected rural land-use in southern Oaxaca and to determine which land-use
strategies proved most effective during times of large-scale change. While
political unrest in complex urban areas often has visible and measurable effects
on local demography, food security, and land-use, one should also expect that
rural hinterlands experience change. This is true in both the past and the
present. As a result of this research, Badillo will determine the kinds of
decisions people made regarding agriculture, settlement, and land-use in rural
areas when confronted with large-scale sociopolitical shifts. Quiechapa, which
lies equidistant from two important stopping points on routes of Postclassic
trade and conquest, is a prime location to study the effects of wider political
unrest on rural regions. Rural land-use data collected in Quiechapa will
complement over 40 years of regional survey research in Oaxaca in providing a
broader context within which to analyze urban/rural land-use dynamics.
Archaeology is uniquely qualified to contribute data pertaining to land-use
change over the long term, which is vital to understanding the historical
trajectories that have led to current global situations. This archaeological
study will advance theoretical understandings about rural land-use change and
its relationship to demography, economy, technology, politics, and the
environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To understand how broader sociopolitical and
economic changes in southern Oaxaca affected land-use in Quiechapa, Badillo will
address the following questions: (1) Where and when did anthropogenic land
modification occur?; (2) In what ways did the people of Quiechapa modify their
landscape?; (3) How were the people living in Quiechapa connected to the broader
interregional politics and exchange networks? Data will be collected through a
regional pedestrian settlement survey in which the survey team will walk the 168
square kilometers study region recording all evidence of land-use and settlement
using a high precision global positioning system (GPS). Observational data and
surface artifact sample locations associated with evidence of land-use will be
organized into the common platform of a geographic information system (GIS)
database for analysis. Surface artifacts and data on land-use modifications such
as terracing, water management features, and residential architecture, in
combination with other environmental datasets, will allow Badillo to detect
changes in land-use and settlement from the Classic (A.D. 200 - 800) to the
Postclassic Period (A.D. 800 - 1521). Badillo will involve citizens of Quiechapa
in the research of their own history and heritage, while also teaching
scientific principles through the practice of archaeology. Moreover, information
about how Quiechapa's local landscape has been modified and used in the past
will be collected in collaboration with local land authorities and will be used
in current agricultural intensification efforts.