* 1543758
* EAGER: An Animated Agent for Developing the Conversational Skills of Individuals with Social Interaction Difficulties
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2017
* Ehsan Hoque, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 08/31/2017
* USD 166,000.00

This EArly Grant for Exploratory Research seeks to develop an exploratory
version of a computer-based animated agent that simulates a conversational
partner, allowing users with social interaction difficulties, such as ones with
Asperger syndrome, to practice conversational skills. The interaction will
explore establishing friendly rapport with the user through conversation;
building such rapport is an important social skill that is difficult for the
targeted individuals to acquire. It is hypothesized that such individuals will
very significantly benefit from the exploratory agent, by allowing them to
practice conversational skills without risk of failure or of making a poor
impression. The most exciting part of this exploratory technology is that it
puts users in the driver's seat of the interaction with a standardized,
objective and repeatable stimulus. The architectural framework for the "getting
acquainted" scenario is general enough to be adaptable to many other restricted
conversational scenarios of societal importance such as job interviews, customer
service, and participating in group decision-making. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
exploratory agent is a simulated adult responding in the mature, patient manner
of an experienced consultant (an expert advisor from the University of Rochester
Medical Center consults on the project). The agent correlates the topic and
content of the user's utterances with the prosody, facial expressions, gaze
direction and head motions accompanying the utterances. The agent also provides
helpful real-time feedback via red/green screen icons about these behaviors, and
behavioral summaries and suggestions for improving the behavior at the end of a
session. The initial domain in this exploratory project is "getting acquainted",
i.e., engaging in the sort of small talk that is conventional for individuals
who have not previously met. The dialogue framework has some transactional
knowledge, independent of topic, to initiate a conversation and to respond
appropriately during a conversation. When the user's responses to the agent's
questions and prompts deviate from expectations, the agent branches to clusters
of strategies including evasive answers, requesting repetition, providing
encouragement and prompting further input. The project includes exploration of
more general questions such as the architecture required for integrating
nonlinguistic and linguistic behavior in an animated agent. The project also
leads to new user interfaces that can capture nonverbal behavior analytics
reflecting the dynamics of the conversation.