* 1543483
* Impact of Convective Processes and Sea Ice Formation on the Distribution of Iron in the Ross Sea: Closing the Seasonal Cycle
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2015,02/29/2020
* Peter Sedwick, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Peter Milne
* 02/29/2020
* USD 394,174.00

The waters of the Ross Sea continental shelf are among the most productive in
the Southern Ocean, and likely comprise a significant oceanic sink for
atmospheric carbon dioxide. In this region, primary production can be limited by
the supply of dissolved iron to surface waters during the growing
season.&lt;br/&gt;A range of biogeochemical measurements and activities are to
be carried out in the late summer-autumnal- early winter time frame in the Ross
Sea in order to better understand phytoplankton dynamics, along with carbon
export. These biogeochemical parameters include elements such as Fe, C and S
believed to be important to Antarctic ecosystems. As well as there being
interest in the functioning of the Ross Sea ecosystem leading up to the
impending polar night, there is also uncertainty as to what drives the
biogeochemical redistribution undergone by micronutrient Fe species during the
extensive sea-ice formation at this time of year.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The field
setting and remote conditions that accompany the proposed study present several
possibilities for STEM education and training at the K-12, undergraduate and
graduate levels, as well as for public outreach. At the K-12 level, the project
seeks to support the development of educational outreach materials targeting
elementary and middle school students,&lt;br/&gt;pre-service science teachers,
and in-service science teachers.