* 1543209
* SciGirls Code: A National Connected Learning Model to Integrate Computing in STEM Learning with Middle School Girls
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2019
* Cassie Scharber, Twin Cities Public Television
* Standard Grant
* Jolene Jesse
* 08/31/2019
* USD 1,239,048.00

This proposal was submitted in response to the STEM + Computing Partnerships
(STEM+C) program solicitation NSF 15-537. The STEM+C program seeks to advance
new approaches to, and evidence-based understanding of, the integration of
computing in K-12 science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM)
teaching and learning. Twin Cities Public Television in partnership with the
National Girls Collaborative Project (NGCP) and the University of Minnesota
Learning Technologies Media Lab, will implement A National Connected Learning
Model to Integrate Computing in STEM Learning with Middle School Girls. Even
though technology is pervasive in modern life, women continue to be
underrepresented in computer science (CS) study and professions. Decades of
research suggest the issues that contribute to CS pipeline deficits are complex,
and they begin early. Although girls and boys do not display a significant
difference in their abilities in math and science, research suggests that the
cause for the gap in CS is social and environmental. A contributing factor
consistently mentioned in the literature is that girls often do not feel they
belong in CS classes, because boy peers have more experience with the concepts
being taught from exposure to coding outside of school. Furthermore, research
suggests that CS courses can isolate girls by their very design with: 1)
curriculum that is irrelevant; 2) pedagogies that discourage collaboration; 3)
lack of opportunities to take risks and make mistakes; and 4) heavy reliance on
lecturing instead of hands-on, project-based learning. Connected learning
pedagogy, where youth make things, work on projects they find personally
relevant, and have open access to project tools and materials, addresses these
issues head-on. Likewise, designing experiences for girls that employ best
practice strategies for gender equitable teaching can help diminish the gap in
CS. SciGirls Code will offer the CS education field a new model for using
digital media to empower girls, role models, and STEM educators, ultimately
enriching and supporting girls' pursuit of CS in academic
settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This two-year pilot program will use principles
of connected learning with 16 STEM outreach partners to provide girls and their
leaders with computational thinking and coding skills. Findings will inform
scale-up within the broader network of girl-serving STEM programs nationwide.
Project goals are to: 1) spark and strengthen girls' interest, skills, and
confidence as technology creators before high school, when attitudes and
academic choices can influence postsecondary CS studies and careers; 2) support
girls' efforts by training educators and role models in best practices for
engaging girls in gender equitable STEM education; and 3) contribute to the
field by researching the connected learning model for out-of-school learning of
CS. These goals will be reached by the following activities: a nine-month
curriculum centering on three tracks, including e-textiles and wearable
technology, robotics, and mobile geospatial technologies; role model training
for women technology professionals; professional development for STEM educators;
and a research component to inform program success, impact and refinement. The
project is grounded in a connected learning approach, which is based on social
learning theory, that postulates that the active support of trained educators
and role models will boost the development of middle school girls' computational
thinking skills, attitudes towards computing pathways/careers, and
understanding/appreciation of how participation in technology creation impacts
themselves and the world around them.