* 1543313
* Collaborative Research: Testing the Hypothesis that Bigger Magma Chambers Crystallize Faster
* GEO,OPP
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2018
* Jill VanTongeren, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Kowalewski
* 04/30/2018
* USD 76,264.00

The solidified remnants of large magma bodies within the continental crust hold
the key to understanding the chemical and physical evolution of volcanic
provinces through time. These deposits also commonly contain some of the world's
most important ore deposits. Exposed deposits in South Africa, Greenland, USA,
Canada, and Antarctica have led researchers to propose that the bigger the magma
body, the faster it will crystallize. While this might seem counter-intuitive
(typically it is thought that more magma = hotter = harder to cool), the
comparison of these exposures show that bigger magma chambers maintain a molten
top that is always in contact with the colder crust; whereas smaller magma
chambers insulate themselves by crystallizing at the margins. The process is
similar to the difference between a large cup of coffee with no lid, and a
smaller cup of coffee held in a thermos. The large unprotected cup of coffee
will cool down much faster than that held in the thermos. This research project
of VanTongeren and Schoene will use previously collected rocks from the large
(~8-9 km thick) Dufek Intrusion in Antarctica to precisely quantify how fast the
magma chamber crystallized, and compare that rate to the much smaller magma
chamber exposed in the Skaergaard Intrusion of E. Greenland. The work is an
important step towards improving our understanding of time-scales associated
with the thermal and chemical evolution of nearly all magma chambers on Earth,
which will ultimately lead to better predictions of volcanic hazards globally.
The work will also yield important insights into the timescales and conditions
necessary for developing vast magmatic ore deposits, which is essential to the
platinum and steel industries in the USA and abroad.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Based
on observations of solidification fronts in six of the world's most completely
exposed layered mafic intrusions, it was recently proposed that bigger magma
chambers must crystallize faster than small magma chambers. While this is
initially counter-intuitive, the hypothesis falls out of simple heat balance
equations and the observation that the thickness of cumulates at the roofs of
such intrusions is negatively proportional to the size of the intrusion. In this
study, VanTongeren and Schoene will directly test the hypothesis that bigger
magma chambers crystallize faster by applying high precision U-Pb zircon
geochronology on 5-10 samples throughout the large Dufek Intrusion of
Antarctica. Due to uncertainties in even the highest-precision ID-TIMS analyses,
the Dufek Intrusion of Antarctica is the only large layered mafic intrusion on
Earth where this research can be accomplished. VanTongeren and Schoene will
place the geochronological measurements of the Dufek Intrusion into a
comprehensive petrologic framework by linking zircon crystallization to other
liquidus phases using mineral geochemistry, zircon saturation models, and
petrologic models for intrusion crystallization. The research has the potential
to radically change the way that we understand the formation and differentiation
of large magma bodies within the shallow crust. Layered intrusions are typically
thought to cool and crystallize over very long timescales allowing for
significant differentiation of the magmas and reorganization of the cumulate
rocks. If the 'bigger magma chambers crystallize faster hypothesis' holds this
could reduce the calculated solidification time scales of the early earth and
lunar magma oceans and have important implications for magma chamber dynamics of
active intraplate volcanism and long-lived continental arcs. Furthermore, while
the Dufek Intrusion is one of only two large layered intrusions exposed on
Earth, very little is known about its petrologic evolution. The detailed
geochemical and petrologic work of VanTongeren and Schoene based on analyses of
previously collected samples will provide important observations with which to
compare the Dufek and other large magma chambers.