* 1543062
* Thinking Outside the Box: Integrating Dynamic Mathematics to Advance Computational Thinking for Diverse Student Populations
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2019
* Nicholas Jackiw, SRI International
* Standard Grant
* M. Alejandra Sorto
* 09/30/2019
* USD 1,249,977.00

The focus of the project is the integration of computer science and mathematics
concepts in a middle school course. The project's goal is to explain students'
learning of four concepts that are part of both mathematics and computer
science: variables, expressions, loops and abstraction. The project will design
a middle school computer science course to incorporate the mathematics concepts.
It will explore technology-based dynamic representations that are part of an
interactive computer-based system. The research results and product development
are potentially transformative to mathematics, science, and computer science
teaching and learning in light of the expansion of computer science courses
nationwide and current national mathematics and science standards. The project
has strong potential for impact because it focuses on signature concepts from
mathematics and computational thinking that are both areas of overlap and
foundational concepts across a range of grade levels and courses. The
STEM+Computing Partnership (STEM+C) program seeks to advance multidisciplinary
integration of computing in STEM teaching and learning through applied research
and development across one or more domains; integration of STEM in computer
science; and broadening participation in computer science. Investments are made
in critical areas of pedagogy, pre-service and in-service teacher professional
development. The ECR program contribution to the funding of this project,
emphasizes fundamental STEM education research that generates foundational
knowledge in the field. Investments in ECR are made in critical areas that are
essential, broad and enduring: STEM learning and STEM learning environments,
broadening participation in STEM, and STEM workforce
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Considering the concepts dynamically is a
significant and potentially transformative departure from current practice in
mathematics and computer science. The research questions examine learning
outcomes for students and a theory of action for engaging computational thinking
in diverse classrooms. The project will begin by creating assessments of
students' conceptual understanding. Then, it will employ a design-based research
study for creating technology platforms and activities for students. Finally, it
will refine the theory of action for implementing the course. The data
collection and analysis includes case studies of students' learning to support
the research results and to refine the curriculum materials. Teachers and school
district leaders are involved with the design and implementation of the
materials. Teachers will be interviewed about their implementation of the course
and about students that have been identified for deeper case study analysis.