* 1543651
* EAGER: Effects of environmental variability on population dynamics in the Long-Term Ecological Research network
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2018
* Thomas Miller, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 06/30/2018
* USD 309,268.00

A common perception is that environmental fluctuations - drought one year,
floods the next - have negative effects on populations and could drive them to
extinction. This proposal will use existing long-term population data collected
at Long Term Ecological Research sites to test this perception rigorously.
Results could overturn this long-standing assumption and provide fundamental new
insights to the field of population ecology. Data synthesized by this project
will be available through a global population dynamics database that is used
worldwide. A clearer understanding of how environmental variability affects
population dynamics will improve conservation and management efforts. Evidence
for positive effects of environmental variability will alter strategies to
conserve threatened species or to manage invasive species. The project will
support a postdoctoral researcher and a data analyst, and will provide training
opportunities at the interface of modeling, statistical analyses, and data
synthesis for graduate and undergraduate students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will attempt the first large-scale synthesis of demographic data to
assess the effects of environmental variability on population dynamics. Twenty-
five Long Term Ecological Research (LTER) projects have been collecting
population-level data for decades, yet these data are rarely used to address key
questions in population ecology. The investigator will collect all LTER time
series of abundances or vital rates by manually inspecting each of the &gt;
6,000 data sets available from the LTER data portal, by combing data archives,
and by contacting LTER researchers directly. The data will be analyzed to test
the magnitude and direction of skewness in the distribution of log(population
growth rate) as an indicator of non-linear responses to environmental variation.
When spatially-replicated time series are available, they will be used to
separate process error from sampling error and analyzed with hierarchical
models. Once skewness in distributions of population growth rates is quantified,
the investigator will attempt to identify key environmental drivers. This is the
riskiest part of the project; when possible, these will allow the researcher to
quantify demographic response functions and predict the effects of variability
on population dynamics with greater confidence. Evidence that effects of
environmental variability are commonly neutral or positive will fundamentally
alter understanding of population dynamics in stochastic environments.