* 1543501
* The Reference Elevation Model of Antarctica (REMA): A High Resolution, Time-Stamped Digital Elevation Model for the Antarctic Ice Sheet
* GEO,OPP
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2020
* Ian Howat, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Cutler
* 05/31/2020
* USD 374,312.00

Howat/1543501

This award will provide support to map the topography of the Antarctic continent
at high spatial resolution and precision to measure ice sheet change, constrain
models, correct satellite observations and support logistics. Antarctica remains
the most poorly mapped landmass on Earth, yet, accurate and complete surface
topography is essential for a wide range of scientific and logistical
activities. The group will use a combination of very high-resolution satellite
imagery, existing ground and airborne survey data and the NSF's supercomputer
infrastructure to construct the Reference Elevation Model of Antarctica (REMA):
a continuous, time-stamped reference surface that will be one to two orders of
magnitude higher resolution than currently available.

REMA will be constructed from stereoscopic, submeter resolution imagery
collected by the WorldView satellite constellation, obtained at no cost in
partnership with the National Geospatial Intelligence Agency and the NSF-
supported Polar Geospatial Center (PGC). The high spatial and radiometric
resolution of the imagery enables photogrammetric digital elevation model (DEM)
extraction over low contrast terrains such as snow, ice and shadows. These DEM's
have horizontal and vertical offsets of up to several meters that can be reduced
to the DEM relative accuracy of 0.2 meter with a single ground control point. We
will use available control points from ground and lidar surveys to register
individual DEMs and optimized, least-squares co-registration to provide control
between overlapping DEM's over large regions. REMA will have a posting of 10
meters and accuracy better than 1 meter. It will be distributed openly by the
Polar Geospatial Center. This project will involve substantial undergraduate
participation, providing training in geospatial science and remote sensing, and
REMA will be used extensively for the outreach programs of the Byrd Polar and
Climate Research Center. This project does not require field work in Antarctica.