* 1543459
* A Full Lifecycle Approach to Understanding Adélie Penguin Response to Changing Pack Ice Conditions in the Ross Sea.
* GEO,OPP
* 06/01/2016,12/31/2020
* Katie Dugger, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Karla Heidelberg
* 12/31/2020
* USD 321,240.00

The Ross Sea region of the Southern Ocean is experiencing growing sea ice cover
in both extent and duration. These trends contrast those of the well-studied,
western Antarctic Peninsula area, where sea ice has been disappearing. Unlike
the latter, little is known about how expanding sea ice coverage might affect
the regional Antarctic marine ecosystem. This project aims to better understand
some of the potential effects of the changing ice conditions on the marine
ecosystem using the widely-recognized indicator species - the Adélie Penguin. A
four-year effort will build on previous results spanning 19 seasons at Ross
Island to explore how successes or failures in each part of the penguin's annual
cycle are effected by ice conditions and how these carry over to the next annual
recruitment cycle, especially with respect to the penguin's condition upon
arrival in the spring. Education and public outreach activities will continually
be promoted through the PenguinCam and PenguinScience websites (sites with
greater than 1 million hits a month) and "NestCheck" (a site that is logged-on
by &gt;300 classrooms annually that allows students to follow penguin families
in their breeding efforts). To encourage students in pursuing educational and
career pathways in the Science Technology Engineering and Math fields, the
project will also provide stories from the field in a Penguin Journal, develop
classroom-ready activities aligned with New Generation Science Standards,
increase the availability of instructional presentations as powerpoint files and
short webisodes. The project will provide additional outreach activities through
local, state and national speaking engagements about penguins, Antarctic science
and climate change. The annual outreach efforts are aimed at reaching over
15,000 students through the website, 300 teachers through presentations and
workshops, and 500 persons in the general public. The project also will train
four interns (undergraduate and graduate level), two post-doctoral researchers,
and a science writer/photographer. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
accomplish three major goals, all of which relate to how Adélie Penguins adapt
to, or cope with environmental change. Specifically the project seeks to
determine 1) how changing winter sea ice conditions in the Ross Sea region
affect penguin migration, behavior and survival and alter the carry-over effects
(COEs) to subsequent reproduction; 2) the interplay between extrinsic and
intrinsic factors influencing COEs over multiple years of an individual?s
lifetime; and 3) how local environmental change may affect population change via
impacts to nesting habitat, interacting with individual quality and COEs.
Retrospective analyses will be conducted using 19 years of colony based data and
collect additional information on individually marked, known-age and known-
history penguins, from new recruits to possibly senescent individuals. Four
years of new information will be gained from efforts based at two colonies (Cape
Royds and Crozier), using radio frequency identification tags to automatically
collect data on breeding and foraging effort of marked, known-history birds to
explore penguin response to resource availability within the colony as well as
between colonies (mates, nesting material, habitat availability). Additional
geolocation/time-depth recorders will be used to investigate travels and
foraging during winter of these birds. The combined efforts will allow an
assessment of the effects of penguin behavior/success in one season on its
behavior in the next (e.g. how does winter behavior affect arrival time and body
condition on subsequent breeding). It is at the individual level that penguins
are responding successfully, or not, to ongoing marine habitat change in the
Ross Sea region.