* 1543256
* Antarctic Peninsula Exhumation and Landscape Development Investigated by Low-Temperature Detrital Thermochronometry
* GEO,OPP
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2023
* David Shuster, Berkeley Geochronology Center
* Standard Grant
* Michael E. Jackson
* 05/31/2023
* USD 366,898.00

The extreme mountain topographies of alpine landscapes at mid latitudes (e.g.,
European Alps, Patagonia, Alaska) are thought to have formed by the erosive
action of glaciers, yet our understanding of exactly when and how those
topographies developed is limited. If glacial ice was responsible for forming
them, then those landscapes must have developed primarily over the last 2-3
million years when ice was present at those latitudes; this timing has only
recently been confirmed by observations. In contrast, the Antarctic Peninsula,
which contains similarly spectacular topographic relief, is known to have hosted
alpine glaciers as early as 37 million years ago, and is currently covered by
ice. Thus, if caused by glacial erosion, the high relief of the peninsula should
have formed much earlier than what has been observed at mid latitude sites, yet
we know nearly nothing about the timing of its development. The primary benefit
of this research will be to study the timing of topography development along the
Antarctic Peninsula by applying state of the art chemical analyses to sediments
collected offshore. This research is important because studying a high latitude
site will enable comparison with sites at mid latitudes and test current
hypotheses on the development of glacial landscapes in
general.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to apply low-temperature
thermochronometry based on the (U-Th)/He system in apatite to investigate the
exhumation history, the development of the present topography, and the pattern
of glacial erosion in the central Antarctic Peninsula. A number of recent
studies have used this approach to study the dramatic, high-relief landscapes
formed by Pleistocene alpine glacial erosion in temperate latitudes: New
Zealand, the Alps, British Columbia, Alaska, and Patagonia. These studies have
not only revealed when these landscapes formed, but have also provided new
insights into the physical mechanisms of glacial erosion. The Antarctic
Peninsula is broadly akin to temperate alpine landscapes in that the dominant
landforms are massive glacial troughs. However, what we know about Antarctic
glacial history suggests that the timing and history of glacial erosion was most
likely very different from the temperate alpine setting: The Antarctic Peninsula
has been glaciated since the Eocene, and Pleistocene climate cooling is
hypothesized to have suppressed, rather than enhanced, glacial erosion. Our goal
is to evaluate these hypotheses by developing a direct thermochronometric record
of when and how the present glacial valley relief formed. We propose to learn
about the timing and process of glacial valley formation through apatite
(U-Th)/He and 4He/3He measurements on glacial sediment collected near the
grounding lines of major glaciers draining the Peninsula. In effect, since we
cannot sample bedrock directly that is currently covered by ice, we will rely on
these glaciers to do it for us.