* 1543942
* BREAD ABRDC: Integrated Resource Development for the Genome-enabled Improvement of Shea Tree for sub-Saharan Africa
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2016,10/31/2020
* Ramni Jamnadass, University of New Hampshire
* Continuing Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 10/31/2020
* USD 563,000.00

Shea trees are central to sustaining the livelihoods of thousands of rural
communities across the vast Sahel region of sub-Saharan Africa. Uniquely adapted
to this harsh semi-arid zone, shea trees produce oil-rich nuts, which an
estimated 18.4 million women gather and manually process into a nutrient-rich
butter used as cooking oil, soap, and medicine for their families. Shea also
provides a rare source of income to these subsistence households across 21
countries, as the butter is valued by both the cosmetics and chocolate
industries. Referred to as "women's gold," shea is one of the few resources that
female members of rural households in the region control, from harvesting to
commercialization. Despite its cultural, economic, and food security importance,
however, the shea tree is under threat. Slow-growing shea trees traditionally
are not planted; rather, nuts are gathered from mature, essentially wild trees
found in minimally-managed areas called parklands. Due to increasing land-use
pressures, the number of these parkland shea trees is declining. In a broad
partnership with regional organizations, this project seeks to reverse this
trend by improving the value of shea through modern breeding. By turning this
semi-wild, variably-yielding species into a more actively managed and
deliberately planted tree crop, the long-term impact of this project will be no
less than improved livelihoods (enhanced nutrition, increased income, and more
robust risk mitigation) for the millions of rural women and their families
across sub-Saharan Africa currently dependent on the highly valued but
threatened parkland populations of shea tree.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the long
juvenile period of shea tree (Vitellaria paradoxa) making traditional breeding
approaches untenable, efficient improvement of the species requires modern
breeding tools, including publicly-available foundational genomics resources and
highly characterized mapping populations. This project will develop such
resources, thereby enabling the long-term genome-enabled improvement of this
currently undomesticated species. An assembly of the highly heterozygous
(&gt;37%) 0.8 Gb diploid genome will be accomplished using long-read (PacBio;
HGAP) sequencing of cv. 'AK01,' a key parent in West African shea breeding
efforts to date. Once annotated using RNA-seq data from replicated, multiple-
tissue libraries (Illumina Hi-seq; MAKER-P), a comprehensive collection of
mapped and functionally-classified SNPs will be developed by resequencing (Ion
Proton)100 diverse V. paradoxa accessions gathered from across the species'
natural distribution. By also developing a nested association mapping
population, a replicated association mapping panel, and an open-source
repository for all genotypic and phenotypic data, this project aims to put
genomic selection of improved shea populations within the reach of regional
breeding and parkland regeneration programs. By training a PhD student and
holding a regional workshop, the project also invests in the capacity building
necessary to bring the full potential of these genomic, informatic, and plant
genetic resources to fruition. Through a broad partnership with national
programs, the CGIAR system, the African Orphan Crops Consortium (AOCC), and the
Global Shea Alliance (GSA), all project outcomes are poised for immediate
translation to the shea improvement sector.