* 1543108
* International Travel to the Gender Summits for US Women Faculty and Researchers in STEM
* EHR,HRD
* 06/15/2015,08/31/2016
* Shirley Malcom, American Association for the Advancement of Science
* Standard Grant
* Claudia Rankins
* 08/31/2016
* USD 132,186.00

The project at the American Association for the Advancement of Science builds on
the successful outcomes of the Mentoring Women in International Research
Collaborations (MWIRC) in STEM initiative. Women faculty in science, technology,
enginnering and mathematics (STEM) fields at Historically Black Colleges and
Universities (HBCUs) and other Minority Serving Institutions (MSIs) are
supported to create and sustain new research networks at the international
level, thus enabling them to learn about developing and establishing critical
research collaborations.

Twelve women faculty will travel to one of the three upcoming Gender Summits, to
be held in South Korea and Germany in 2015 and in Mexico in 2016. Attendance at
the summits and follow-up activities will allow faculty to expand their
networks, perspectives, and collaborations in the STEM disciplines which will
enrich their research capacity and that of their institutions. The participants
will be able to benefit from an already existing gender-concerned community.
This project will create a strong synergy and engagement from a variety of
entities and partners, will help STEM faculty better understand international
research priorities, resources for developing international research
collaborations, and guidelines for U.S. STEM researchers traveling and
conducting research abroad. The project has co-funding support from the Global
Venture Fund in the Office of International Science and Engineering.