* 1543932
* The Madden Julian Oscillation and the Maritime Continent
* GEO,AGS
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2021
* Adam Sobel, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Varavut Limpasuvan
* 03/31/2021
* USD 757,467.00

The Madden-Julian Oscillation (MJO) is a weather disturbance that emanates in
the tropics but influences weather globally. This project will improve both the
understanding and ability to predict the weather disturbances associated with
the MJO. The focus is on how the disturbances move from west to east across the
Maritime Continent, which is the region along the equator around and including
Indonesia. The project will seek to understand how the presence of the
Indonesian islands, as well as the mountains on those islands, influence the
motion of the weather disturbances: what causes the disturbances either to move
across the islands or not do so, and how that motion can be forecast better.

The project will do this two ways. First, idealized sensitivity experiments will
be performed using models. For example, the islands will be removed entirely, or
retained with mountains removed. Second, weather forecast simulations which have
already been carried out by weather prediction centers around the world will be
analyzed. The project team will examine forecasts that compared well with what
occurred, such as those in which the weather disturbances moved eastward across
the Maritime Continent. The project will improve understanding of the MJO. On a
more practical level, the project will lead to improved long-range weather
forecasts. A graduate student will also be trained. The results of this project
will be communicated to the public through public lectures, blogs, and op-ed
pieces.