* 1543599
* Collaborative Research: IDBR: Type A: Diver-Operated Imaging Platform with Complementary Systems for Quantifying Aquatic Organism Interactions
* BIO,DBI
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2019
* John Dabiri, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 04/30/2019
* USD 272,849.00

An award is made to the California Institute of Technology and other
collaborating organizations including Providence College, Roger Williams
University and the University of Texas at Austin to do research and development
of a new diver-operated technology to measure key biological and physical
processes that affect the health of the ocean and the organisms therein. The
ability to conduct science directly in the ocean environment will be a unique
national capability that will transform our understanding of the ocean and can
potentially enable prediction of adverse impacts on industries such as fishing
and coastal tourism. The project will advance the study of marine biology by
extending previous laboratory research into more realistic experiments in the
field. Importantly, the technology developed during this project will be made
available free-of-charge to other U.S. researchers through a loan program
developed and tested under prior NSF support. A small business will collaborate
with the researchers toward low-cost manufacturing of the technology. The
project will support a diverse workforce through the hiring and training of a
full-time graduate student and summer students recruited through a program of
targeted research opportunities for underrepresented students. These researchers
will conduct laboratory and field work at the Marine Biological Laboratory in
Woods Hole, MA, exposing them to front-line field
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Knowledge of aquatic animal ecology depends upon
accurate measurement of individual organisms for critical processes such as
feeding, behavior, and associated fluid motions. Imaging of these interactions
has yielded important advances in the understanding of these processes, but has
depended primarily upon the controlled conditions of the laboratory. Laboratory
conditions allow advanced optical configurations to provide high spatial and
temporal resolution moving images within highly controlled conditions. However,
these same controlled and defined conditions may also inadvertently create
artificial environments that affect the outcome of natural process measurements.
The goal of this research is to enable in situ measurements that combine novel
daytime particle image velocimetry (PIV); high-resolution, collimated
brightfield imaging, and three-dimensional image holography. This new technology
will enable (1) direct quantification of complex processes, such as feeding and
swimming in turbulent flows under variable lighting conditions, (2) detailed
field measurements of animals that are important in the environment but
comparatively intractable for controlled laboratory studies, and (3) field
confirmation of laboratory data on processes such as predator-prey interactions.