* 1543419
* RUI: Characterizing Protein Homeostasis and the Regulatory Mechanisms Controlling Molecular Chaperone Expression in the Highly Stenothermal Notothenioid Fish, Trematomus Bernacchii
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2024
* Mackenzie Zippay, Sonoma State University
* Standard Grant
* William Ambrose
* 07/31/2024
* USD 741,548.00

The project will integrate analyses of fish physiology, protein production and
genetics to determine if regulation of molecular chaperones (a class of proteins
that facilitate the proper folding of proteins in a cell) has been permanently
lost in a key fish species (Trematomus bernacchii) inhabiting the Southern
Ocean. To do so, efforts will be undertaken to analyze chaperones in these
fishes and how elevated temperatures impact protein turnover and protein damage.
These studies should more definitively determine if the interruption of
chaperone function is environmentally controlled (which could suggest these fish
could benefit in some form by increasing sea surface temperatures) or if there
is complete loss of chaperone function due to a change in its structure through
evolutionary processes (which would suggest these fish are less likely to be
able to adapt to warming). In addition to filling key gaps in our knowledge
about the diversity and evolution of fishes in the southern ocean and the
potential impacts changing temperatures might have on fish populations, the
project will support the training of undergraduate and graduate students at an
RUI institution. Specifically, activities and content directly related to this
project's aims will be incorporated into the undergraduate curriculum at Sonoma
State University in an effort to increase undergraduate participation in
research, especially with respect to underrepresented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has specific aims to perform a
comparative analysis of nucleotide divergence resulting in non-synonymous amino
acid changes in the trans-regulatory elements, namely members of the heat shock
factor (HSF) family of transcription factors, in T. bernacchii and N. angustata.
The project will also utilize metabolic labeling of newly synthesized proteins
from isolated hepatocytes to monitor protein turnover rates in fish acclimated
to both -1.5 and +4 °C for an extended period. Changes in chaperoning capacity
and levels of damaged proteins will be quantified in multiple tissues to gain a
better understanding of the cellular requirements for maintaining protein
homeostasis under long-term acclimations to +4 °C. In combination, the work will
help answer questions regarding divergence in these fishes as well a fundamental
information regarding protein structure and function that may also have bio-
medical implications.