* 1543901
* BREAD ABRDC: Development of Essential Genetic and
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2023
* Damaris Odeny, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 06/30/2023
* USD 1,771,465.00

Finger millet is a grain crop of strategic importance to food security in
Eastern Africa. The grain has high nutritional value, can grow in arid
environments and thus is important to the livelihood of smallholder farmers. A
major agricultural goal in the region is to develop higher yielding varieties of
finger millet through reducing or eliminating diseases that impact growth of the
plant. Blast fungus is a pathogen that reduces yield up to 80% and is one of the
main diseases affecting finger millet. To understand how to control disease
outbreaks, this project uses genomic sequencing as a powerful approach to
identify precise strains of the fungus and to study how the fungus causes
disease symptoms in the plant. Sequence analyses of blast strains collected in
Kenya, Tanzania, Uganda and Ethiopia will provide information on the genetic
diversity of the pathogen in Eastern Africa, and provide a resource to identify
the factors that are responsible for infection of finger millet. The knowledge
from this approach is essential to develop efficient disease management
strategies. Furthermore, sequence analyses of the finger millet host will
clarify why some cultivars are more resistant to blast than others. The
generated resources will also be used as a vehicle to train undergraduate and
graduate students in Eastern Africa in bioinformatics, an expertise that is
essential to translate the information to improve breeding strategies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific aims of the project are to (1) Generate 80X
PacBio sequence for the allotetraploid finger millet genome (1C=1.8 Gb) to
generate a high quality genome assembly (1C=1.8 Gb); (2) Resequence 200 Eastern
African isolates of the finger millet blast fungus Magnaporthe oryzae, including
24 that were collected 10 years ago, to determine the diversity and evolution of
this finger millet pathogen both over time and across geographic regions. The
blast genome sequences will be mined to identify candidate effector genes using
an effector prediction pipeline that incorporates common characteristics of
known effectors (secretion and high polymorphism levels;(3) Analyze the blast-
finger millet interaction transcriptome using RNA-Seq to identify genes that are
induced at early stages of infection. Genes encoding secreted proteins will be
identified from the RNA-Seq experiment and cross-referenced to those identified
using the effector prediction pipeline. Host genes that are differentially
expressed will be compared between compatible and incompatible interactions, and
with genes that are differentially expressed during early stages of blast
infection in rice, and(4) Develop a nested association mapping panel of some
4000 RILs derived from 21 diverse parents using a double round robin design.
This population will represent the first mapping resource that captures
substantial diversity present in finger millet germplasm and has a high
quantitative trait loci detection power.