* 1543827
* Workshop Proposal: Perspectives: Examining Complex Ecological Dynamics through Arts, Humanities and Science Integration; Reno, Nevada; June 19-21, 2015
* BIO,DEB
* 05/15/2015,04/30/2019
* Mary Leigh, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 04/30/2019
* USD 49,567.00

Society faces unprecedented challenges due to environmental change. Addressing
the grand challenges of our time will require a synthesis of multiple
perspectives, including science, arts, and the humanities. These fields share a
common aim of exposing hidden truths about a complex world. This workshop will
bring together individual artists, scientists, philosophers, historians, social
scientists, representatives from funding agencies in the arts, humanities and
sciences, and institutions with significant histories and perspectives on
integration across these areas. In combination, this cross-disciplinary group
can foster empathy, increase openness to science, and empower society to access
multiple sources of information as critical decisions are made related to land
and resource management, conservation, and societal health. A compilation of
resources currently available to encourage integration across these disciplines
will be made publicly available, and workshop activities will be posted on the
Field Stations and Marine Laboratories art blog. Finally, this intellectual
collaboration will broaden participation in scientific arenas in unparalleled
ways.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aim of this workshop is to expand the depth and
breadth of interdisciplinary efforts in which arts and humanities contribute to
fundamental inquiry and analyses of the grand challenges facing social-
environmental systems. Synthesizing perspectives on social-environmental
challenges in the context of place-based and problem-focused research promises
progress in solving problems that cannot be achieved by separate disciplines
working in relative isolation. The arts and humanities, and the numerous
subdisciplines included in these generalized disciplinary headings, will offer a
productive source of ideas and approaches to the grand challenges of this era.
The workshop is risky; many of the proposed participants have never worked
together before. A strategic agenda will guide the 3-day workshop and clear
goals are identified. These include the outlines of a common research agenda, a
roadmap for future activities to achieve this agenda, and co-authorship of
manuscripts. The workshop will be held at the Nevada Museum of Art - Center for
Art and the Environment and attended by 25-30 individuals who will chart a new
frontier that directly implements the Memorandum of Understanding recently
signed by the National Science Foundation, the National Endowment for the Arts,
and the National Endowment for the Humanities.