* 1543813
* Bilateral BBSRC NSF/ Bio:  Modelling Light Control of Development
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Enamul Huq, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 08/31/2019
* USD 408,363.00

Changes in light availability in the environment can be caused by encroaching
vegetation or the progression of the seasons and can alter the course of plant
development. Developmental flexibility (plasticity) allows plants to adapt to
changing environments and is essential for their survival. In this project, a
collaborative team of researchers from the US (University of Texas Austin) and
the UK (Edinburgh University) will use a combination of mathematical modeling
and experimentation to examine at the molecular level how light regulates plant
development. Understanding plant responses to changing environments, including
light, will allow for more efficient food production. This project will support
informal science education, outreach to middle and high school students, and
training in modeling and experimental techniques for postdoctoral fellows and
undergraduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Throughout the plant life cycle,
the phytochrome family of photoreceptors detect alterations in the light
environment and propagates adaptive changes in plant architecture; however it is
unclear how this is executed at the molecular level. The preliminary data
presented here provide compelling evidence that light controls development via
the Shoot Apical Meristem (SAM). HECTATE (HEC) transcription factors have
recently been shown to control cell proliferation by regulating SAM genes. The
preliminary data demonstrate that HECs operate through a Phytochrome Interaction
Factor (PIF)-based mechanism, implying a direct molecular link between PIFs and
the SAM. This study will integrate experimental and theoretical approaches to:
(1) elucidate the molecular events through which light controls SAM function;
(2) develop a new conceptual model for light signaling; and (3) provide
technological advances in plant architecture manipulation for plant breeding.
The project benefits from significant modelling and data storage/sharing
resources offered by partner labs. The model will help to determine how
different light regimes alter pathway dynamics and development, providing a
systems level understanding of pathway behavior. The ultimate goal of the
project will be to generate a molecular and systems level understanding of how
light regulates organogenesis, providing a new paradigm for light signaling.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative US/UK project is supported by the US
National Science Foundation and the UK Biotechnology and Biological Sciences
Research Council.