* 1543122
* Meeting:  Inaugural Neuroimaging Workshop on the Dynamic Social Brain (October 22-23, 2015)
* SBE,BCS
* 10/15/2015,12/31/2016
* Stephanie Cacioppo, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Alumit Ishai
* 12/31/2016
* USD 14,775.00

A key challenge in the study of the human brain resides not only in determining
how psychological states and processes map onto patterns of brain activity but
how this activity is modulated by shared representations, social compositions,
and social behaviors. When the term "social neuroscience" was introduced in 1992
and characterized as the study of the transduction pathways between the various
biological and social levels of organization, the dominant perspective for
examining the brain was the solitary computer. Since 1992, it has also become
essential to consider theoretically and empirically how thinking brains think
about other thinking brains, a core concept in social neuroscience. The past 25
years have seen not only the acceptance of the field of social neuroscience, but
also its tremendous growth as an integrative and interdisciplinary field towards
medical neuroscience, as several neuroimaging procedures were burgeoning, and
human lesion studies, comparative research, and animal models began to focus
more on the biological basis of social structures and their effects on mental
and physical health. The growth of social neuroscience has been fueled by
research the expansion of these methods, and by the development of analytic
tools for studying the dynamic neural aspects of the social brain in health and
disease. With such a fast growth, there is a crucial need for neuroscientists to
stay up-to-date on the available neuroimaging methods and cutting-edge analytic
tools to study the social brain. Dr. Stephanie Cacioppo at the University of
Chicago Pritzker School of Medicine will lead the first neuroimaging workshop on
the dynamic social brain to address this need by focusing on the most important
neuroimaging technique used by social neuroscientists, namely, functional
magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This workshop will offer
attendees both a theoretical and a practical background to provide attendees
with a unique opportunity to learn more about the cutting-edge neuroimaging
methods and analytic tools currently available for rigorous investigation of the
social brain. The internationally renown speakers in this year's neuroimaging
workshop meeting will illustrate the value of comparative research and will
stimulate discussions among attendees regarding the importance of opening new
dialogues between researchers and clinicians. Lectures will be intertwined with
45-minute long sessions dedicated to promote more discussion on building more
meaningful bridges between researchers pertaining to social neuroscience and its
implications for society at large. This workshop aims to raise awareness on the
intimate relationship between theory and methods; to promote the discussion on a
set of considerations to guide the interpretation or understanding of data from
neuroimaging studies; to highlight the importance of using converging methods to
dissect the social brain; to identify common themes in the neural mechanisms of
social behavior; and to promote discussion on building more meaningful bridges
between researchers and clinicians and between animal and human researchers
pertaining to social neuroscience and its implications for society at large.
This workshop is expected to have academic and societal impact by fostering
interdisciplinary and international interactions and potential collaboration
among a tremendous diversity of talented young researchers at various career
stages, from different disciplines, and from historically under-represented
groups. By bringing students, fellows, and faculty together from various
departments to learn about and work on neuroimaging to address questions about
brain function from each of their perspectives, they will learn about the
inherently interdisciplinary nature of the enterprise and the importance of
interdisciplinary research teams to address their individual questions. The
final outcome of this workshop will be the development of large-scale, high
quality, and cross-cutting collaborative project proposals possibly
international, from interdisciplinary scientific teams in neuroimaging composed
of researchers and clinicians studying animal and human social behaviors.