* 1543750
* Asymptotic Regimes of Nonlinear Dispersive Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 08/18/2014,07/31/2016
* Zaher Hani, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 07/31/2016
* USD 63,361.00

The main objective of this project is to explore factors that vitally influence
the long-time behavior of nonlinear dispersive PDE like the non-linear
Schroedinger (NLS), nonlinear wave (NLW), nonlinear Klein-Gordon (NKG), and
Zakharov systems. First, the effect of domain geometry is investigated in terms
of a relation between the volume growth of the underlying manifold and the decay
of linear solutions. The implications of this relation for the nonlinear problem
are then explored in certain tractable geometries, namely quotients of Euclidean
spaces. Second, the question of small-data scattering (asymptotically linear
behavior) for some weakly nonlinear dispersive equations is considered. These
are equations where the nonlinearity is not of high enough degree for classical
methods to succeed. One focus is on inhomogeneities represented by a potential
term, and how this can affect the asymptotic behavior. Finally, the so-called
weakly turbulent regime is investigated by studying the long-time behavior of
the cubic NLS equation on a compact domain. In this context, a new continuum
equation is derived for the envelope of the discrete Fourier modes by taking a
suitable large-box limit in the spirit of weak turbulence theory. This equation
turns out to enjoy remarkable symmetries and even explicit solutions, and can be
used (via rigorous approximation results) to better understand the long-time
frequency dynamics of the original NLS system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
nonlinear dispersive equations considered in this project arise naturally in
several areas of physics (plasma physics, nonlinear optics, general relativity,
etc.) where they often serve as simplified effective models. In order for these
models to be useful for engineering purposes as well, one has to understand the
effect of inhomogeneities (usually modeled by a non-Euclidean domain geometry or
a potential term) in making connections with the real world. Such a study would
help set the parameters and limitations of not only the validity of the existing
simplified models, but also the faithfulness of computer simulations (based on
those models) in predicting experimental phenomena. On a more theoretical note,
starting a mathematically rigorous study of the all-important physical theory of
weak turbulence, as suggested in the proposal, represents a cross-disciplinary
collaboration between pure mathematics, applied mathematics, and physics, with
rewarding applications in plasma and fluid engineering, as well as ocean and
atmospheric science.