* 1543366
* Dynamics of the Antarctic Seasonal Ice Zone
* GEO,OPP
* 04/15/2016,03/31/2020
* John Marshall, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Peter Milne
* 03/31/2020
* USD 826,678.00

The seasonal sea ice zone (SIZ) on the southern flank of the Antarctic
Circumpolar Current is the region in which sea ice undergoes a massive seasonal
cycle in its thickness and extent. The SIZ extends all the way around Antarctica
and it is here that sea-ice manufacture and export leads to brine rejection and
loss of buoyancy in the water column. In this way cold surface waters are
preconditioned for subsequent convection, mixing and entrainment in coastal
polynyas, under ice shelves and over the continental slope of Antarctica. The
transformed (densified) waters ultimately make up Antarctic Bottom Water feeding
the lower cell of the Southern Ocean (SO), connecting to the abyssal oceans.
Despite the importance of the SIZ in driving the meridional circulation of the
ocean-atmosphere climate system, its dynamics is not well observed, modeled or
understood. This study seeks to model the fluid dynamics of the seasonal cycle
of sea-ice formation in a strongly eddying region next to the continental shelf.

The broad impacts of the research center upon the Antarctic being a system of
such great importance to global ocean circulation, and to climate. The study
intends to bring together theory, observations and models to address the
contemporary problem of uptake of heat to the abyssal ocean, and will provide a
challenging context for the education of graduate students and postdoctoral
researchers in interdisciplinary science. The development of MITgcm, an open
source ocean model used by many, will also continue.