* 1543309
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award: The Long Term Relationship Between Political Authority And Economic Organization
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2015,01/31/2017
* Robert Drennan, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 01/31/2017
* USD 10,080.00

A major concern of social science research has been to identify the mechanisms
underlying the development of socially complex societies and the ways in which
larger towns and cities exert centripetal forces that draw together and
integrate the populations of these societies. Only archaeology can trace the
earliest parts of this development, during which the patterns built on later
were established. Systematic study of early complex societies has shown
considerable variability in the social, environmental, and economic conditions
that foster their development, and comparisons of archaeological cases reveal
patterns in this variability that provide insight into how different
developmental forces can combine and complement each other. This project will
focus especially on the relationship between political authority and the
organization of systems for providing a population with the utilitarian goods of
daily life. The connections between early rulers and these basic economic
systems are poorly known. Researchers ask whether, how, and to what extent
controlling, managing, or profiting from the production and distribution of
basic goods contributed to the ability of early rulers to project their
political authority. The different forms that this relationship could take might
set the stage for political entities founded on different core principles and
lead to greater or lesser long-term political stability. Greater understanding
of the basic factors that encourage economic development and political stability
in large-scale societies makes a clear contribution in a world composed of such
societies, with varied organizational patterns and histories and and with
different degrees of success in achieving political stability and in providing
for the economic needs of their populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will assess the degree to which changes in distribution networks of basic goods
correspond with the centralization and decentralization of political units.
Under the supervision of Dr. Robert D. Drennan, the doctoral candidate, Camilla
Kelsoe, will carry out a geochemical analysis of a sample of utilitarian pottery
sherds recovered by previous research from two Neolithic walled towns in the
Jianghan Plain of south-central China. Patterns in the compositional variability
of these pottery sherds will be examined to delineate pottery distribution
networks through the late Neolithic period (3300-2000 BCE). One of these two
towns, Xiaocheng, developed and became increasingly centralized through this
period, while the population of the other, Taojiahu, became less centralized.
These alternative trajectories present an ideal case in which to systematically
assess the relationship between centralized political authority and economic
development. In addition to its substantive results, the project will provide
essential research training for the doctoral candidate and foster closer
academic collaboration between the University of Pittsburgh and several
institutions in China: Wuhan University, the Hubei Province Institute of
Archaeology, the Chinese Academy of Sciences, and Central South University.