* 1543958
* BREAD PHENO:  High-Throughput Phenotyping with Smart Phones. #phenoApps
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2020
* Mitchell Neilsen, Kansas State University
* Continuing Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 07/31/2020
* USD 1,632,824.00

Food and nutritional security will be a grand challenge in the coming decades.
The global population is expected to increase to over 9 billion and food demand
will grow by more than 50%. Currently, there are 2 billion people worldwide
living in poverty, mostly relying on subsistence agriculture in developing
countries. While poverty and food insecurity is a complex issue, the development
of improved climate-resilient, high yielding and nutritious plant varieties is a
critical part of improving food security, increasing income and economic
welfare. To address this challenge, innovative approaches are needed to speed up
the development of improved plant varieties. In plant breeding and genetics,
precise measurements of plant characteristics are needed to accurately determine
the effect of important genes and to identify and select the most promising
candidate plant varieties. There has been limited technology development in this
area, particularly for traits measured in field trials where most measurements
are still taken and recorded by hand. This project will develop mobile
applications (apps) for measuring plant traits that can be deployed on
inexpensive and readily available mobile devices. Initial testing and deployment
through collaboration with cassava and wheat breeders will enable rapid
dissemination and broad usability. Middle-school and high-school students will
also be engaged to test and use the apps to explore plant growth and measure
plant traits. Equipping thousands of plant breeders around the world with tools
for rapid measurement and analysis of important plant traits will provide the
foundation for accelerated development of improved plant varieties that will
ultimately result in increased productivity, food security, nutrition and income
of smallholder farmers and their families in developing countries.

Over the past decade, the availability of genomic data has exploded while the
methods to collect phenotypes have made minimal advancements. This has led to a
dramatic imbalance in data sets connecting genotype to phenotype and highlights
phenotyping as the remaining major bottleneck in plant breeding programs. This
project will advance the field of 3D graphics and modeling, data mining and deep
learning through integration of simultaneous ground truth phenotypic
measurements and imaging with mobile technology. Building on the success of
Field Book (www.wheatgenetics.org/field-book), user-friendly mobile apps for
field-based high-throughput phenotyping (HTP) will be developed and deployed.
This project will converge novel advances in image processing and machine vision
to deliver mobile apps through established breeder networks. Novel image
analysis algorithms will be developed to model and extract plant phenotypes. A
robust development pipeline will be assisted by 1) real-time field testing
through breeding collaborators around the world and 2) middle-school and high-
school students using the apps to explore plant growth and quantitative
differences under genetic control. To ensure both immediate, broad deployment
and functionality on a diverse set of crops, breeder networks for cassava and
wheat will be engaged, providing a diverse set of target plant phenotypes,
environments, breeding programs and working cultures. By combining data from
research programs with ground truth breeder knowledge, this project will lay the
foundation for collecting training sets that can subsequently be used to extract
and quantify complex phenotypes using deep learning. Open-source apps for
smartphones and tablets will consist of both software and documentation so that
users will be able to understand how to use the apps. Apps will be distributed
through online app stores (Windows Store, iTunes App Store, Google Play),
through project websites, and via collaborative plant breeding networks. The
resulting source code will be hosted in a public GitHub repository with a GNU
General Public License (GPL) open-source license.