* 1543158
* Collaborative Research: Antarctic Automatic Weather Station Program 2016-2019
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* John Cassano, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Peter Milne
* 08/31/2020
* USD 99,793.00

The Antarctic Automatic Weather Station (AWS) network is the most extensive
ground meteorological network in the Antarctic, approaching its 30th year at
several of its installations. Its prime focus as a long term observational
record is to measure the near surface weather and climatology of the Antarctic
atmosphere. AWS stations measure air-temperature, pressure, wind speed and
direction at a nominal surface height of ~ 2-3m. Other parameters such as
relative humidity and snow accumulation may also be taken. Observational data
from the AWS are collected via Iridium network, or DCS Argos aboard either NOAA
or MetOp polar orbiting satellites and thus made available in near real time to
operational and synoptic weather forecasters. The surface observations from the
AAWS network are important records for recent climate change and meteorological
processes. The surface observations from the AAWS network are also used
operationally, and in the planning of field work. The surface observations made
from the AAWS network have been used to check on satellite and remote sensing
observations.

This project proposes to use the surface conditions observed by the AWS network
to determine how large-scale modes of climate variability impact Antarctic
weather and climate, how the surface observations from the AWS network are
linked to surface layer and boundary layer processes, and to quantify the impact
of snowfall and blowing snow events. Specifically, this project proposes to
improve our understanding of the processes that lead to unusual weather events
and how these events are related to large-scale modes of climate variability.
This project will fill a gap in knowledge of snowfall distribution, and
distinguishing between snowfall and blowing snow events using a suite of
precipitation sensors near McMurdo Station.