* 1543328
* Production and Fate of Oxylipins in Waters of the Western Antarctic Penninsula: Linkages Between UV Radiation, Lipid Peroxidation, and Carbon Cycling
* GEO,OPP
* 01/01/2017,12/31/2019
* Benjamin Van Mooy, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Karla Heidelberg
* 12/31/2019
* USD 582,484.00

The depletion of stratospheric ozone over Antarctica leads to abnormally high
levels of ultraviolet radiation (UVR) from the sun reaching the surface of the
ocean. This phenomenon is predicted to continue for the next half century,
despite bans on ozone-destroying pollutants. Phytoplankton in the near surface
ocean are subjected to variable amounts of UVR and contain a lot of lipids
(fats). Because phytoplankton are at the base of the food chain their lipids
makes their way into the Antarctic marine ecosystem's food web. The molecular
structures of phytoplankton lipids are easily altered by UVR. When this happens,
their lipids can be transformed from healthy molecules into potentially harmful
molecules(oxylipins) known to be disruptive to reproductive and developmental
processes. This project will use state-of-the-art molecular methods to answer
questions about extent to which UVR damages lipid molecules in phytoplankton,
and how these resultant molecules might effect the food chain in the ocean near
Antarctica. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Lipid peroxidation is often invoked
as consequence of increased exposure of phytoplankton to UVR-produced reactive
oxygen species (ROS), but the literature is practically silent on peroxidized
lipids and their byproducts (i.e. oxylipins) in the ocean. In waters of the West
Antarctic Peninsula (WAP), spring-time blooms of diatoms contribute
significantly to overall marine primary production. Oxylipins from diatoms can
be highly bioactive; their impact on zooplankton grazers, bacteria, and other
phytoplankton has been the subject of intense study. However, almost all of this
work has focused on the production of oxylipins via enzymatic pathways, not by
pathways involving UVR and/or ROS. Furthermore, rigorous experimental work on
the effects of oxylipins has been confined almost exclusively to pure cultures
and artificial communities. Thus, the true potential of these molecules to
disrupt carbon cycling is very poorly-constrained, and is entirely unknown in
the waters of the WAP. Armed with new highly-sensitive, state-of-the-art
analytical techniques based on high-mass-resolution mass spectrometry, the
principal investigator and his research group have begun to uncover an exquisite
diversity of oxylipins in natural WAP planktonic communities. These techniques
will be applied to understand the connections between UVR, ROS, oxylipins, and
carbon cycling. The project will answer the question of how UVR, via ROS,
affects oxylipin production by diatoms in WAP surface waters in controlled
experiments conducted at a field station. With the answer to this question in
hand, the project will also seek to answer how this phenomenon impacts the flow
of carbon, particularly the export of organic carbon from the system, during a
research cruise. The level of UVR-induced stresses experienced by oxylipin-rich
planktonic communities in the WAP is unique, making Antarctica the only location
for answering these fundamental questions. Major activities will include
laboratory experiments with artificial membranes and diatom cultures, as well
field experiments with phytoplankton, zooplankton, and bacteria in WAP waters.