* 1543894
* Enabling Algorithms, Signal Processing, and Circuits for Agile Cognitive Radio in CMOS Technology
* MPS,AST
* 01/01/2015,07/31/2019
* James Buckwalter, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Jon Williams
* 07/31/2019
* USD 1,057,223.00

Cognitive radio techniques will be developed that enable rapid, wideband
spectrum sensing in the presence of strong interference. Cognitive radios must
detect available spectrum quickly in real time with high-probability of success,
which requires extremely high dynamic range in the presence of powerful
interference signals. Furthermore, future cognitive radio will operate over
multiple frequency bands spread out over a wide frequency range. This compounds
the challenges to the receiver design since all filtering must be capable of
tuning over wide frequency ranges. Finally, the radio must agilely hop among
frequency bands. The time required to detect the power in any channel is an
overhead that limits the network throughput.

Most prior cognitive radio research applies digital baseband algorithms to
conventional RF and analog radio circuitry, which is not designed to address the
spectrum sensing application. This limits the achievable spectrum sensing
bandwidth and agility and results in high power consumption for the RF, analog,
and digital signal processing blocks. This work is fundamentally different in
that it will customize the entire receive chain from the RF circuitry through
the digital signal processing (DSP) to incorporate new techniques specifically
targeted to address spectrum sensing. The techniques involve the injection of
pseudonoise-modulated RF signals into the receiver to identify the blockers via
correlation algorithms in the DSP as well as to calibrate and cancel the
nonlinear characteristics of the receiver. We will develop and refine the
proposed algorithms and demonstrate their utility in a 28-nm CMOS receiver
integrated circuit.