* 1543684
* INSPIRE: Forging new connections among mammalian evolution, environmental change, and tectonics during the Eocene.
* GEO,EAR
* 06/15/2015,05/31/2022
* Michael Taylor, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Dena Smith
* 05/31/2022
* USD 596,654.00

INSPIRE: Forging new connections among mammalian evolution, environmental
change, and tectonics during the Eocene.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;K. Christopher
Beard and Michael Taylor&lt;br/&gt;University of Kansas,
EAR-1543684&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This INSPIRE
project is jointly funded by the Sedimentary Geology and Paleobiology Program in
the Earth Sciences Division of the Geosciences (GEO) Directorate, the Biological
Anthropology Program in the Division of Behavorial and Cognitive Sciences of the
Social, Behavorial and Economic (SBE) Directorate, the SBE Office of
Multidisciplinary Activities, the Office of International Science and
Engineering (OISE), and the Office of International and Integrative Activities
(OIIA) INSPIRE program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project investigates how
dramatic changes in the Earth's environment impacted the evolution of early
primates and other mammals in southwest Asia and adjacent regions. An
international team of scientists from the University of Kansas and partner
institutions in the USA, Turkey and France will explore Eocene (~40-45 million
years old) fossil sites that include both African and Eurasian mammals. These
Eocene mammals lived in an environment wrought by remarkable climatic and
geologic changes. The team will explore potential links between plate tectonics,
environmental change, and the evolution of both native mammal groups and
"invasive species" such as early anthropoids (primate ancestors of modern
monkeys, apes and humans) that were colonizing Africa for the first time. Early
anthropoids and other Asian mammals may have traversed southwest Asia in order
to get to Africa, a hypothesis that will be tested by the PIs work. The project
will strengthen scientific cooperation and educational opportunities between
American and Turkish scientists and students, while fundamentally advancing the
understanding of early mammalian evolution, including our own anthropoid primate
ancestors, at the crossroads between Africa, Europe and
Asia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The multidisciplinary team working on this project
will collect new data in the field and perform detailed investigations in the
lab aimed at: (1) documenting and characterizing the Eocene mammal fauna in
order to understand the phylogenetic and biogeographic relationships of
individual taxa and how the entire fauna was assembled; (2) constraining the
timing and processes of accretion of Gondwanan microplates onto Turkey and their
relationship to the Eocene mammal faunas there; (3) establishing a multi-proxy
reconstruction of Eocene environments and its impact on the local fauna and
environment; (4) assessing the potential role of Turkey as a pathway for the
colonization of Africa by early Asian anthropoid primates and other mammals; and
(5) conducting macroevolutionary analyses of the mammalian fossil record to
investigate predictable links between the physical environment and patterns of
faunal dispersal and faunal turnover.