* 1543258
* Quality Understanding and Engagement for Students and Teachers on Computational Thinking (QUEST CT)
* EDU,DRL
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2020
* Youwen Ouyang, California State University San Marcos Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Arlene de Strulle
* 12/31/2020
* USD 1,249,249.00

The project "Quality Understanding and Engagement for Students and Teachers on
Computational Thinking" (QUEST CT) was submitted to is STEM+C (STEM + Computing
Partnerships) which is a program that challenges STEM educators to approach
education with a new lens - integrating Computational Thinking as part of
traditional STEM disciplinary learning. The significance of the QUEST CT project
is that it will (1) develop a model for teacher professional development to
support integration of Computational Thinking into STEM classroom activities,
and (2) broaden the participation of students from traditionally
underrepresented groups in STEM and computing through the combination of formal
and informal learning experiences. The project will directly impact more than
1000 students as 18 project teachers implement Computational Thinking-integrated
science lessons into classroom activities over two years. The Computational
Thinking lessons developed and field tested by teachers will contribute to the
need for exemplary resources that effectively integrate Computational Thinking
concepts into existing STEM classroom content and will be available to all
educators. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of QUEST CT are: to increase teacher
knowledge and ability to integrate Computational Thinking as defined by ISTE
(International Society for Technology in Education) and CSTA (Computer Science
Teachers Association) into fifth and sixth grade science lessons and activities;
and to increase student STEM interest and understanding of Computational
Thinking concepts in the context of learning science. With support from various
school districts, the project will engage 18 fifth and sixth grade teachers in
professional development including a summer academy, coached lesson development,
and professional learning communities. Each year, more than 500 students from
three school districts that reflect varying levels of diversity will be involved
in the project through formal classroom activities and informal events such as
summer camp, after school clubs and family nights. Ongoing mentoring and support
from the project leadership will allow close monitoring of project progress.
Graduate and undergraduate computer science students will provide technical
support for teachers as they implement Computational Thinking learning
experiences. The project uses a combination of two educational research
approaches: exploratory research and design and development research. The
fundamental education problem addressed is to design and implement an
intervention that replaces the disjointed efforts to integrate Computational
Thinking into STEM within K-12.