* 1543078
* PFI:AIR - TT:  A Novel Concept for Variable Delivery Flow Units for Fluid Power Applications
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2015,07/31/2017
* Andrea Vacca, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 07/31/2017
* USD 203,072.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on translating a new design
that transforms a standard, fixed displacement external spur gear machine (EGM),
used in hydraulic motors and pumps, into a variable delivery flow machine that
reduces energy demand and fuel consumption. This Variable Delivery - External
Gear Machine (VD-EGM) technology offers energy-efficient, reliable and low-cost
pumps and motors in engineering applications such as high pressure fluid power
circuits (used in construction, agriculture, transportation, aerospace,
manufacturing and entrainment) and low pressure fluid systems (fuel injection,
washing systems, food and pharmaceutical industry). The VD-EGM concept preserves
all typical advantages of EGMs, such as low cost, compactness, high efficiency,
tolerance to both contaminants and cavitation, reliability; and it also permits
application in efficient "flow on demand" systems layout configurations, for
which traditional EGMs are not suitable. This will enable: 1) the use of more
energy efficient system layouts in current applications of EGMs; 2) the use of
EGMs in place of more expensive designs of variable displacement machines (such
as axial piston pumps and vane pumps). As a consequence, the VD-EGM has the
potential to impact almost all fluid power machines, which currently handle
about 3% of the total national energy consumption, offering significant fuel
consumption reduction (up to 40%) without significant cost increase.
Similarities in the design and appearance of the VD-EGM with respect to standard
EGMs will allow for an easy acceptance of the novel concept into the fluid power
market.

This project will result in two functional prototypes (P1, P2): P1 will be a
hydraulically operated VD-EGM suitable for power transmission systems involving
high operating pressures (up to 250 bar), while P2 will be an electronically
operated VD-EGM suitable for low pressure applications (up to 30 bar). To
promote commercialization, the project will build a technology demonstrator, a
hydraulic fan drive system, based on prototype P1.

The intellectual merit of this research is the novel principle for obtaining
variable timing in EGMs, which uses asymmetric gear profile. This principle
introduces an actuation system to modify the fluid dynamic features of the
meshing process in such a way that a variable flow is delivered by the EGM.
Although suitable to vary the displacement up to a certain range, this principle
is applicable for both high- and low-pressure systems and enables high bandwidth
associated with flow regulation. The research approach is based on a multi-
objective numerical optimization procedure based on a detailed tribological
model for EGM that has been created to assist the VD-EGM design. This procedure
will advance knowledge not only about variable timing applications of EGMs, but
also about the multiple physical characteristics of the meshing process and the
displacing action of EGMs.

Personnel involved in this project include, the project PI, two graduate level
students and two undergraduate students which will receive innovation and
technology translation experiences by overcoming the challenges related to the
design of the actuation systems of prototypes P1 and P2 of the VD-EGM. The
students will also work with a business entity (Purdue Office of Technology and
Commercialization) through the project co-PI, and receive feedback from a gear
pump manufacturers that will be instrumental for product commercialization.