* 1543166
* UNOLS: Management of Marine Technical Support
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2016,02/28/2023
* Anthony Knap, Texas A&M University
* Cooperative Agreement
* James Holik
* 02/28/2023
* USD 4,975,242.00

NSF Solicitation 15-525 requested proposals from institutions for the Management
of the UNOLS Technician Pool. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Technical Services
Program in Ocean Sciences (OCE) at NSF provides funding for support activities
both at sea and shore-side for a variety of oceanographic research projects.
This support is generally provided by the staff of full time technicians at the
operating institutions in the Academic Fleet. During periods when the support
demands are greater than the available personnel, the institution hires or
borrows (from another operating institution) additional technicians on an ad hoc
basis. Conversely, when an institution has a weak schedule, the size of the
technical support staff does not adjust and technicians may be underutilized.
The NSF, in conjunction with the Technical Support Manager at the UNOLS office,
has instituted a process whereby the exchange of full-time technicians between
Ship Operating Institutions can occur without the burden of sending invoices and
payment between institutions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The next step in this
process is the establishment of a fleet-wide Technician Pool where a portion of
the sea-going workforce is comprised of non-institution-specific, contract
personnel that are utilized as needed. The goals of the Tech Pool are two-
fold:&lt;br/&gt;? To provide the Technical Support Managers in the fleet more
flexibility in achieving the optimal staffing levels, both ashore and at
sea.&lt;br/&gt;? To more efficiently manage the personnel resources in the fleet
in the face of level or shrinking budgets.&lt;br/&gt;NSF is aware that many
institutions have HR policies that make it difficult to hire temporary/part time
employees. The hiring of non-full-time, contract technicians through a single
UNOLS institution would address this issue and provide a resource for operators
in the fleet. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A 4-member panel convened on July 30, 2015
to discuss 4 proposals submitted to the Oceanographic Technical Services Program
in response to Solicitation NSF 15-525. The solicitation involved the management
of the UNOLS Marine Technician Pool.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Program recommends
that the award for the hosting of the UNOLS Technician Pool be given to Texas
A&amp;M University. The award should be a five-year cooperative agreement. The
initial budget, as well as the out year budgets, will be negotiated at a later
time when a better idea of the ship schedules are
known.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The following proposals will therefore be
declined:&lt;br/&gt;1543749 University of Miami&lt;br/&gt;1543442 Scripps
Institution of Oceanography&lt;br/&gt;1542791 University of
Washington.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1543166 Texas A&amp;M University will be
recommended.