* 1543656
* CPS: TTP Option: Synergy: Collaborative Research: The Science of Activity-Predictive Cyber-Physical Systems (APCPS)
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2020
* Diane Cook, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 09/30/2020
* USD 1,100,000.00

This project aims to design algorithmic techniques to perform activity
discovery, recognition, and prediction from sensor data. These techniques will
form the foundation for the science of Activity- Prediction Cyber-Physical
Systems, including potential improvement in the responsiveness and adaptiveness
of the systems. The outcome of this work is also anticipated to have important
implications in the specific application areas of health care and
sustainability, two priority areas of societal importance. The first application
will allow for health interventions to be provided that adapt to an individual's
daily routine and operate in that person's everyday environment. The second
application will offer concrete tools for building automation that improve
sustainability without disrupting an individual's current or upcoming
activities. The project investigators will leverage existing training programs
to involve students from underrepresented groups in this research. Bi-annual
tours and a museum exhibit will reach K-12 teachers, students and visitors, and
ongoing commercialization efforts will ensure that the designed technologies are
made available for the public to use.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Deploying activity-
predictive cyber-physical systems "in the wild" requires a number of robust
computational components for activity learning, knowledge transfer, and human-
in- the-loop computing that are introduced as part of this project. These
components then create cyber physical systems that funnel information from a
sensed environment (the physical setting as well as humans in the environment),
to activity models in the cloud, to mobile device interfaces, to the smart grid,
and then back to the environment. The proposed research centers on defining the
science of activity-predictive cyber-physical systems, organized around the
following thrusts: (1) the design of scalable and generalizable algorithms for
activity discovery, recognition, and prediction; (2) the design of transfer
learning methods to increase the the ability to generalize activity-predictive
cyber-physical systems; (3) the design of human-in-the-loop computing methods to
increase the sensitivity of activity-predictive cyber-physical systems; (4) the
introduction of evaluation metrics for activity-predictive cyber-physical
systems; and (5) transition of activity-predictive cyber-physical systems to
practical applications including health monitoring/intervention and
smart/sustainable cities.