* 1543347
* Collaborative Research: Subglacial Antarctic Lakes Scientific Access (SALSA): Integrated Study of Carbon Cycling in Hydrologically-active Subglacial Environments
* GEO,OPP
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2021
* Brad Rosenheim, University of South Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Cutler
* 08/31/2021
* USD 382,940.00

The Antarctic subglacial environment remains one of the least explored regions
on Earth. This project will examine the physical and biological characteristics
of Subglacial Lake Mercer, a lake that lies 1200m beneath the West Antarctic Ice
Sheet. This study will address key questions relating to the stability of the
ice sheet, the subglacial hydrological system, and the deep-cold subglacial
biosphere. The education and outreach component aims to widely disseminate
results to the scientific community and to the general public through short
films, a blog, and a website.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Subglacial Lake Mercer is one
of the larger hydrologically active lakes in the southern basin of the Whillans
Ice Plain, West Antarctica. It receives about 25 percent of its water from East
Antarctica with the remainder originating from West Antarctica, is influenced by
drain/fill cycles in a lake immediately upstream (Subglacial Lake Conway), and
lies about 100 km upstream of the present grounding line of the Ross Ice Shelf.
This site will yield information on the history of the Whillans and Mercer Ice
Streams, and on grounding line migration. The integrated study will include
direct sampling of basal ice, water, and sediment from the lake in concert with
surface geophysical surveys over a three-year period to define the hydrological
connectivity among lakes on the Whillans Ice Plain and their flow paths to the
sea. The geophysical surveys will furnish information on subglacial hydrology,
aid the site selection for hot-water drilling, and provide spatial context for
interpreting findings. The hot-water-drilled boreholes will be used to collect
basal ice samples, provide access for direct measurement of subglacial physical,
chemical, and biological conditions in the water column and sediments, and to
explore the subglacial water cavities using a remotely operated vehicle equipped
with sensors, cameras, and sampling equipment. Data collected from this study
will address the overarching hypothesis "Contemporary biodiversity and carbon
cycling in hydrologically-active subglacial environments associated with the
Mercer and Whillans ice streams are regulated by the mineralization and cycling
of relict marine organic matter and through interactions among ice, rock, water,
and sediments". The project will be undertaken by a collaborative team of
scientists, with expertise in microbiology, biogeochemistry, hydrology,
geophysics, glaciology, marine geology, paleoceanography, and science
communication.