* 1543014
* CS10K: Leveraging the National UTeach Network to Strengthen and Expand Computer Science Principles Education
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2019
* Calvin Lin, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Allyson Kennedy
* 09/30/2019
* USD 2,579,724.00

The University of Texas at Austin (UT Austin) proposes a project to strengthen
and expand access to computer science (CS) education in U.S. high schools. The
project will leverage the Thriving in Our Digital World curriculum, the
successful UTeach model for STEM teacher preparation, the unique expertise of
the UTeach Institute (the organization charged with ensuring the fidelity of
national UTeach implementation and the expansion and the sustainability of
related STEM education innovations), and a national network, facilitated by the
UTeach Institute, of 44 UTeach partner programs at universities across 21 states
and the District of Columbia. The project will develop and scale professional
development (PD) that prepares teachers for the new APÂ® CS Principles course as
it becomes officially available in the fall of 2016. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project has four major goals: (1) to develop and integrate CS content and
activities into the national UTeach curriculum for pre-service STEM teachers;
(2) to facilitate a collaborative dialogue to support the development and
strengthening of pathways for CS teacher licensure and secondary instruction in
the 21 states and District of Columbia that partner with the UTeach Institute;
(3) to develop and pilot in-person and online PD programs to scale high quality
training to a diverse corps of teachers preparing to offer the Thriving in Our
Digital World curriculum based on the AP CS Principles framework; and (4) to
recruit and support 300 teachers. The three-year phased project timeline aligns
with the rollout of the new AP CS Principles exam, and it will prepare roughly
6,000 students in Grades 10 through 12 to take the exam. In addition, by
leveraging the expertise of the UTeach Institute to scale and sustain STEM
teacher preparation and PD initiatives, all project components will be fully
institutionalized and sustained through a fee structure by the end of the grant
period.