* 1543226
* PFI-AIR-TT:  Wearable sleepwear for quantitative prognostication and noninvasive therapy of obstructive sleep apnea
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2015,02/28/2019
* Satish Bukkapatnam, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 02/28/2019
* USD 256,331.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on translating an advanced
prediction and prognostics approach to fill the need for affordable and
effective at-home solutions to treat sleep disorders. Sleep disorders such as
obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) are prevalent in an estimated 6.6% of the national
population. The market for sleep treatment is noted to exceed $23 billion per
year, and is set to grow at over 15% annually. However the current treatment
procedures suffer from severe drawbacks and are highly criticized in consumer
forums. Recent advancements in sensors and wireless communication offer an
unprecedented opportunity for cost-effective home care options to treat sleep
apnea. This project will result in a prototype of SleepEaze technology that
captures this opportunity. This technology is based on using a wireless
biometric sleepwear to monitor the apnea patient's biorhythms during sleep, and
it employs a patent-pending algorithm to predict apnea events several minutes
ahead of their onset. Then the muscles responsible for the obstruction can be
stimulated when the event is predicted to be imminent ("nip in the bud"),
allowing the patient a more restful sleep. The use of the innovative prediction
algorithm as well as low power electronic elements offer a breakthrough in the
noninvasive stimulations that can lead to a new class of affordable wearable
devices for sleep apnea treatment with high commercialization
potential.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project plans to pursue three major
objectives: (a) Technology Improvement, which includes: the refinement of the
wearable sensor layout to enhance comfort, tuning of parameters of the
prediction model based on nonparametric Dirichlet Process Mixture of Gaussian
Process representations to reduce computational overhead associated with multi-
step look ahead procedures, and optimization of the stimulation modality,
location, and time-frequency stimulation profiles using a novel low power
electronics to effectively avert sleep apnea events; (b) Extended testing using
an early prototype, extending an ongoing human subject study to benchmark signal
quality, prediction and stimulation performance, and sleep quality improvement
from the technology in preparation for approvals (510K) from the federal
regulatory agencies; and (c) Prototyping of a updated wearable multi-sensor unit
for real-time treatment of sleep apnea episodes, as well as its testing and
benchmarking. If successful, the proposed project will result in a functional,
refined prototype of the SleepEaze device (hardware and associated software
interface) that offers a radically new approach for OSA treatment. In addition,
personnel involved in this project, including a post-doctoral associate and two
graduate students, will receive entrepreneurship experiences offered through
Texas A&amp;M University and the NSF Southwest I-Corps node.