* 1543690
* VOSS: Teams Emerging from the Crowd: Virtual Team Structure as a Predictor of Idea Goodness in Online Innovation Communities
* CSE,OAC
* 07/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Paul Leonardi, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Rajiv Ramnath
* 08/31/2017
* USD 202,387.00

Innovation is a core driver of the U.S. economy. Organizations are constantly
seeking to be more innovative with fewer resources. Advanced information and
communication technologies that allow organizations to extract good ideas for
products, services, and policies from the diverse suggestions of user
communities represent one way to increase innovation without a concomitant
increase in resource expenditures. But the outsourcing of idea generation to
non-specialists increases the variance in the quality and applicability of the
ideas that are generated and, concordantly, strains an organization's ability to
give equal attention to all suggestions. The goal of this study is to explore
how organizations might more effectively harness "the power of the crowd" to
find and recognize the most promising ideas within a sea of contributions.

Recently, a good deal of research into team design has shown that the structural
composition of a team can explain variations in the team's ability to generate
good ideas. Conceptualizing a collective of crowd-soucing voters as an "emergent
virtual team" allows us to explore a number of hypotheses about when the ideas
that are voted to be "good" by emergent virtual teams with particular structures
will, in fact, be the ideas upon which an organization should spend its limited
resources of attention. In this two-year project, we collect and analyze ideas
submitted and voted on by users in three community-based innovation forums,
develop an algorithm for efficiently and effectively filtering good ideas from
bad, and test the predictive power of the algorithm on other community-based
innovation forums.