* 1543950
* Acquisition of a Nikon LV100 Polarizing Microscope for Research and Student Training
* GEO,EAR
* 01/15/2016,12/31/2016
* Michael Petronis, New Mexico Highlands University
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 12/31/2016
* USD 43,642.00

This grant supports the acquisition of a research-grade petrographic microscope
(Nikon LV100) with an automatic point counter stepping stage and PETROG software
to enable examination of thin sections. The requested microscope will support
teaching in structural geology, sedimentology, and mineralogy courses by
allowing photographic documentation and storage of thin section and grain
separate images. This microscope will also support existing paleomagnetic,
mineralogy, petrology, and tectonic research at New Mexico Highland University.

The ability to examine thin sections with transmitted and reflected light is
fundamental in rock and mineral characterizations. The microscopic images and
the textural analyses obtained can provide important information to aid the
determination of formation history, which is crucial in the study of structural
geology, volcanology, and paleomagnetic research. The microscope will be open to
regional, national and international collaborators. This equipment will
facilitate the training of a diverse undergraduate and M.S. student body at this
Hispanic Serving Institution as well as at surrounding institutions. This
support is congruent with NSF?s mission of promoting the progress of science and
will advance the national prosperity and welfare especially through the training
of the next generations of scientists.