* 1543698
* III: Workshop: Broadening Collaboration and Mobilizing Resources in the Biodiversity and Ecosystem Informatics Communities
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2015,02/28/2017
* Gerald Guala, NatureServe
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 02/28/2017
* USD 98,415.00

In July 2011, the President's Council of Advisors on Science and Technology
(PCAST) issued an influential report on sustaining environmental capital (PCAST
2011) recommending a series of actions, including the development of an
Ecoinformatics-based Open Resources and Machine Accessibility (EcoINFORMA)
initiative. The Federal response has been to design and implement the first
phase of a major effort to mobilize and integrate Federal data (see:
ecosystems.data.gov). Currently released products include a universal geospatial
viewer and an integrated metadata resource, as well as three thematic hubs.
These are Biodiversity Information Serving Our Nation (bison.usgs.ornl.gov) for
biodiversity, EnviroAtlas (enviroatlas.epa.gov) for ecosystem services, and the
Multi-resolution Land Characteristics Consortium (www.mrlc.gov) for landcover
dynamics. In their report, the PCAST stated: "EcoINFORMA should interact with
international biodiversity and ecosystem information systems in the development
of globally accepted biodiversity and ecosystem information standards, and
should seek out and encourage partnerships with the private and academic sectors
to develop innovative tools for data integration, analysis, visualization, and
decision-making." Recent mobilization of very large data sets in the Federal
system as a part of EcoINFORMA has produced unprecedented opportunities for
academic and commercial innovation, and the time is ripe for members of the
Federal, academic, and commercial sectors to come together and examine the
possibilities. A workshop and follow-up activities to bring together Federal
environmental data providers and consumers with non-Federal environmental data
providers and consumers to foster synergistic projects aimed at sustaining the
country?s environmental capital and advancing science as a whole will take place
in Washington, DC, in September 2015. The team will convene a broad
representation of federal and nonfederal members of the biodiversity informatics
and ecoinformatics communities, including academics and NGOs from a diverse
group of organizations. The workshop will lead to much broader understanding and
utilization of the existing EcoInforma hubs, as well as important feedback to
the curators of those hubs about user community needs and interests.