* 1543552
* Collaborative Research: Logistically Light Instrument Deployment for Estimation of Antarctic Basal Temperatures and Geothermal Heat Fluxes
* GEO,OPP
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2017
* John Selker, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Michael E. Jackson
* 05/31/2017
* USD 9,999.00

Title: Logistically Light Instrument Deployment for Estimation of Antarctic
Basal Temperatures and Geothermal Heat Fluxes&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical
Description: New observations of Antarctic ice sheet variables are essential for
drill-site selection for climate records, for understanding how ice dynamics
affect sea level, and for investigating the geologic history of the continent.
Temperature depth-profiles are of particular current interest for estimating
basal temperature and geothermal heat flux in Antarctica. Antarctic geothermal
heat flux is presently poorly known except at recent drilling sites, and is the
largest unknown in determining basal conditions. However, current logistical
costs greatly limit drilling to acquire temperature profiles. Our long-term goal
is the development, testing and commissioning of a new means of acquiring
englacial temperature profiles at much lower costs than existing methods. To
that end, we will undertake laboratory experiments and numerical modeling to
develop to a new way to use ice melt probes, rather than traditional drilling,
to deploy temperature measurement equipment to depths of a kilometer and
greater. To use melt probes for this purpose, we must keep the melted ice above
such probes from freezing completely, so that cable can be fed continually down
to the probe as it descends. This development will also open the way toward
recovering melt probes, so as to prevent environmental impacts and expense of
equipment left in the field. Our initial experiments and modeling will test the
validity of our approach and make it ready for further testing in the
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: We will undertake laboratory
and modeling work (1) to reduce the technical risk in our approach to melt-probe
deployment of Raman Distributed Temperature Sensing (DTS) cables; and (2) to
begin development of a recoverable ice melt probe. Specifically, we will use
numerical modeling of the Stefan problem with cylindrical symmetry to guide
detailed designs for cable-heating and anti-freeze injection, and will test and
revise candidate designs by means of laboratory testing. We will test the long-
term stability of ethanol-filled melt holes, to gauge their suitability for
recoverable melt probe systems for temperature measurement (where months-long
thermal equilibration after installation will be required). We will gain
experience with Raman DTS methods by employing DTS to measure critical
temperature data in our laboratory experiments, both within the melt hole and in
adjacent ice. To address recoverability, we will design and test a new melt head
for the upper end of our ice melt probe, and demonstrate upward travel through a
partially refrozen melt hole. Finally, we will publish both modeling and
experimental results in peer-reviewed publications, and will present the project
to a broad public audience in a special event at a Seattle museum of science and
technology. The result of this work will be demonstrated technical readiness for
testing in a subsequent project at larger ice-drilling test facilities at the
earliest opportunity (prospectively, at the University of Wisconsin, following
soon after completion of this project) and, following that, in the field.