* 1543872
* EAGER: Cybermanufacturing: Design of an Agile and Smart Manufacturing Exchange: Enabling Small Businesses through Standardized Protocols and Distributed Optimization
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Krishnendu Chakrabarty, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/2018
* USD 300,000.00

This EArly-concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) award supports
fundamental research on the design of an agile manufacturing exchange system
(MES) in which suppliers of raw materials, assemblers, transportation companies,
etc., will participate through standardized protocols to fulfill complex
manufacturing orders. This design will provide the foundation for a smart
software mediation layer (i.e., a "broker") that will enable a MES to be self-
learning and adaptive to dynamic/diverse service requests and resource
availability, as well as support a large network of service providers and users
within a complex information ecosystem. The economic competitiveness of the U.S.
dependss on new and innovative methods for intelligent mass customization
systems for the manufacturing sector, which will enable the processing of small-
sized and diverse orders that demand almost instant fulfillment. The MES will
enable this transformation by supporting on-demand integration of resources,
graceful recovery from failures, and dynamic adaptation without any disruption
in operations. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;In order to meet these goals, research
will be focused on adaptation to emerging system behaviors by dynamically
evolving optimization strategies in real-time. Users and providers will be
connected in a dynamic manufacturing network that will accommodate multiple
product flows, uncertainty in links between providers and themselves, and fault
tolerance to provide service despite failed network components. This level of
adaptation, seamless efficiency, and uninterrupted service will constitute a
significant step forward towards a smart MES. The research goals will be
accomplished through the design of a distributed real-time optimization and
knowledge discovery framework that will address workflow optimization, resource
allocation, and data-driven performance prediction in a dynamic manufacturing
network of users, brokers, and providers. The specific research tasks include
online admission control policies, dynamic production planning, analysis and
prediction of service-level performance for forecasting, distributed methods for
dynamic resource allocation under uncertainty, and visual analytics techniques
to support human decision makers and situational awareness.