* 1543539
* RUI: Growing Up on Ice: Physiological Adaptations and Developmental Plasticity in Weddell Seal Pups Across Two Extreme Physical Environments
* GEO,OPP
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2024
* Linnea Pearson, California Polytechnic State University Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Rebecca Gast
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,183,160.00

The transition of young from parental care to independence is a critical stage
in the life of many animals. Surviving this stage can be especially challenging
for polar mammals where the extreme cold requires extra energy to keep warm,
rather than using the majority of energy for growth, development and physical
activities. Young Weddell seals (Leptonychotes weddellii) have only weeks to
develop the capabilities to survive both on top of the sea ice and within the
-1.9°C seawater where they can forage for food. The project seeks to better
understand how Weddell seal pups rapidly develop (within weeks) the capacity to
transition between these two extreme environments (that differ greatly in their
abilities to conduct heat) and how they budget their energy during the
transition. Though the biology and physiology of adult Weddell seals is well
studied, the energetic and physiological strategies of pups during development
is still unclear. Understanding factors that may affect survival at critical
life history events is essential for better understanding factors that might
affect marine mammal populations. Weddell seals are the southernmost breeding
mammal and are easily recognizable as quintessential Antarctic seals.
Determining potential vulnerabilities at critical life stages to change in the
Antarctic environment will facilitate the researchers' ability to not only gain
public interest but also communicate how research is revealing ways in which
changes are occurring at the poles and how these changes may affect polar
ecosystems. By collaborating with the Marine Mammal Center, the project will
directly reach the public, through curricular educational materials and public
outreach that will impact over 100,000 visitors
annually.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To elucidate the physiological strategies that
facilitate the survival of Weddell seal pups from birth to independence, the
proposed study examines the development of their thermoregulation and diving
capability. To achieve this, the project will determine the mechanisms that
Weddell seal pups use to maintain a stable, warm body temperature in air and in
water and then examine the development of diving capability as the animals
prepare for independent foraging. The researchers will take a fully integrative
approach- making assessments from proteins to tissues to the whole-animal level-
when investigating both these objectives. To assess the development of
thermoregulatory capability, researchers will quantify body insulation, resting
metabolic rates in air and in water, muscle thermogenesis (shivering), and body
surface temperatures in the field. The project will also assess the development
of dive capability by quantifying oxygen storage capacities and measuring early
dive behavior. To identify possible cellular mechanisms for how Weddell seals
navigate this trade-off during development, the program will quantify several
key developmental regulators of increased hypoxic capacity (HIF, VEGF and EPO)
using qPCR, as well as follow the proteomic changes of adipose and muscle
tissue, which will include abundance changes of metabolic, antioxidant,
cytoskeletal, and Ca2+-regulating proteins. The study of the physiological
development leading up to the transition to independence in pinnipeds will help
researchers better predict the effects of climate change on the distribution and
abundance of this species and how this will affect other trophic levels.
Environmental changes that alter habitat suitability have been shown to decrease
population health, specifically because of declines in juvenile survival.