* 1543967
* BREAD ABRDC: Development of Genomic Resources in Water Yam (Dioscorea alata L.) for Accelerated Breeding and Improvement
* BIO,IOS
* 05/15/2016,04/30/2022
* Daniel Rokhsar, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 04/30/2022
* USD 1,458,577.00

Yams (genus Dioscorea) are an important source of food and income for millions
of smallholder farmers in the tropical and sub-tropical regions of Africa, Asia,
the Pacific, and Latin America. Rich in carbohydrates, and containing protein
and vitamin C, the year-round availability of yams makes them preferable to
seasonal crops. The importance of yams in West Africa is exemplified by their
vital role in traditional culture, rituals and religion; yam production is
declining, however, due to threats from pests and diseases. Thus, in the context
of surging global population growth, improved yam breeding techniques are
urgently needed. Water yam, also called greater yam (Dioscorea alata) is the
most widely distributed cultivated yam species in the world, and its advantages
include high nutritional content, long storability of tubers, and ability to
yield in poor quality soil. This project will leverage cutting-edge DNA
sequencing and computational analysis to provide a high quality water yam genome
assembly and genetic map to the yam community, which will allow breeders to use
modern genetic methods to breed the crop more efficiently. The project will also
characterize the natural genetic variability present in global collections,
yielding insight into how they may be used to improve the crop, and contributing
to an understanding of the relationship between water yam DNA sequence and
traits important to smallholder farmers. Bringing water yam into the modern
genomics era will facilitate the accelerated release of improved varieties to
the farmers that need them.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The water yam Dioscorea alata
is superior to most cultivated yam species due to its potential to yield under
low to average soil fertility, ease of propagation, early vigor for weed
suppression, and low post-harvest losses. Threats, however, include anthracnose
disease, which can cause losses of up to 90% of production, and breeding for
desired traits in water yam is arduous due to its autopolyploid and heterozygous
nature, long growth cycle, and erratic flowering. This project will accelerate
the improvement of water yam by (1) constructing a high quality chromosome-scale
genome assembly for D. alata, interpreted through annotation and comparative
analysis, (2) producing a framework genetic map for D. alata via analysis of
mapcrosses segregating for traits important for farmers, and (3) characterizing
the global collection of D. alata cultivars. Advanced technologies such as
PacBio de novo sequencing, whole-genome resequencing, genotyping-by-sequencing,
flow cytometry for ploidy analysis, and publicly available and custom
bioinformatics tools, will be leveraged. The chromosome-scale genome assembly
and genetic map will lay the groundwork for more efficient breeding approaches
such as genomic selection in water yam. Quantitative trait locus analysis of
mapping populations segregating for anthracnose resistance and tuber quality is
expected to yield specific sequence variants linked to, and thus mechanistic
insight into, those traits. Study of water yam diversity across global
collections will elucidate its breeding history, reveal bottlenecks, and suggest
strategies for broadening the gene pool. All sequencing resources will be
publicly available through the NCBI and the phytozome plant genomics resource.