* 1543268
* Reducing Uncertainty Surrounding Climate Change Using Emergent Constraints
* GEO,AGS
* 03/01/2016,02/28/2022
* Xin Qu, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 02/28/2022
* USD 999,473.00

Global climate models (GCMs) are powerful tools for understanding how the
climate responds to forcing from greenhouse gas increases and other forcing
agents, and they are widely used to provide guidance to policy makers and
stakeholders concerned about future climate change. These models capture the
basic physics of climate change, but their utility is limited by uncertainties
in the representation of important feedback effects. For example in the snow
albedo feedback (SAF) warmer conditions lead to reductions in snow cover,
replacing a highly reflective snow surface with darker underlying ground cover
which absorbs more sunlight, thereby enhancing the initial warming (the opposite
holds in a cooling climate). In this project the PIs seek to improve the
representation of feedbacks in GCMs by relating observations of present-day
climate to simulations of climate change. To do this the PIs use the method of
"emergent constraints", which in this context refers to relationships between
present-day and future climate change simulations which are robust across an
ensemble of GCMs. Previous work by the PIs has shown that the strength of the
SAF calculated from future climate simulations is strongly correlated with the
SAF derived from the seasonal cycle in present-day simulations from the same
models. The SAF derived from the present-day seasonal cycle can be compared with
real-world observations, thus providing a means to use available observations to
determine which GCMs are most likely to correctly represent the SAF contribution
to climate change. The constraint is emergent in the sense that it emerges from
a physically motivated examination of the robust collective behavior of an
ensemble of GCMs, rather than from a first-principles
derivation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs' previous work (see AGS-0135136)
established the usefulness of emergent constraints as a way to validate feedback
strength in climate change simulations, and the present work seeks to go beyond
validation and use such constraints as a means to improve the representation of
feedbacks in models. Model development is a more challenging application of
emergent constraints than model validation, as the constraints must be
specifically related to particular physical parameterizations in the model. In
particular, the PIs seek to identify aspects of the land surface component model
of the GCM which are key determinants of SAF strength, and determine how they
can be adjusted to reduce biases in SAF strength. Possible candidates include
the apportionment of snow between the ground and the vegetation canopy. The
scope of the work may be expanded to consider the sea ice albedo feedback, which
operates similarly to SAF as described above and includes a role for snow on sea
ice in determining feedback strength.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Further research will
consider emergent constraints that determine the extent to which the global
hydrological cycle responds to global warming induced by greenhouse gas
increases. The global hydrological cycle is expected to accelerate in a warming
climate, with increases in global evaporation and precipitation at a rate of a
few percent per degree of warming. The reasons for expecting acceleration are
well understood, but there is considerable uncertainty in the magnitude of the
acceleration, as represented by the large model-to-model spread in climate
change simulations. Work here attempts to derive emergent constraints for the
hydrological cycle by examining the changes in the atmospheric energy budget
that accompany changes in precipitation and evaporation. The emergent
constraints connect precipitation-related changes in atmospheric energy budgets
from climate change simulations to aspects of atmospheric energetics in present-
day simulations, which can then be compared to satellite-based observations.
Preliminary work shows, for example, that the clear sky shortwave absorption in
climate change simulations is highly correlated with the sensitivity of clear
sky shortwave absorption to total precipitable water (TPW) in control
simulations. This constraint is of interest because sensitivity to TPW can be
constrained by satellite observations, and it is also closely related to the
parameterization of shortwave radiative transfer in
GCMs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The reduction of uncertainty in model projections of
future climate change is of societal as well as scientific interest, as
reductions in uncertainty would increase the value of climate change projections
used by stakeholders and policy makers confronting the possible impacts of
climate change. The PIs will work directly with modeling centers in their model
development work, convening special sessions at annual scientific meetings in
which results of the project will be shared and key members of the modeling
community will offer guidance. Results of these sessions will be synthesized in
research publications, in an effort to catalyze a broad effort to improve model
parameterizations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition, an outreach activity is
planned to explain climate models and their uncertainties to the general public.
Despite the clear need for accurate, up-to-date, and easily comprehensible
information about GCMs, their sources of uncertainty, and the work being done to
improve them, such information is not easily available at present. To address
this need the project will develop and maintain a website to serve as an
educational resource on climate modeling. The website will contain a GCM primer,
discussion of sources of uncertainty, and an assessment of the strengths and
limitations of GCMs. Further outreach will be conducted through public lectures
and demonstrations held at the Discovery Cube, a local science museum. This
outreach will include the development of videos to be presented on a Science on
a Sphere (SoS) display, and these will be available for use on other SoS
displays worldwide. Finally, the project provides for the education and training
of a graduate student, thereby developing the future workforce in this
scientific area.