* 1543446
* Lower Thermospheric Science using New Meteor Radars at McMurdo and WAIS Divide
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2023
* Jeffrey Forbes, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Vladimir Papitashvili
* 08/31/2023
* USD 1,012,212.00

The Arctic and Antarctic are unique for the upper atmospheric research as these
polar regions affect significantly the dynamics of planetary atmospheric
circulations. Like the oceans, Earth's atmosphere experiences planet-wide
gravitational tides caused by the Moon. In addition to planetary atmospheric
waves of various scale caused by Earth's rotation, the largest amplitude of
upward-propagating, thermally forced atmospheric tides are generated by the
periodic heating of the atmosphere by the Sun ? the atmosphere is heated during
the day and not heated at night. All of these phenomena transport heat and
momentum from the lower atmosphere into the upper atmosphere. Understanding the
coupling of these waves between both the Northern and Southern hemispheres and
from the lower atmosphere to the ionosphere and upper atmosphere will lead to
the key processes responsible for transporting energy throughout the entire
atmosphere-ionosphere system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will let
scientists investigate the spatial-temporal structure and variability of the
Antarctic mesosphere and lower thermosphere circulation at high latitudes. For
this goal, a state-of-the-art meteor radar system will be installed at McMurdo
Station, which then will provide hourly mean velocities of the zonal and
meridional neutral winds between 80 and 100 km altitude operating continuously
24/7 through the year. Two existing models, the Modern Era Retrospective-
Analysis for Research and Applications (MERRA) and the Global-Scale Wave Model
(GSWM), will be employed to analyze radar observations in the global context.
The collected data will be published almost instantaneously at a project website
and provided to the NSF-supported CEDAR/Madrigal database and the Antarctic
Master Directory. The project supports and trains one graduate and one
undergraduate students; a young professional research assistant will also be
involved in this effort. To broaden participation of underrepresented groups,
students from the University of Colorado Summer Multicultural Access to Research
and Training program will be engaged to locate qualified students to participate
on this project.