* 1543717
* Emerging Areas in Polymer Science and Engineering: A Plenary Session at the 2015 American Institute of Chemical Engineers Annual Meeting
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2016
* Megan Robertson, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Freddy Khoury
* 07/31/2016
* USD 5,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL AND TECHNICAL ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Funds in the amount of
$5,000 are recommended in support of the travel of junior faculty and graduate
students participating in the plenary symposium on ?Emerging Areas in Polymer
Science and Engineering?, and the ?Excellence in Graduate Polymer Research?
session, to be held at the American Institute of Chemical Engineering (AIChE)
Annual meeting on Nov. 8-13, 2015 in Salt Lake City, UT. The planned ?Emerging
Areas in Polymer Science and Engineering? plenary symposium, is comprehensive in
scope aiming at the pulse of contemporary polymer science and
engineering/applications, to the benefit of the chemical engineering community.
The following topics will be emphasized in the planned plenary symposium:
Organic photovoltaics and other energy-relevant polymeric materials; New routes
for long-range ordering and alignment of block copolymers; Thermodynamics and
polymerization kinetics in nanoconfined polymer films; Bioinspired and
biocompatible polymers and surfaces; Bridging the gap between structure-property
relationships in polyolefins and their industrial applications. The graduate
student award symposium organized in conjunction with the plenary symposium will
showcase recent results of highly qualified graduate students which have been
nominated by their thesis advisors. Diversity among the chosen supported
participants of both sessions is an aim of the proposal.