* 1543987
* Support of US Graduate Student for 2015 Magnetism Summer. To Be Held in Minneapolis St. Paul Minnesota on June 14-19, 2015
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/15/2015,05/31/2016
* Bethanie Stadler, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 05/31/2016
* USD 12,480.00

This proposal is requesting travel funds and subsistence support for U.S.
graduate students to attend one-week 2015 Magnetism Summer School being held at
the University of Minnesota, Minneapolis/St Paul, Minnesota, from on June 14-19,
2015. Funds are requested to support for an additional 12 U.S. graduate students
to attend the Magnetism Summer School in addition to the 70 being supported by
the IEEE Magnetics Society. This outreach effort promotes education in the field
of magnetism and attracts more young scientists to choose a research career in
magnetism and related areas. The broader impact of the Summer School lies in the
education of young scientists and researchers in a fast-moving and economically
important field of magnetism. Participants will learn both fundamental as well
as advanced topics through lectures delivered by internationally-renowned
experts. In addition, there is a degree of cultural education, teaching young
scientists to interact with their colleagues from other countries. The students
will be co-housed with peers from different nationalities fostering interaction
and cultural exchange. The organizers of the Summer School particularly
encourage women and underrepresented minorities to participate. The program
committee also strives for diversity in the lecturers selected for the summer
school to provide role models for female and minority students. There are 28%
women attendees.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Summer School provides a forum for
exchange of information in the field of magnetics research. The one-week
Magnetism Summer School is designed for graduate students to both learn and
interact with each other and world-renown experts in the field. Lectures have
been carefully chosen to begin with fundamentals of magnetism and proceed into
more advanced topics throughout the week. In addition, lecturers are chosen from
around the world both from industry and academia. Each participating student is
required to present a poster about their current research. The students will
also have the opportunity to present their own work to each other and to experts
via two evening poster sessions. The students will spend significant time
interacting with researchers. A large team of poster judges have been assembled
to evaluate the quality of student research efforts. Finally, there will be
special evening sessions on Entrepreneurship and a Career Panel by the speakers.