* 1543582
* EAGER:  Magnetic Nanostructures with Perpendicular Anisotropy
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2016
* Kai Liu, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 08/31/2016
* USD 45,000.00

Non-Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A key attribute of a magnetic
material is the ability to retain its magnetic moment in certain directions, or
magnetic anisotropy. For example, an iron needle is usually magnetized along its
long axis and a thin iron foil would have its moments lying in the film plane.
Certain nanoscale magnets in thin film forms, however, prefer to orient their
moments perpendicular to the films - known as perpendicular magnetic anisotropy.
Such nanomagnets are technologically important, as they allow much more
efficient information storage at higher densities, analogous to the benefits of
building skyscrapers with small real-estate footprints. This project
investigates two types of such nanomaterials that have potentially
transformative technological impacts: 1. ordered alloys of iron/platinum-based
materials as storage media in next generation ultrahigh density magnetic
recording; 2. a novel type of nanomagnet arrays where the magnetic moments take
up a special arrangement known as the skyrmion state. The magnetic skyrmions
offer potentially new mechanisms for information storage that is not only
robust, but also highly energy efficient, expected to be at a tiny fraction of
the energy cost of current technologies. Students involved will receive exposure
to research experiences in university, national laboratory and user-facility,
and industrial research and development.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Alloys
of FePt-based materials in the ordered phase are promising media choices for the
emerging heat-assisted magnetic recording technology due to their high
anisotropy, large saturation magnetization, and moderate Curie temperature. This
project addresses critical challenges in the convenient realization of the high
anisotropy phase, and understanding and control over the switching field
distribution. Thin films of FePt-based alloys in the ordered phase are
investigated. Basic understanding and control of the magnetization reversal are
gained through magnetometry and first-order reversal curve studies at elevated
temperatures. The second research area focuses on magnetic skyrmions that
exhibit topologically protected quantum states and other unique topological
phenomena. Hybrid skyrmion lattices based on perpendicular anisotropy films are
synthesized and investigated to demonstrate the ground state at room
temperature. A set of magnetic field sequences is followed to establish the
skyrmion lattices, as well as vortex lattices and mixed lattices for comparison.
Magnetic imaging, polarized neutron reflectometry, magneto-transport studies,
and micromagnetic simulations are carried out to probe the skyrmions and their
responses to external stimuli. These artificial skyrmions are expected to be
stable over wide temperature and field ranges, thus offering an exciting
platform to explore the intriguing physics in such exotic spin textures.