* 1543957
* BREAD PHENO: High Throughput Phenotyping Early Stage Root Bulking in Cassava using Ground Penetrating Radar
* BIO,IOS
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2021
* Dirk Hays, Texas A&M AgriLife Research
* Continuing Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 05/31/2021
* USD 2,486,669.00

Cassava (Manihot esculenta) is a tropical root crop with exceptional drought
tolerance, making it a critical component of food security for 800 million
people in tropical regions of Africa, Latin America, and Asia. Despite its
importance, cassava's current 12 to 24 month crop cycle limits the economic
prosperity of smallholder farmers due to the length of time between harvest
cycles. Identifying new cassava varieties that bulk roots early in the crop
cycle is an essential solution to overcome this time constraint. Selection for
an early root bulking trait, however, is currently limited because it requires
destructive digging of roots, unmanageable breeding trial sizes, and large labor
costs. This project will improve trait selection by adapting a technology from
geophysics called ground-penetrating radar to produce three-dimensional
quantifiable images of cassava roots non-destructively. Using ground-penetrating
radar, early bulking root masses can be imaged underground. The goal is to
select for cassava varieties that increase cassava yields by 25 to 50% by
selecting early stage root bulking from existing high yielding genotypes. The
development of a commercial ground-penetrating radar instrument and associated
data processing software for selecting early stage root bulking in cassava will
provide cassava breeders throughout the world with the tools needed to develop
new higher yielding cultivars.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cassava is a tropical root
crop that is exceptionally adapted to drought tolerance but has a prolonged life
cycle of 12 to 24 months. This long duration limits harvest capabilities for
smallholder farmers in the developing world, thus reducing the benefits of the
crop as a component of global food security. Overcoming this limitation through
selection of new cassava cultivars that exhibit early stage root bulking (ESRB)
is an essential solution to ensure continued food security. This project will
adapt ground-penetrating radar (GPR) to non-destructively develop 3-dimensional
(3-D) quantifiable images of cassava roots. Current GPR instruments and
analytical software are designed for subsurface imaging but not necessarily
adapted for crop research. This project will use uncoupled GPR transmitters and
antenna and an in vitro cassava trough assay system to develop an accurate and
cost effective GPR instrument design for cassava breeding in terms of central
frequencies emitted and antenna geometries. Ancillary soil matrix data will be
combined to allow the development of broadband GPR filter processes of root
versus soil matrix specific frequencies, derive root allometries, and begin to
convert the individual data processing methods into a streamlined decision
support software for ESRB selection. In the long term, the aim is to increase
yield by 25 to 50% via GPR-based selection of ESRB from existing high yielding
genotypes. The project will ultimately develop an ideal GPR instrument and an
easy to use streamlined data processing and decision support software needed by
cassava breeders to develop higher yielding early bulking cassava cultivars.