* 1543654
* Collaborative Research: Diversification in the Deep-Sea and the Evolution of Fangs, Bioluminescence, Hermaphroditism, and Marine Habitat Transitions
* BIO,DEB
* 11/01/2014,09/30/2018
* Matthew Davis, St. Cloud State University
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 09/30/2018
* USD 306,542.00

All animals that have evolved in the deep sea are under similar selective
pressures as a result of the environment (e.g., little to no sunlight, high
atmospheric pressure). This extreme habitat has led to massive convergence in
animal morphology and behavior across deep-sea organisms, including
bioluminescence, enlarged fangs and gaping mouths. In this project, the
investigators will build phylogenies, model the evolution of deep-sea
adaptations and uncover the links between these adaptations and diversification
rates in three major clades of fishes. This study integrates phylogenetic
relationships based on genetic and morphological data, comparative morphology,
ecology, and evolutionary biology in an effort to broaden our understanding of
fishes that have evolved, thrived, and diversified in the deep sea.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will increase our understanding of a diverse
array of deep-sea evolutionary adaptations, including bioluminescent structures
that are used for predation, defense, species recognition, and sexual selection.
These novel morphologies and behaviors have never before been studied within the
context of a robust evolutionary framework based on molecular and morphological
data. The resulting hypotheses will include a temporal component based on the
fossil record that will allow us to explore, for the first time, whether these
specializations are having potential effects on speciation in the deep sea. This
project will support the training of postdoctoral, graduate, undergraduate, and
high school students in marine biology, systematics, and evolutionary biology at
the University of Kansas and American Museum of Natural History. Findings from
this work will continue to augment a new bioluminescence exhibit created and
curated by PI Sparks and co-PI Smith (Creatures of Light).