* 1543388
* Eddy/tidal Water Mass Transformation and Transport in the Weddell Sea
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Andrew Stewart, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Peter Milne
* 08/31/2020
* USD 428,209.00

The Weddell Sea supports a range of processes that are critical to the Antarctic
and global-scale ocean circulation and to climate. Warm Deep Water (WDW), found
offshore at mid-depth, makes incursions up onto the continental shelf that have
the potential to drive rapid retreat of the Filchner-Ronne ice shelf. A modified
form of WDW mixes with High Salinity Shelf Water produced in coastal polynyas,
and with Ice Shelf water produced by basal melting of marine-terminating
glaciers produces Antarctic Bottom Water (AABW). The net export of AABW
ventilates around 50% of the subsurface ocean, and globally stores around 30
times as much carbon as the atmosphere. Thus the significant observed warming
and freshening of AABW over the past few decades may indicate a rearrangement of
the Antarctic circulation, with implications for long-term changes in deep-ocean
oxygen concentration, atmospheric carbon dioxide concentration, and rises in sea
level that are yet to be quantified. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is using
high performance numerical simulation (high-res MIT Global Circulation Model) to
evaluate the relative roles of tides and eddies in the series of water mass
transformation that leads to ABW production. Turbulent features such as
mesoscale and sub-mesoscale features (sometimes called ?ocean weather?) are
small, making their spatial and temporal representation in models
computationally intensive. Key questions being asked are the role of mesoscale
eddies in transporting circumpolar Warm Deep Water up onto the continental
shelves where they give up their heat, and in export of AABW into the deep
central Weddell Gyre. Mesoscale, submesoscale and tidal eddies are known to be
critical to understanding AABW water mass transformation, and to the broader
Southern Ocean circulation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Changes or rearrangements in
Antarctic oceanic circulation features in turn may have implications for the
uptake of excess CO2 and heat into the oceans, stability of the Antarctic ice
shelves, and sea level-rise. The project will provide a post-doctoral research
position and help commence the career of an early career faculty member.
Regional model velocity and property fields will be made available to the wider
scientific community for the purpose of planning observational campaigns, and in
order to foster future collaborations to investigate biogeochemical tracer
transport and atmosphere-ocean exchange around the Antarctic continental margins