* 1543156
* Track 2 CS10K: Expanding Computer Science Curriculum, Diversity, and Teacher Preparedness in Montana High Schools
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2015,02/28/2017
* Lisa Blank, University of Montana
* Standard Grant
* Janice Cuny
* 02/28/2017
* USD 153,587.00

The University of Montana in Missoula, in partnership with Montana State
University in Bozeman, Montana Tech (MTech) in Butte, and the Salish Kootenai
Tribal College (SKC), will undertake a planning effort for a larger statewide
initiative to introduce CS high school courses that engage and retain a diverse
population of students, promote and advocate for these courses, and prepare high
school teachers to offer and sustain them. The expanded curriculum will include
material from the Joy and Beauty of Computing course recently created and
piloted by one of the collaborating institutions of this proposal (MSU), and the
new AP principles course currently being developed by NSF and the College Board.
Dual credit opportunities will be available for students. In addition, the
curriculum will be supported with activities proven to improve diversity
(mentoring, pair programming, role models). High school teachers will
participate via team-teaching, curriculum development, and professional
development (PD) workshops. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This planning grant would
enable the PIs to build on their curriculum within the context of the CS10K
Project with initial research and development around diversity (in particular,
strategies for engaging and retaining Native American students), curriculum
(positioning their course offerings in the context of the CS10K effort), and
teacher professional development.