* 1543922
* BREAD ABRDC: Genomic approaches to capture Novel Alleles in cultivated peanut to increase smallholder production.
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2020
* Harold Stalker, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 03/31/2020
* USD 1,144,473.00

PI: Peggy Ozias-Akins (University of Georgia)

CoPIs: Scott A. Jackson and Soraya Bertioli (University of Georgia), H. Thomas
Stalker (North Carolina State University), and Daniel Fonceka (CIRAD and
ISRA/CERAAS, Senegal)

Cultivated peanut is an important food and oil crop in the U.S. and globally.
Peanut is polyploid and originated relatively recently in evolutionary time from
hybridization between two diploid species, followed by chromosome doubling. This
domestication bottleneck limits variation among genes for resistance to most
pests and diseases. Advances in breeding methods have resulted in the
development of synthetic polyploids from the ancestral diploid species of
peanut. Crossing and backcrossing synthetic polyploids with cultivated lines
allows transfer of chromosomal segments carrying desirable traits to the
cultivated genome. Given that the majority of peanuts are produced in developing
countries and that potential for yield gains based on genetic improvement is
large, the long-term impact on production of this nutritious crop will be
substantial. Partnership with the Senegalese Institute for Agricultural Research
will ensure that the outputs of this project reach smallholder farmers given
their current inclusion in a network that is being used both for evaluation and
pre-diffusion of the most promising germplasm. Well characterized germplasm also
will be made available to breeding programs around the world.

Cultivated peanut (Arachis hypogaea L.) is an important food and oil crop in the
U.S. and internationally, particularly for small holder farmers. The
allotetraploid cultivated species (2n = 4x = 40; AABB genomes) originated from
two diploid species, A. duranensis (AA) and A. ipaensis (BB), has very low
levels of DNA polymorphism, and only moderate levels of resistance to most pests
and diseases. However, several diploid (2n = 2x = 20) Arachis species have
extremely high levels of resistance or immunity to the most important diseases
of peanut. Objectives of this project are to hybridize four A-genome disease-
resistant species with two diploid B- and one K-genome species. The B- and
K-genomes are recently described cytological variants of the B genome that
likely have different recombination potentials with cultivated peanut. Synthetic
tetraploids will be produced from twelve interspecific hybrid combinations and
then hybridized with peanut cultivars so that selections can be made for early
and late leaf spots, rust, other pathogen resistances, drought tolerance, and
favorable pod and haulm traits. In addition, advanced generation interspecific
hybrids from four AABB synthetics will be field tested in Africa for these same
traits. Taking advantage of the expanding genomic resources for peanut,
sequence-based genotyping will be conducted to survey allelic diversity between
parental lines, to confirm the hybrid nature of crosses and backcrosses, to
characterize introgressions during backcrossing, and to select for QTL
conferring leaf spot and rust resistance and drought tolerance along with pod
and haulm traits. It is expected that genotyping and phenotyping information
generated will contribute to QTL and gene discovery bearing significance for
peanut improvement in traits relevant to smallholder agriculture in Africa and
other peanut growing regions of the world. These proposed activities will
advance knowledge of peanut genetics, evolutionary relationships within the
genus, genome structure and gene function enabling a more systematic approach
for introgression of wild alleles into cultivated germplasm. Project activities
will involve graduate and undergraduate students and provide an active learning
environment with emphasis on modern plant breeding and genomics.