* 1543786
* Spatial Variability in Organic Aerosol: Relationships between Sources, Processing, and Composition
* GEO,AGS
* 12/01/2015,11/30/2018
* Albert Presto, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 11/30/2018
* USD 599,859.00

This project focuses on developing a better understanding of the factors
governing spatial and temporal variations in fine particle concentration and
composition in the atmosphere, with specific emphasis on variability in organic
aerosol (OA). Spatial variability of fine particles in the atmosphere derives in
part from spatial-temporal trends in emissions sources, the subsequent mixing of
these emissions with background air, and the physical and chemical processing of
the emissions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific objectives of the research are:
(1) Determine spatial-temporal variability in OA composition through a series of
ambient measurements in a region with significant contributions from traffic,
background aerosol, and industrial emissions; (2) Relate this variability to
spatial and temporal variability in sources and chemical processing, with the
goal of identifying source contributions to OA with high fidelity and
specificity; and (3) Develop an improved understanding of how physical (e.g.,
evaporation) and chemical (e.g., oxidation) transformations affect ambient OA
concentrations and composition over relevant spatial and temporal scales
(seconds to days, ~10 m - 100 km). The project will focus on a series of case
studies (industrial-dominated, traffic-dominated, urban-rural transect) to
investigate OA emissions and subsequent physical and chemical processing, and
use factor analysis and cluster analysis tools to determine OA sources and to
probe its chemical evolution. The sampling network in Pittsburgh PA consists of
a stationary sampling site, around which a mobile laboratory will be deployed to
characterize spatial variations.