* 1543214
* PFI: AIR-TT:  Developing a Prototype for the Next Generation of Petroleum Data Processing and Analytics Platform
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2019
* Lei Huang, Prairie View A & M University
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 08/31/2019
* USD 297,872.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on translating promising
cloud computing and data processing research results to an application in the
petroleum industry: a next generation petroleum data analytics platform. This
integrated, easy-to-use platform will ease the daily work of big data processing
and analytics in the petroleum industry. It will simplify the geophysicists' and
data scientists' new algorithm design and facilitate their daily data
interpretation and analytics work. The project will result in a prototype with
the following unique features: high-level programming environment, rich data
analytics packages, domain specific libraries, user-friendly web interface,
flexible workflow and parallel seismic processing templates. These features
provide the following advantages: scalable performance, high productivity, cost
savings, and flexibility when compared to the leading competing generic data
analytics platforms in this market space.

This project addresses the following technology gaps as it translates from
research discovery toward commercial application. 1) Design efficient data
storage and distributions for petroleum data sets; 2) simplify parallelization
efforts for new seismic data processing and analytics algorithm design; 3) apply
the latest big data analytics discovery to support geological feature detection;
4) achieve both scalable performance and high productivity for petroleum data
analytics. In addition, personnel involved in this project, including graduate
and undergraduate students, will receive entrepreneurship experiences through
I-Corps customer discovery work and this project.

The project engages TEC Application Analysis and the Texas A&M System Technology
and Commercialization office to augment research capability with deep domain
knowledge, guide commercialization aspects, and to perform marketing analysis in
this technology translation effort from research discovery toward commercial
reality.