* 1543935
* Student Travel Fellowships for ACM Symposium on Cloud Computing 2015
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2016
* K. Selcuk Candan, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* nan zhang
* 06/30/2016
* USD 15,000.00

The ACM Symposium on Cloud Computing 2015 (SoCC 2015) is the sixth in an
established series of symposia that bring together researchers, developers,
users, and practitioners interested in cloud computing. As the premier
conference on cloud computing, and through the continuous efforts of the
community, the scope of SoCC is broad and encompasses diverse data management
and systems topics such as software as a service, virtualization, scalable cloud
data services, and data management and analytics at scale. Many facets of
systems and data management issues must be revisited in the context of cloud
computing. The goal of the proposed project is to help train and develop the
future generation of leaders and workforce in the increasingly critical field of
cloud computing and data services by supporting 15 students currently
matriculated in US institutions for partial travel support and registration. The
SoCC 2015 program includes research and industrial papers, poster sessions, and
keynote talks by leaders in academia and industry. All these activities provide
a unique opportunity for students to share their knowledge, experience, and
research works with internationally recognized researchers from both academia
and industry. In addition to meeting industry (such as such as Oracle,
Microsoft, Google, IBM,Salesforce, WMWare, and Facebook, and others) leaders
during regular program sessions, this year students will also be able to will
also actively participate in a new interactive activity, titled "Vis-a-vis
Meeting with Leading Researchers." These opportunities will have a long lasting
impact on the future career of the participants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
conference will be co-located with VLDB 2015 and will be held in Kohala Coast,
Hawaii. Efforts to reduce student registration fees have been made; however,
supporting students to take advantage of the great benefits offered at ACM SoCC
2015 enables greater student interaction opportunities and a higher educational
impact. The intellectual merit of the project will include opportunity for
students to showcase their research results, get feedback on their works in
progress, learn about the cutting edge research conducted by others, and
interact with experts at a premier cloud computing conference. the broader
impact of the project will include helping train the future generation of
researchers and workforce in the increasingly critical field of cloud
computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For further information see the project web site
at: http://acmsocc.github.io/2015/index.html