* 1543702
* Workshop on Challenges for Space Solar Power - Dec. 14-16, 2015, Orlando, FL
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Seyed Zekavat, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 07/31/2019
* USD 24,954.00

Proposal Number: 1543702 Principal Investigator: Seyed A Zekavat

The Workshop on Challenges for Space Solar Power (SSP) will be co-located with
the IEEE Conference on Wireless Systems for Space and Extreme Environments
(WiSEE). The IEEE-WiSEE 2015 Conference will be held at the University of
Central Florida, Orlando, FL, from December 14-16, 2015. The overall goal of the
SSP workshop is to promote SSP technology, research and education to renew
interest in this area in the United States, based on recent wireless technology
developments in the US and internationally. Space Solar Power (SSP) systems use
solar photovoltaic systems in Earth orbit to convert sunlight to electricity,
where the solar incidence is nearly 10 times greater than that at the surface of
the Earth. The electricity is converted into microwaves and then beamed down to
receiving stations on the surface of the Earth for conversion back into
electricity for the grid. This workshop will highlight recent scientific and
engineering advances in the development of SSP systems in the US and
internationally, particularly in Japan, and is designed promote student
participation to stimulate renewed US academic interest in this area.

The workshop will be organized by Michigan Technological University with the
assistance of Space Solar Power Institute. The proposed workshop will recap the
current status of SSP development in the United States and internationally, and
will discuss issues and opportunities needed to advance SSP systems, including
government support and needed industry investment. Towards this end, invited
workshop presentations from industry and academia, and subsequent panel
discussions, will highlight the potential of SSP as an energy source, assess the
most relevant technologies for SSP, identify the most critical technological
needs for stimulating development of SSP, including the prospect of using
competitions to promote SSP technology development. The SSP workshop outcomes
will include peer-reviewed papers published in IEEE Xplore based on the oral or
poster presentations. The workshop also aims to recruit student participants
from Central Florida University, Michigan Technology University, and the Georgia
Institute of Technology through travel scholarships. Students will participate
in demonstrations of wireless power transfer to model race cars to illustrate
SSP energy transmission principles. The workshop will set up a website to
advertise the workshop and summarize its outcomes.