* 1543172
* PFI:AIR-TT:  Kinect-Based Low-Cost Motion Analysis System for Medical Applications
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Ruigang Yang, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 08/31/2018
* USD 199,888.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on translating innovative
single-view motion capture technology to fill the need of medical professionals
to quantify a patient?s body movement. This single-view motion capture system is
important because it will be a transformational technological improvement that
is available to physicians and physical therapists to diagnosis, treat, and
monitor patients with a movement disorder. The project will result in a
prototype system that will provide a live demonstration to potential customers
and investors. This prototype system will consist of a single Kinect camera and
a laptop. It will acquire motion data, process the data close to real-time, and
provide visual feedback to the patients as well as the clinicians. In particular
the performance measures for the clinicians will be anatomically correct and
accurate so progress in treating movement dysfunction can be quantified.
Compared to the leading motion capture system in the market place today, this
project will lead to a portable, low-cost single-camera system that will give
medical professionals accurate and precise 3D measurements of movement
dysfunction in any environment.

This project addresses the following technology gaps as it translates from
research discovery toward commercial application. The first and foremost is the
need to automatically identify anthropometric landmarks in the input data to
define an anatomically correct coordinate system. A novel data-driven method is
to going to be investigated. The second is the need to achieve faster processing
speed and consolidate the processing pipeline. Simplified tracking algorithm and
code optimization will be implemented to achieve the required real-time
performance. In addition, personnel involved in this project, in particular both
graduate and undergraduate students, will not only receive innovation
experiences throughout the research and development cycles, but also cultivate
their entrepreneurship through the business development activities.