* 1543176
* EAGER: Bringing Design Thinking into Developers' Coding Activities through an Architectural Tactic Recommender System
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2017
* Mehdi Mirakhorli, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 06/30/2017
* USD 80,000.00

The success of any complex software-intensive system is highly dependent on the
extent to which it addresses stakeholders' quality concerns such as reliability,
availability, security and performance. Software architects utilize a rich set
of proven and re-usable architectural solutions such as tactics and patterns to
satisfy each specific quality attribute. The objective of this research project
is to develop a novel tactic-recommender system that is trained through learning
from the source code of thousands of open-source software systems.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The project will include developing a set of novel big-data
compatible architecture profilers that ?detect? and ?learn? architectural
choices made by several developers across source codes of thousands of open-
source systems. This knowledge is used to recommend architectural tactics
fitting a new project. This represents a paradigm shift in utilizing automated
techniques to bring design thinking into developers? daily coding activities.
Unlike existing architecture design practices, which all involve a rigorous
upfront analysis of the system's quality concerns, this research takes a bottom-
up approach. It uses the latent domain topics in the source code and identifies
not only architectural tactics/patterns missing in a given project but also
recommends several high quality sample implementations of the tactics/patterns
from open source software projects. The findings of this research will partially
address the current gap between design and implementation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of the work will be to improve the
productivity of software development and to improve the quality and evolvability
of software-intensive systems.