* 1543838
* EAGER: Synthetic Control of Metabolism by Dynamic Metabolons
* BIO,MCB
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2019
* Wilfred Chen, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 08/31/2019
* USD 299,937.00

This project addresses a challenging problem in metabolic engineering, namely
the channelling of chemical reactions in the cell into metabolic pathways in an
efficient and dynamically controlled manner, but without affecting cellular
growth. The two collaborators offer complementary expertise in the analysis of
metabolic flux and protein engineering in order to pursue a highly innovative
design concept to achieve this goal. The students trained on this project will
be exposed to multi-disciplinary training in the context of research that is
anticipated to significantly advance biomanufacturing capabilities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal is to develop synthetic dynamic metabolons that
will allow carbon flux to be redirected as desired. The end result will be the
ability to provide dynamic optimization of microbial metabolism for optimal
product formation. This will be achieved by dynamic shifts between the assembly
and disassembly of synthetic metabolons in order to modulate the overall output
function. Specifically, successive metabolic enzymes will be coupled onto
Pumilio (PUF) modules, which are also capable of binding specific riboswitches.
These riboswitches are designed to respond to specific metabolic or synthetic
signals. Feasibility will be demonstrated by designing two multi-enzyme dynamic
metabolons, one that converts methanol into hexulose-6-phosphate, which is a
valuable precursor for chemical and fuel production. The second metabolon
includes enzymes that convert acetyl-CoA into mevalonate. The ultimate goal is
to combine the knowledge gained toward the design of dynamic metabolons for
enhanced fatty acid synthesis.