* 1543986
* MATH: EAGER: Online Collaborative Problem Solving in Remedial College Mathematics
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2017
* Di Xu, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 08/31/2017
* USD 300,000.00

This is a study of the impact of the learning environment on undergraduate
students learning problem-solving in remedial pre-calculus mathematics. The
study will examine the comparative effectiveness of face-to-face discussion
groups and 2 different types of online designs, compared to individual practice.
Students will be randomly assigned to one of four groups: three treatment groups
that carry out collaborative problem solving using (1) face-to-face discussion,
(2) an audio capability with a whiteboard online tool, or (3) an online virtual
environment combining audio plus whiteboard plus avatar-based interaction; or a
control group of individual problem solving. Currently, pre-calculus instruction
is been carried out online in this university using the web-based ALEKS tutorial
software, an online interactive learning system that uses an artificial
intelligence algorithm to assess and report student mastery of content material.
In search of improved student performance, this project is conducting an early
in-depth study of the effectiveness of a richer online design for learning
problem solving that was recently constructed for management courses, called
VirBELA (Virtual Business Education Leadership Assessment). It is a learning
platform that offers students the opportunity to work in teams. In mathematics,
VirBELA has good potential for facilitating group problem-solving. It provides a
whiteboard that allows students to draw diagrams and functions as needed and
also provides an audio capability for discussion. It has the added feature of
giving students a virtual online embodiment by creating an avatar for each
student. There is evidence from other sources that avatars create a richer, more
interactive and engaging online collaborative environment that more closely
replicates the advantages of in-person communication. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
wide range of data will be collected and assessed, including usage logs of the
tutorial learning software, common final exam scores in both pre-calculus and
calculus, and individual institutional data. Other outcome variables will
include how students perform on the problem solving, how they use the tutorial-
based mathematics software before and after problem solving sessions, and
whether they persist to the next calculus course, what grades they earn in the
following calculus course, and how their attitudes toward STEM study change
based on pre- and post-surveys. The study will be repeated in three different
quarters.