* 1543040
* Creating a Virtual Infrastructure for Engaging Rural Youth in STEM Disciplines through Computer Science
* EHR,DRL
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2020
* Bruce Segee, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* Wu He
* 12/31/2020
* USD 1,999,695.00

This project will advance efforts of the Innovative Technology Experiences for
Students and Teachers (ITEST) program to better understand and promote practices
that increase students' motivations and capacities to pursue careers in fields
of science, technology, engineering, or mathematics (STEM) by developing and
studying an educational intervention for rural youth to engage with computer
science and math concepts through a popular videogame. This project uses the
software environment Minecraft, which has already attracted over 100 million
users, as a platform for teaching middle schoolers about math and computing
concepts. Curriculum and assessment 'badges' will be developed to motivate and
teach youth. Research will study how implementing the curriculum in in-school
settings, and in afterschool settings through 4-H, influences youngsters'
knowledge of math and programming, their attitudes and inclination to STEM
careers, and their standardized test scores.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
proposes to use LearnToMod for Minecraft to engage rural middle school learners
(5th to 8th grades) in programming, spatial reasoning, and problem-solving
skills. LearnToMod will be piloted with approximately 80 4-H Extension
participants and 80 in-school participants, and then a larger implementation
will be launched to involve a total of approximately 1000 students in urban and
rural areas through five more iterations of curricular refinement. Outcomes will
be examined using case studies, participation logs, teacher and student surveys,
the badges and embedded assessments developed by the project, and standardized
test data from the Maine Department of Education's State Longitudinal Data
System. The project will use multi-level mixture modeling to identify specific
school characteristics that are associated with different usage and engagement
patterns by both students and teachers. Similar analyses will use school-level
variables and characteristics, such as poverty, access to resources, existing
STEM programs/activities, etc., as predictors of implementation and change in
reported teacher attitudes and behavior, such as incorporation of computer
science into STEM areas. These analyses will focus on the cross-level
interaction/moderator relationships between behaviors of participating students
and teachers and school-level characteristics or demographics (e.g., what types
of computer programming activities or skills are associated with the greatest
change specifically in low-versus-high income schools?).The partnership consists
of education and computer science researchers at the University of Maine, the
nonprofit ThoughtSTEM, UMaine Cooperative Extension (4-H), the Network Maine
state cyberinfrastructure project and the Maine Department of Education's
Learning Technology Initiative (MLTI), plus K-12 partners. K-12 partners include
the Western Foothills Regional School Unit, Eastern Maine AOS, Bangor School
Department, Southern Maine SAD Cumberland and North Yarmouth, and the Maine
Virtual Academy. Formal evaluation will be conducted by TERC, an independent
research organization.