* 1543865
* CAREER: Fundamental Research on a Novel Ultrasound-assisted Water-confined Laser Micromachining Technology
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2015,04/30/2017
* Benxin Wu, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Steve Schmid
* 04/30/2017
* USD 170,986.00

The research objective of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award
is to understand the coupled laser and ultrasound-material interactions in a
novel ultrasound-assisted, water-confined laser micromachining process, which
combines laser machining with in-situ ultrasound in water. The approach includes
physics-based modeling of the coupled laser and ultrasound-material interaction,
time-resolved observation of the machining process, and characterization of the
machined workpiece microstructures and mechanical properties. The educational
objective of this project is to integrate the research in micro manufacturing
with education, community outreach and minority student involvement. The
approach includes curriculum development by incorporating research results,
graduate students mentoring, undergraduate and minority high school student
involvement through a project class and an academy program, interfacing with
local schools and museum, and teaching skill improvement.

If successful, this project will provide an improved understanding of the
coupled laser and ultrasound material interactions in the ultrasound-assisted
water-confined laser micromachining process, which can potentially avoid or
greatly reduce current micromachining defects. This can lead to better product
quality, increase the manufacturing efficiency, and reduced cost. This will have
a broad impact on medical, electronics, automotive and many other areas, which
have a rapidly growing need for micromachining. The educational activities will
improve education in the manufacturing area, strengthen the university's
connections with local communities, enhance the public awareness to laser
technologies, and attract more high school and minority students to the
university science and engineering programs. Research results dissemination can
be effectively realized through journal and conference publications, and the
interactions with industries.