* 1543450
* Microbial Community Structure and Expression of Functional Genes Involved in the Seasonal Cycling of DMSP in the Southern Ocean
* GEO,OPP
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2022
* Peter Countway, Bigelow Laboratory for Ocean Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Kelly Brunt
* 05/31/2022
* USD 1,093,785.00

The Southern Ocean in the vicinity of Antarctica is a region characterized by
seasonally-driven marine phytoplankton blooms that are often dominated by
microalgal species which produce large amounts of dimethylsulfoniopropionate
(DMSP). DMSP can be converted to the compound dimethylsulfide (DMS) which is a
molecule that can escape into the atmosphere where it is known to have strong
condensation properties that are involved in regional cloud formation.
Production of DMSP can influence the diversity and composition of microbial
assemblages in seawater and the types and activities of microbes in the seawater
will likely affect the magnitude of DMSP\DMS production. The proposal aims to
examine the role of DMSP in structuring the microbial communities in Antarctic
waters and how this structuring may influence DMSP cycling. The project will
leverage the Antarctic research to introduce concepts and data linking microbial
diversity and biogeochemistry to a range of audiences (including high school and
undergraduate students in Maine). The project will also engage teacher and
students in rural K-8 schools and will allow a collaboration with a science
writer and illustrator who will join the team in the field. The writer will use
the southern ocean experience as the setting for a poster and a book about the
proposed research and the scientists studying extreme environments.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will examine (1) the extent to which the
cycling of DMSP in southern ocean waters influences the composition and
diversity of bacterial and protistan assemblages; (2) conversely, whether the
composition and diversity of southern ocean protistan and bacterial assemblages
influence the magnitude and rates of DMSP cycling; (3) the expression of DMSP
degradation genes by marine bacteria seasonally and in response to additions of
DMSP; and, to synthesize these results by quantifying (4) the microbial networks
resulting from the presence of DMSP-producers and DMSP-consumers along with
their predators, all involved in the cycling of DMSP in southern ocean waters.
The work will be accomplished by conducting continuous growth experiments with
DMSP-amended natural samples during field sampling of different microbial
communities present in summer and fall. Data from the molecular (such as 16S/
18S tag sequences, DMSP-cycle gene transcripts) and biogeochemical (such as
biogenic sulfur cycling, bacterial production, microbial biomass) investigations
will be integrated via network analysis.