* 1543559
* PFI:AIR - TT:  Robust High Porosity Filter for Circulating Tumor Cell Enrichment
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2015,12/31/2017
* Robert Davis, Brigham Young University
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 12/31/2017
* USD 205,028.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on translating robust, high
open area microfilters to fill the need for rare cell separation in various
research and diagnostic contexts. The microfilter is important because it makes
possible rapid, high purity separation of rare cells from complex mixtures, such
as cancer cells circulating in blood. This high purity separation could enable
the early detection of cancers and other diseases. The project will result in a
prototype and scalable process for the manufacture of microfilters with greater
than 40% open area. The resulting microfilter will be unique due to the
combination of a high open area while maintaining mechanical robustness required
for integration with standard medical equipment. These features enable both a
higher purity separation and a higher volume capacity when compared to track-
etched filters, the leading filter material in this market space.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses the following technology gap(s) as
it translates from research discovery toward commercial application. First, the
method of manufacture will be determined so that a prototype can be made with
greater than 40% open area. This will be developed by applying variations of
known three-dimensional microfabrication techniques. Second, through testing and
iteration, design parameters will be determined to achieve sufficient burst
strength. Third, tests will be performed with clinical samples to determine if
the filtration capacity and purity meet minimum requirements for an initial
application as a cancer diagnostic. In addition, personnel involved in this
project, undergraduates and a postdoctoral researcher, will receive technology
translation experience through participating in the customer development process
as interviews are conducted. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project engages two
partners to enable clinical testing and continuation of other business
activities. Precision Membranes LLC is a startup co-founded by participating
personnel to lead customer development and business model generation activities.
Astrimmune LTD will incorporate prototype filters into a clinical trial and
provide feedback about performance parameters of various designs.