* 1543124
* Development of Assessment Protocols for Assessing Computational Thinking in Physics and Engineering Making Activities
* EHR,DRL
* 10/15/2015,12/31/2018
* Yue Yin, Northeastern Illinois University
* Standard Grant
* Arlene de Strulle
* 12/31/2018
* USD 898,564.00

Computing has become an integral part of everyday practice within modern fields
of science, technology, engineering, and math (STEM). As a result, the
STEM+Computing Partnerships (STEM+C) program seeks to advance new approaches to,
and evidence-based understanding of, the integration of computing in STEM
teaching and learning. 'Making' is an emerging movement in which kids use
technological tools to create hardware and software that solves personally
relevant problems, using things like programmable circuit boards, arts and craft
materials, and computers. Building on a broad set of maker spaces in Chicago,
the Assessing Computational Thinking in Making Activities (ACTMA) project will
develop curricula and assessments to see how kids can learn physics and
computation through making. Experts in educational measurement, in broadening
STEM participation, and in instructing makers will work together with kids to
design materials that are culturally responsive to girls, Hispanic-Americans,
and African-Americans. By building and testing these curricula, the project will
further our understanding of what kids are actually learning in informal maker
spaces; how better to link maker activities to computer science and physics
education; and will help provide actionable assessments that parents, informal
educators, and researchers can use to help improve learning environments like
maker spaces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this project lies
in two thrusts; first, the project will help to better understand existing
student practices around physics and computation, in a culturally diverse,
mature set of maker-oriented informal learning environments. Qualitative
analysis based on Weintrop's computational thinking framework and Lewins'
generalized qualitative analysis codes will identify target curricular goals
through Charmaz's grounded theory process. The second thrust will provide both
iterated curricular designs and learning assessments that are culturally
responsive, based on the practices and learning goals identified in the first
thrust. The curriculum will be iteratively designed using youth informants to
ensure cultural responsiveness and validity. The assessments will also be
iteratively developed, relying on practitioner observations which can target
'moments of notice' in which an educator-friendly rubric would allow instructors
to observe evidence of learning (both in the subject domain knowledge, and in
computational thinking practices, aligned with emerging standards from ISTE and
CSTA). An external evaluator will gauge the use and cultural sensitivity of the
curriculum and assessments. The broader impacts of the project will relate to
the use of the curriculum and assessments in the Center for College Access and
Success partners around Chicago, and potentially its uptake in makerspaces
across the country. An additional potential broader impact is increasing our
ability to design and assess the success of makerspaces for STEM learning, and
even broadening participation in STEM by providing learning activities that are
specifically designed to appeal to a number of underrepresented groups (girls,
racial minorities, and ethnic minorities.)