* 1543228
* Research on Effects of Integrating Computational Science and Model Building in Water Systems Teaching and Learning
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/2015,05/31/2022
* John Moore, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Arlene de Strulle
* 05/31/2022
* USD 2,339,730.00

As computational capabilities increasingly revolutionize and become integral to
the practice of science, technology, engineering, and math (STEM) disciplines,
the STEM+Computing (STEM+C) Partnerships program seeks to integrate the use of
computational approaches in K-12 STEM teaching and learning. The Comp Hydro
project will address the goals of the STEM+C program, as well as an urgent issue
facing society: the availability of clean water as an ecosystem service
supporting human uses and ecological integrity. The vision of Comp Hydro is to
foster water and computational science literacy by integrating authentic, place-
and data-based learning as high school students build and use physical,
mathematical and conceptual models. The approaches and resources of Comp Hydro
will be developed in a broad diversity of settings - types of schools and school
systems, student and teacher populations, instructional contexts, and regional
challenges and constraints on water quality and availability. Teams in four
locations around the country will adapt surface water- and groundwater-themed
computer modules to local environmental and school contexts, will pilot test
them in high school Earth and environmental science classes, and will partner in
education research on student and teacher STEM learning. Approximately 2,400
students will be involved with and benefit from the project. The diverse nature
of the participating school districts will both engage a demographically diverse
student population in STEM and help the project achieve significant broader
impacts, by assuring that the findings and tools developed reflect the needs of
a broad diversity of people and places. Through curricular resource creation and
professional development for teachers, Comp Hydro will help to build the
capacity of each school district to integrate computational and environmental
science. Instructional materials based on learning progressions will support
students in developing water science literacy required for informed citizen
decision-making. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Comp Hydro project will address one
of the most daunting challenges to developing scientific literacy in students:
integrating teaching and learning of key ideas and practices of place-based
environmental science with computational and quantitative science in authentic,
innovative and effective ways. The basic premise of the project is that to
achieve model-based reasoning in environmental science, a student needs to
concurrently develop more sophisticated computational reasoning. Four
curriculum/professional development modules will be developed to integrate Earth
system and computational thinking content. They will focus on these
computational concepts and practices: ability to access and manipulate data from
multiple sources; ability to use computational tools to develop models, analyze
data, produce data visualizations, and identify key trends; application of
computational reasoning and model-based understanding to construct quantitative,
scientific explanations and predictions regarding hydrologic systems. The
project will: 1) develop and refine instructional units for surface and
groundwater, each comprising two 1-week modules, 2) engage teachers as partners
and agents of dissemination, 3) study teacher and student learning, 4) explore
supports and constraints on teaching, and 5) build a platform for project
research and development and dissemination. The project will engage four teams
of 6 teachers, who will work over two school years with educators and scientists
at four diverse sites (Arizona, Colorado, Maryland, and Montana). Comp Hydro
will utilize a design-based research approach, grounded in learning progressions
as a theoretical and methodological frame, for both its research and
instructional materials. The project will integrate computational and data sense
making practices and understandings into the Water Systems Learning Progression.
It will produce a trajectory of learning and associated assessment instruments
that can describe how students become more sophisticated with respect to
integrated scientific practices, including analyzing, interpreting and
representing data; developing and using models; using computational thinking;
and constructing scientific explanations and predictions about hydrologic
systems. The project also will develop a set of design principles, and an
associated computer platform for broader dissemination and for supporting
teachers in integrating the use of big and small data sets into meaningful
environmental science learning experiences with high school students.