* 1543195
* CS10K: Training Arkansas Computing Teachers (TACT)
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2019
* William Oliver, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Allyson Kennedy
* 09/30/2019
* USD 991,664.00

The University of Arkansas (UA) proposes a multifaceted program - called TACT
(Training Arkansas Computing Teachers)- to certify high school teachers to teach
computer science (CS). Arkansas has recently become the first state in the
nation to require that all public high schools offer CS courses. This has left
schools scrambling to comply as prior to June 2015, only 6.4% of them offered
CS. In addition, the state had no process in place to certify CS teachers. While
online CS courses will help most Arkansas high schools comply with the new
legislation, the literature suggests significant benefits to face-to-face
instruction. To meet the immediate and ongoing demand for well-trained and CS
certified high school teachers, and to better prepare Arkansas' high school
students for computer-related professions, the UA College of Engineering (COE)
propose a multifaceted program that will develop both in-service and pre-service
high school teachers to be certified to teach Computer Science (CS) Principles.
The in-service component will rapidly address the immediate demand and the pre-
service component will prepare an ongoing pipeline of CS teachers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will use a dual track approach. Pre-service
professional development will be developed through the Arkansas UTeach program
using curricula developed at the University of Texas at Austin's UTeach
Institute in Austin, TX. In-service teachers will be prepared through UA's
Advanced Placement Summer Institute (APSI). In both cases the curricula will be
based on the Thriving in Our Digital World CS Principles course developed at the
University of Texas, Austin. The effort will be evaluated, assessing both
teacher and students outcomes, and comparing student outcomes against their
peers who worked online. These findings will contribute to the CS education
literature, helping to clarify how effective solely online CS instruction in
high school populations relative to face-to-face instruction. In addition, TACT
experiences refining the components of this multifaceted teacher preparation
program will help inform additional scaling efforts specifically based on
Thriving in Our Digital World, and it will help inform policymakers more
generally considering statewide mandates on CS education.