* 1543139
* Assessing the Impact of Computer Modeling and Programing in Secondary Algebra
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2018
* Christopher Stewart, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steele
* 09/30/2018
* USD 1,201,385.00

Research shows that meeting current and future demands for professionals in
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) careers in the U.S.
will require major shifts in education, particularly in terms of classroom
learning in K-12 settings. Computing has become an integral part of the practice
of modern science, mathematics, and engineering. As a result, the STEM+Computing
Partnership (STEM+C) program seeks to integrate the use of computation
approaches in K-12 STEM teaching and learning. The Assessing the Impact of
Computer Modeling and Programing in Secondary Algebra project will examine the
impact of modeling and computer programming opportunities on students'
understanding of linear functions and their engagement in practices associated
with STEM+C success. Through its focus on algebra -- the most widely taken high
school mathematics course -- Computer Modeling in Algebra will pilot an approach
that has the potential to put computer science squarely in the path of virtually
every high school student. This project will combine the pedagogical content
knowledge of researchers in STEM education and the computational prowess of
computer scientists to infuse programming and computer modeling into a project-
based algebra unit on linear functions taught to students from a range of
backgrounds. Teachers and students will develop an understanding of
computational thinking as a way of creatively approaching tasks using
fundamental concepts from computer science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Computer
Modeling in Algebra will develop accessible yet relevant approaches to integrate
modeling and computer programming experiences into algebra and to transform the
mathematical understanding, problem-solving practices, and STEM+C investment of
teachers and students alike. The project will pursue four main goals: (1) to
effectively integrate modeling and computer programming into a project-based
learning (PBL) unit on linear functions, (2) to prepare teachers to implement
this unit -- and computer modeling and programming more broadly -- as part of
their regular teaching in a classroom setting, (3) to assess the effect of the
PBL unit on learners' understanding of functions, persistence and confidence in
problem-solving, and willingness to tackle open-ended tasks, and (4) to enhance
students' engagement in mathematics, computer science, and related fields,
particularly among students from groups underrepresented in STEM and computer
science. The project will use modeling-centered inquiry and project-based
approaches in the study that reflect current research on the development of
computational thinking and the incorporation of programming in K-12. The
professional development experiences at the heart of the initiative will follow
a participatory approach that engages teachers as partners in research, expands
their understanding of pedagogical approaches that lead to success for all
students (and especially low-income and minority students), and positions them
to transform their teaching of linear functions by infusing computer modeling
and programming into their algebra curriculum. The initiative will produce data
on how integration of modeling and computer programming in mathematics can
improve student understanding of functions and contribute to greater investment
in, preparation for, and access to STEM+C fields. Through strategic curricular
design, transformative teacher training, and close attention to student
experiences and learning outcomes in traditional classroom settings, the study
will pave the way for further integration of computer science into secondary
mathematics to broaden the pipeline of students prepared for STEM+C careers.