* 1543655
* The Role of Regional Organizations in Improving Access to the  National Computational Infrastructure
* CSE,OAC
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2016
* David Swanson, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Rudolf Eigenmann
* 07/31/2016
* USD 49,998.00

Agencies like the National Science Foundation have made significant investments
in the national computational infrastructure by creating campus and national
computation centers throughout the United States. The financial investments are
not limited to computer hardware and extend to investments in networks,
software, and support personnel to assist campus-level researchers to
effectively use these resources to answer challenging scientific questions. A
diverse set of organizations has emerged to support access to the national
computational infrastructure. Many of the organizations specialize whereas
others provide a range of services. Some of these organizations are self-
sustaining while others rely on continued agency support. Organizations that
provide similar services are likely to communicate with one another more
regularly. The Improving Access Workshop, supported by this award, will bring
together for the first time representatives from campus, state, regional, and
other organizations with a vested interest in furthering access to and
supporting computational resources by campus researchers. Participants will
develop a set of recommendations to assist the community to expand researcher
engagement to under-represented communities, to engage in timely and relevant
education and outreach efforts to computational researchers over the long term,
to coordinate efforts across the diverse set of organizations described above,
and to leverage resources across campus, state, and regional boundaries.

The goal of the workshop is to develop a coherent set of recommendations to the
National Science Foundation and to the community, at large, which provide
answers to a set of strategic questions. A Conference Organizing Committee
composed of experts in campus, regional, and national infrastructure has been
formed. To accelerate the process of developing a useful set of recommendations,
white papers will be solicited in advance of the conference that are relevant to
the strategic questions. Based on a review of papers submitted, invitations to
participate in the conference will be extended to up to 60 organizations. The
one and a half day conference will be held in Kansas City, MO, and facilitated
by members of the organizing committee. A final report will be issued in late
2015. The proposed meeting promises to coordinate efforts that lead to
significant improvements in meeting the needs of academic researchers. The
meeting will bring the needs of the computational research community to the
forefront of organizations that are uniquely positioned to assist in meeting
those needs. In situations where a small or medium-sized campus does not have
the resources to assist a small number of researchers with advanced
computational needs, the next level up - the state or other regional
organization - will be in an excellent position to reach out to those
researchers. In the long-term, the output from this conference promises to re-
focus the efforts of regional organizations and align them with the capacities
of the national infrastructure and the needs of campus researchers.