* 1543809
* Support for the 2015 Summer Biomechanics, Biotransport and Bioengineering Conference
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Christopher Ethier, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Alex Leonessa
* 05/31/2016
* USD 23,560.00

1543809 Ethier

This project supports two activities at the 2015 Summer Biomechanics,
Biotransport and Bioengineering Conference (SB3C2015), held June 17-20, 2015 at
the Snowbird Meeting and Conference Center, Snowbird UT. These activities are
designed to increase the participation rate for females and under-represented
minority researchers at the conference by offering travel fellowships, and to
sponsor the Ph.D. student paper competition by defraying attendance costs for
Ph.D. student finalists in the competition. In this way, this award promotes the
education of, and furthers the careers of, female, student and minority
attendees. The long-term goal is to help develop these individuals to become
future leaders in bioengineering. The theme of the meeting is "Synergy of
Modeling and Experiments in Biomechanics, Bioengineering and Biotransport". Its
primary purpose is to promote state-of-the-art research, collaboration, and
international scientific discourse in the broad field of bioengineering with
focus on biomechanics, biotransport, biomaterials, tissue engineering,
rehabilitation and design. This meeting has evolved from the long-running and
highly successful annual Summer Bioengineering Conference series, first run in
1993. The 2015 Conference name has been changed to better reflect the enlarged
scope of the meeting, as well as the different sponsorship structure. The
selections of the plenary speaker, workshops, and highlighted sessions will
serve to inform, educate and inspire attendees about the importance of and
pathways for translating their technologies. All presentations are documented in
the two-page extended abstract format and compiled in a USB drive (also posted
on the conference web site), available to all registrants. Copyright is provided
and an ISBN number issued to allow appropriate archiving of the conference
material.

The specific NSF funding requests are: 1. To sponsor travel fellowships and a
mentoring/advancement workshop for females and under-represented minorities
(URM). We will offer travel awards for women and URM students to attend
SB3C2015, with preference to target these fellowships to junior undergraduates
in SB3C-related disciplines interested in graduate school. Fourteen awards will
be given with support/encouragement to ask department chairs and Deans to fund
the rest of the student's travel. This will achieve the mission of bringing
greater diversity to SB3C, providing an exciting opportunity for women and URM
students, and potentially increasing the pool of women and URM graduate students
in SB3C-related disciplines. 2. To sponsor the extremely popular Student Paper
Competition by covering the meeting attendance costs of the 36 Ph.D. student
finalists. All abstracts submitted are 2-page extended abstracts and the Ph.D.
student finalists are selected after a rigorous review process (3 reviewers per
abstract). Six finalists for each technical area are selected by the student
paper committee and the students present their work in 6 parallel podium
sessions to compete for best paper awards in a number of subfields related to
the overall theme of the conference.