* 1543530
* Collaborative Research: Stability and Dynamics of Antarctic Marine Outlet Glaciers
* GEO,OPP
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2022
* John Paden, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Cutler
* 05/31/2022
* USD 440,000.00

Van der Veen/1543530&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research is to
gain better understanding of the West Antarctic ice flow in the transition
region from grounded ice to floating ice shelves and investigate the conditions
that can initiate and sustain major retreat of these glaciers. Several major
Antarctic outlet glaciers and ice streams will be investigated using a suite of
observational techniques and modeling tools. Glaciers include Thwaites Glacier,
which has become a focal point in the discussion of West Antarctic retreat,
Whillans Ice Stream as an example of the archetype ice stream, and Byrd Glacier,
a major outlet glacier draining East Antarctica through the Transantarctic
Mountains into the Ross Ice Shelf. This study will investigate whether the
ongoing changes in these glaciers will lead to long-term mass loss (the onset of
ice sheet collapse), or whether these glaciers will quickly stabilize with a new
geometry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To adequately incorporate the dynamic behavior
of outlet glaciers and ice streams requires inclusion of the relevant physical
processes, and the development of regional models that employ a numerical grid
with a horizontal grid spacing sufficiently refined to capture smaller-scale bed
topographic features that may control the flow of these glaciers. This award
revisits the issue of stability of marine-terminating glaciers whose grounding
line is located on a retrograded bed slope. In particular, an attempt will be
made to resolve the question whether observed rapid changes are the result of
perturbations at the terminus or grounding line, or whether these changes
reflect ice-dynamical forcing over the grounded reaches. High-resolution
satellite imagery will be used to investigate ice-flow perturbations on smaller
spatial scales than has been done before, to evaluate the importance of
localized sites of high basal resistance on grounding-line stability. This
collaborative project involves a range of modeling strategies including force-
budget analysis, flow-band modeling, Full Stokes modeling for local studies, and
using the Ice Sheet System Model developed at JPL for regional modeling. Broader
Impacts include training two graduate students in computer simulations and ice
sheet modeling algorithms. The work will also expand on a web-based interactive
flowline model, so that it includes more realistic grounding line dynamics.