* 1543255
* Research and Design of a Curriculum Authoring System for Computational Project-Based Learning Units in Education
* EHR,DRL
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2020
* Trish Millines-Dziko, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Arlene de Strulle
* 08/31/2020
* USD 1,500,845.00

Computing has become an integral part of the practice of modern science, math,
and engineering. In addition, contemporary STEM careers and research show
increased emphasis in the workforce on the need to understand, and to be able to
use computing and have computational thinking skills. Moreover, the National
Research Council Framework for K-12 Science Education (NRC, 2012) outlined
important epistemic practices of science regarding computing that was intended
to guide STEM instruction. However, for a myriad of reasons, institutions like
K-12 education have not kept up-to-date with integrating the necessary skills
development needed for STEM careers. Further, K-12 teachers need assistance in
developing and using effective, evidence-based practices for integrating
computing and/or computer science into their STEM practice, such as modeling,
data analysis, systems and computational thinking. This proposed research
project will study the development of computational thinking competencies
through the process called "computation inquiry" related to geoscience
instruction at the middle and high school level, and will study the effects of
an innovative authoring tool that will provide teachers with the ability to
develop and modify curricula. The project advances the objectives of the
STEM+Computing Partnership (STEM+C) program by seeking to enhance knowledge on
new appproaches to integrating computing into STEM teaching and learning. The
PI's will work directly with teachers in deriving models of STEM+C curriculum
that will assist teachers in designing their own integrated course(s). Special
emphasis will be focused on culturally and linguistically diverse populations.
Partners include the Technology Access Foundation (TAF) and the TAF Academy of
Middle and High Schools with 15 teachers and 300 students. Other partners
include the University of Washington Institute for Science + Math Education, and
Inverness Research as the external evaluator. This project is based upon the use
of project-based learning and the use of the next generation of science
standards (NGSS). The PI will add computational inquiry with computational
thinking as a strategy to develop curricula. Their research plan focuses on how
students and teachers adapt to the integration of computational elements into
STEM courses and how each learns and expands the use of computation. Their broad
research questions are: How do students develop computational competencies and
learn science concepts through computational STEM project investigations
involving the practices of modeling, analyzing data, and programming?; How do
students' images of science and science identities shift through engagement in
computational project-based investigations in science?; How does knowledge of
computation lead to new interests and learning pathways related to computational
inquiry in STEM for students?; How do teachers in STEM education-focused schools
learn to integrate a focus on computational inquiry into their project-based
instructional approaches?;How do STEM professionals involved with curriculum co-
design support teacher professional learning and integration of a computational
focus in curriculum?; How do STEM professionals learn about youth mentoring and
project-based learning approaches to the teaching of STEM topics through working
with students on STEM projects? Methodologies include: Qualitative coding of
student artifacts and interviews; cognitive assessments; ethnographic co-design
experiences and design-based research of mentoring experiences.