* 1543038
* PFI:AIR - TT:  Proof of concept low-cost energy efficient multi-hazard resistant wall system
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Clay Naito, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 08/31/2018
* USD 253,389.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on translating an
innovative building envelope system to fill the industry need for enhanced
resistance to natural and man-made hazards including explosions and impact
events from wind or water-borne hazards. It also provides energy efficiency and
ease of construction. This building envelope system, the comb-tie envelope
system, is important because it will enhance the understanding of how insulated
wall panel systems can be used to provide a thermally efficient and blast
resistive envelope to building systems. Competitive technology is not currently
available and thus the system will create new markets by providing a cost
effective solution for federal and military building construction where blast
protection and energy efficiency are required. The technology will also
complement existing technology used for conventional construction applications.
The technology can be manufactured in the U.S. providing the potential for new
business and employment opportunities. The project will result in a proof-of-
concept of the comb-tie envelope system with the following unique features: ease
of installation, the ability to support loads under large panel displacements,
and thermal efficiency. These features provide the following advantages:
performance under extreme loads, cost savings, and thermal efficiency when
compared to the leading competing composite panel systems in this market space.

This project addresses the following technology gap(s) as it translates from
research discovery toward commercial application. The system relies on an
innovative shear tie connector and a supporting design approach. The knowledge
gaps addressed will include determination of the idealized connector shape for
installation and pullout and shear performance, the strength provided by the
connector, verification of the capacity under loading, and validation of the
design approach. The project will finalize the detailing of the tie system
developed for the insulated panels through finite element modeling of the
system. The ability of the tie to provide composite action to the wall system
and the ability to be easily installed will be quantified. The refined details
will be prototyped and experimentally evaluated through pullout tests and shear
tests to quantify the strength provided. These component property results will
be used for finalizing the design approach which allow for fabrication and load
testing to ensure that the design strength and deformation performance levels
are achieved. The complete system will also be verified under explosive loading
to verify the dynamic capabilities of the systems. In addition, personnel
involved in this project, undergraduates and graduate students, will receive
innovation and technology translation experiences through the proof-of-concept
development, and market opportunity investigations with industry trade
organizations and wall panel producers.