* 1543536
* Collaborative Research:   Characterizing Atmospheric Gravity Waves and their Effects on the Antarctic Ozone Layer
* GEO,OPP
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2020
* Chihoko Cullens, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Robert C. Moore
* 03/31/2020
* USD 180,323.00

Stratospheric ozone is an important greenhouse gas that also protects the
planet's surface from destructive solar ultraviolet radiation. Depletion of the
ozone layer occurs through a series of chemical reactions in which ozone
molecules are destroyed by reacting with halogens (chlorine, bromine, etc.) with
some of the halogens originating from man-made halocarbons. These reactions are
enhanced with cold temperatures at stratospheric altitudes. Current computer
models are capable estimating the magnitude of ozone hole development in the
stratosphere over the polar regions, but the models underestimate the amount of
stratospheric cooling as compared to measurements made by ground-based remote-
sensing LIDAR (Light Detection and Ranging) instruments. This project seeks to
better understand the role of atmospheric gravity waves in the Earth's
stratosphere and their potential effects on the Antarctic ozone layer. Accurate
forecasts of the Antarctic ozone hole parameters by coupling atmospheric
chemistry and climate models are critical for monitoring ozone hole recovery.
This, in turn, is important for understanding whether or not the goals of the
Montreal protocol are being met.

The high-resolution Weather Research and Forecasting (WRF) model will be used to
account for effects of atmospheric gravity waves that propagate upward in the
lower atmosphere and, therefore, affect atmospheric circulation, stratospheric
temperature, and consequently behavior of the Antarctic ozone layer. A number of
Antarctic ground-based lidar data (from McMurdo, South Pole, Davis, Syowa
stations, and past observations at Rothera Station) will be used to validate and
examine the WRF modeling results. The enhanced gravity wave parameterization
will be used to run "The Whole Atmosphere Community Climate Model" (WACCM) to
study the stratospheric circulation and temperatures above Antarctica. This
research effort is a cost-effective investment that will advance the state of
knowledge of lower atmosphere dynamics and improve or correct parameterization
of gravity waves and, thereby, improve models of the lower atmosphere. In turn
this will improve understanding of how lower atmosphere processes can affect
ozone depletion reactions. The award will support an early career female
scientist with her first NSF funding, as well as support an undergraduate
student.