* 1543593
* RAPID:  Behavioral Plasticity and Hybridization of Young Species
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2016
* Susan Foster, Clark University
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Elekonich
* 07/31/2016
* USD 14,880.00

Biological diversity is decreasing at an exceptionally rapid rate in response to
human modification of the environment. One outcome of human activity is
increasing productivity in aquatic environments, often leading to changes in
growth rates of aquatic organisms including the threespine stickleback fish.
This small fish has served as a model for understanding how newly-arisen species
have evolved and how they maintain their distinctiveness. The research proposed
here will evaluate the threat posed to pairs of species that have arisen in a
small number of lakes in the Pacific Northwest, focusing on possible shifts in
body size and behavior. The research has significant conservation implications
not just for stickleback but also for understanding human-caused environmental
changes leading to size and behavioral shifts, and, ultimately, interbreeding
between species and loss of biodiversity. The research will include
undergraduates and graduate students in field and laboratory research. The
findings will be incorporated into teaching at the undergraduate level at Clark
University and into outreach activities involving elementary school through high
school students in the largely impoverished and minority community in which
Clark University is located.

The initial stages of speciation are difficult to capture, but the threespine
stickleback fish (Gasterosteus aculeatus) from the Pacific Northwest has served
as a model system of the speciation process. Replicated pairs of species have
revealed in detail the genetic, morphological, and behavioral transitions
associated with divergence. Sometimes, the initial stages of speciation are
mediated by plastic shifts in behavior and morphology, when populations are
exposed to novel environments. Plastic transitions may be followed by genetic
accommodation, leading to evolutionary differentiation of the populations, and
to stable reproductive isolation. In some instances however, reproductive
isolation can be maintained by differential use of habitats in secondary
sympatry, without significant genetic differentiation, leading to the
possibility that changing environments will facilitate hybridization and loss of
closely related species. This is a possibility that has not been explored in the
species pairs of G. aculeatus. Differences in body size are important mediators
of reproductive isolation between members of the pairs. This research will
evaluate the possibility that differences in body size between the species pairs
is decreasing due to increasing aquatic productivity and that this could lead to
hybridization of the three remaining benthic-limnetic species pairs in southern
British Columbia. The timing of the research is critical, as evolution in this
system is known to be rapid, as is the environmental change that could cause its
demise. These species pairs have offered unparalleled insight into the
mechanisms of ecological speciation, and their loss through hybridization will
conceal the numerous biological signatures of early divergence they have
provided. All data will be archived in the Dryad Digital Repository.