* 1543344
* Quantifying Surface Area in Muds from the Antarctic Dry Valleys: Implications for Weathering in Glacial Systems
* GEO,OPP
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2022
* Gerilyn Soreghan, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Michael E. Jackson
* 05/31/2022
* USD 383,709.00

As glaciers creep across the landscape, they can act as earthmovers, plucking up
rocks and grinding them into fine sediments. Glaciers have moved across the
Antarctic landscape over thousands to millions of years, leaving these ground-up
sediments in their wake. This study builds on pilot discoveries by the
investigators that revealed remarkably large and variable measurements of
surface area in glacially-derived fine-grained sediments found in the McMurdo
Dry Valleys (MDV), one of the few landscapes on the Antarctic continent not
currently covered by ice. Surface area is key to chemical weathering, the
process by which rock is converted to soils as ions are carried away in streams
and groundwater. These chemical weathering processes are also one of the primary
means by which the Earth system naturally removes carbon dioxide from the
atmosphere. Hence, high surface areas observed in sediments implies high
"weatherability" which in turn translates to more potential carbon dioxide
removed from the atmosphere. Therefore, chemical weathering in high surface area
glacial sediments may have significant impacts on Earth's carbon cycle. The
researchers will measure the chemical and physical properties of sediments
previously collected from the Dry Valleys to understand what factors lead to
production of sediment with high-surface area and potential "weather ability"
and investigate how sediment produced in these glacial systems could ultimately
impact Earth's carbon budget. Results from this research will help scientists
(including modelers) refine predictions of the effects of melting glaciers- and
attendant exposure of glacial sediment? on atmospheric carbon levels. These
results may also contribute to applied research efforts on development of
carbon-dioxide removal technologies utilizing principles of rock weathering. In
addition to the scientific benefits, this research will involve several students
at the undergraduate, graduate, and post-doctoral levels, including science
education undergraduates, thus contributing to training of the next-generation
STEM workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Physical weathering produces fresh
surfaces, greatly enhancing specific surface area (SSA) and reactive surface
area (RSA) of primary minerals. Quantifying SSA and RSA of sediments is key to
determining dissolution and leaching rates during natural weathering, but few
data exist on distribution of sediment SA, particularly in glacial and fluvial
systems. Pilot data from glacial stream systems in Taylor Valley and Wright
Valley (located in the MDV) exhibit remarkably high and variable values in both
SSA and RSA, values that in some cases greatly exceed values from muds in
temperate glacial systems. This discovery motivates the current research, which
aims to investigate the hypothesis that high and variable SAs of muds within
Wright and Taylor Valleys reflect textural and/or compositional inheritance from
the differing depositional settings within the MDV, biologic controls, dust
additions, and/or pedogenic processes. These hypotheses will be tested by
sedimentologically, mineralogically, and geochemically characterizing muds from
glacially derived sediment deposited in various environments (cold vs. wet based
glaciation; fluvial, lacustrine, dust, and drift deposits) and of varying age
(Miocene to Modern) from the MDV and quantifying variation of SA and reactivity.
Comparisons with analyzed muds from temperate glacial systems will enable polar-
temperate comparisons. Analyses will focus on muds of previously collected
sediment from the MDVs. Grain size and SSA will be measured by Laser Analysis
and N2 adsorption BET, respectively. After carbonate removal, samples will be
re-analyzed for SSA, and muds characterized geochemically. Mineralogy and bulk
chemistry will also be assessed on co-occurring sand fractions, and textural
attributes documented. SSA-normalized dissolution experiments will be used to
compare solutes released from sediments to determine RSAs. Results will be
integrated with the various sedimentologic and geochemical analyses to test the
posed hypotheses. Ultimately, this research should shed light on how weathering
in Antarctic systems contributes to global carbon cycling.