* 1543042
* PFI:AIR - TT:  A Versatile E-Tongue for In Situ Detection of Heavy Metals in Water and Sediments
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2015,02/28/2021
* David Ryan, University of Massachusetts Lowell
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 02/28/2021
* USD 376,625.00

This Partnership for Innovation: Accelerating Innovation Research Technology
Translation project focuses on translating a modular and field deployable
electrochemical sensing technology to fill the unmet need for rapid, low cost,
and on-site characterization of toxic metals such as arsenic, cadmium, copper,
lead, zinc, and mercury in water and sediments. This project will result in the
development and field demonstration of a modular prototype "E-tongue" probe.
This E-tongue probe will facilitate accurate, rapid, and cost-effective
detection and quantification of heavy metals and have a direct impact on
improving health and safety of humans. Standard spectro-analytical methods are
expensive, bulky and require trained personnel for operation. The E-Tongue probe
has the following unique features and advantages over existing laboratory and
portable technologies, including: a) Portability and robustness, enabling rapid
on-site testing; b) High sensitivity to detect multiple toxic metal ions below
EPA specified maximum contamination limits; c) Integrated pH and temperature
sensor for additional data and improved accuracy; d) User-friendly; and e) Low
cost. By ascertaining levels of heavy metal contaminants at sites with
sufficient accuracy in real-time, the E-Tongue probe can assist engineers to
make onsite decisions, such as determining optimum locations for placement of
monitoring wells, identifying hot-spots for sample collection for detailed
laboratory testing, and adjusting field activity to control remediation options.
It will also provide regulatory agencies with critical information so that they
can take appropriate steps such as communicating drinking water advisories in a
timely manner. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will result in the creation of
a field deployable prototype E-tongue probe comprising an electrochemical sensor
array, data acquisition/control and intelligent pattern recognition software. To
develop the prototype, and move from research discovery to commercial
application, the project will address the following technology gaps: 1)
Simultaneous detection of multiple analytes, 2) Interfering compounds and
electrode fouling, 3) Effects of temperature and pH, 4) Sampling challenges in
the monitoring well and sediment testing systems. These technology gaps will be
overcome by the use of multiple modified electrodes to enhance selectivity and
sensitivity, elimination of interference and fouling through the use of
appropriate sampling electrolytes and electrode protection strategies,
integration of pH and temperature sensors to compensate for variations in pH and
temperature, and incorporation of automated sampling systems. This project will
provide the investigators, postdoctoral researcher and graduate student, the
experience in transforming novel discoveries into prototype devices to solve
real-world problems, as well as interdisciplinary, multicultural, global
entrepreneurship experience through the Manning School of Business "Global
Entrepreneurship and Innovation" program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Geoprobe and K2
Engineering will partner in manufacturing the prototype E-Tongue probe and
princed circuit board (PCB) fabrication and assembly of the miniature
potentiostat. Demonstration of the prototype E-Tongue probe will be conducted in
collaboration with the Massachusetts Department of Environmental Protection
(Mass DEP) and CH2M Hill. Mass DEP will help locate appropriate sites for
prototype demonstration. CH2M Hill will partner in the demonstration of the
E-Tongue probe in heavy metal contaminated river sediments. The diverse skills
and complementary expertise of the team, and collaborations with industry and
regulatory agencies (CH2M, and Mass DEP) will ensure the successful translation
of this project.