* 1543399
* Collaborative Research: Triggering of Antarctic Icequakes, Slip Events, and other Tectonic Phenomena by Distant Earthquakes
* GEO,OPP
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2020
* Zhigang Peng, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Michael E. Jackson
* 05/31/2020
* USD 136,368.00

The continent of Antarctica has approximately the same surface area as the
continental United States, though we know significantly less about its
underlying geology and seismic activity. Multinational investments in
geophysical infrastructure over the last few decades, especially broadband
seismometers operating for several years, are allowing us to observe many
interesting natural phenomena, including iceberg calving, ice stream slip, and
tectonic earthquakes. To specifically leverage those past investments, we will
analyze past and current data to gain a better understanding of Antarctic
seismicity. Our recent research revealed that certain large earthquakes
occurring elsewhere in the world triggered ice movement near various stations
throughout Antarctica. We plan to conduct an exhaustive search of the terabytes
of available data, using cutting-edge computational techniques, to uncover
additional evidence for ice crevassing, ice stream slip, and earth movement
during earthquakes. One specific focus of our research will include
investigating whether some of these phenomena may be triggered by external
influences, including passing surface waves from distant earthquakes, ocean
tides, or seasonal melt. We plan to produce a catalog of the identified activity
and share it publicly, so the public and researchers can easily access it. To
reach a broader audience, we will present talks to high school classes,
including Advanced Placement classes, in the Austin, Texas and Atlanta, Georgia
metropolitan areas with emphasis on general aspects of seismic hazard, climate
variability, and the geographies of Antarctica. This project will provide
research opportunities for undergraduates, training for graduate students, and
support for an early-career scientist.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In recent years, a
new generation of geodetic and seismic instrumentation has been deployed as
permanent stations throughout Antarctica (POLENET), in addition to stations
deployed for shorter duration (less than 3 years) experiments (e.g.
AGAP/TAMSEIS). These efforts are providing critical infrastructure needed to
address fundamental questions about both crustal-scale tectonic structures and
ice sheets, and their interactions. We plan to conduct a systematic detection of
tectonic and icequake activities in Antarctica, focusing primarily on background
seismicity, remotely-triggered seismicity, and glacier slip events. Our proposed
tasks include: (1) Identification of seismicity throughout the Antarctic
continent for both tectonic and ice sources. (2) An exhaustive search for
additional triggered events in Antarctica during the last ~15 years of global
significant earthquakes. (3) Determination of triggered source mechanisms and
whether those triggered events also occur at other times, by analyzing years of
data using a matched-filter analysis (where the triggered local event is used to
detect similar events). (4) Further analysis of GPS measurements over a ~5.5
year period from Whillans Ice Plain, which suggests that triggering of stick-
slip events occurred after the largest earthquakes. An improved knowledge of how
the Antarctic ice sheet responds to external perturbations such as dynamic
stresses from large distant earthquakes and recent ice unloading could lead to a
better understanding of ice failure and related dynamic processes. By leveraging
the vast logistical investment to install seismometers in Antarctica over the
last decade, our project will build an exhaustive catalog of tectonic
earthquakes, icequakes, calving events, and any other detectable near-surface
seismic phenomena.