* 1543109
* PFI:AIR - TT:  Proof of concept study and scaleability of injection molded nanostructured biomedical consumables
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2015,02/28/2019
* Sabrina Jedlicka, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 02/28/2019
* USD 214,962.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on translating multi-scale
injection molding technology to applications in biological research,
specifically for in vitro cell growth. Cells grown in vitro are critically
useful tools in biomedical research and development. Recent research in the area
of in vitro cell growth has led to a number of important discoveries with
regards to how cells behave and respond to their environment. These discoveries
have significantly altered the way that researchers think about how cells grow;
however, few commercial products reflecting this knowledge exist, possibly
causing bottlenecks in applications ranging from in vitro fertilization (IVF) to
disease model development for pharmaceutical testing. The project will result in
a family of cell culture substrate prototypes designed to improve cell growth
and development over the traditional flat polystyrene surfaces currently used in
the industry today. The prototypes will be designed for high-volume
manufacturing to ensure commercial usefulness and cost-effectiveness in the
biomedical sector.

This project addresses the following technology gaps as it translates from
research discovery toward commercial application. First, traditional silicon
tooling for multi-scale molding at the micro/nanoscale is cost-prohibitive.
Second, the high-volume manufacturing of injection-molded polymeric devices that
possess features at the low micro to nanoscale is currently limited by factors
such as tooling life and manufacturing robustness. Third, a robust in vitro cell
response to such products is required for future commercialization. To address
these technology gaps, the team will employ designs inspired by native cell
environments, using a well-established in vitro cell growth assay for mouse
embryos. Molds for high volume manufacturing will be produced using bulk
metallic glass tooling, on which mold robustness will be analyzed. Polymer
rheology will be controlled in a variety of ways to ensure feature consistency
and reproducibility. Costs associated with mold production and other tooling
will be built into the current working financial model to determine the next
phase of the commercialization effort. In addition, personnel involved in this
project, including a graduate student and a team of undergraduate/high school
students will receive innovation and entrepreneurship experience by developing
the designs, talking to potential customers, and aiding with the development of
a commercialization plan for the technology.