* 1543245
* NSFGEO-NERC: Evolutionary Response of Southern Ocean Diatoms to Environmental Change
* GEO,OPP
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2022
* Tatiana Rynearson, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Maria Vernet
* 06/30/2022
* USD 790,442.00

The research will examine how diatoms (an important group of plankton in the
Southern Ocean) adapt to environmental change. Diatoms will be sampled from
different regions of the Southern Ocean, including the Drake Passage, the
Pacific Sector of the Southern Ocean and the Ross Sea and examined to determine
the range of genetic variation among diatoms in these regions. Experiments on a
range of diatoms will be conducted in home laboratories and will be aimed at
measuring shifts in physiological capacities over many generations in response
to directional changes in the environment (temperature and pH). The information
on the genetic diversity of field populations combined with information on
potential rates of adaptability and genome changes will provide insight into
ways in which polar marine diatoms populations may respond to environmental
changes that may occur in surface oceans in the future or may have occurred
during past climate conditions. Such information allows better modeling of
biogeochemical cycles in the ocean as well as improves our abilities to
interpret records of past ocean conditions. The project will support a doctoral
student and a postdoctoral researcher as well as several undergraduate students.
These scientists will learn the fundamentals of experimental evolution, a skill
set that is being sought in the fields of biology and oceanography. The project
also includes a collaboration with the Metcalf Institute for Marine and
Environmental Reporting that will design and facilitate a session focused on
current research related to evolution and climate change to be held at the
annual conference of the National Association of Science Writers (NASW).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Both physiological and genetic variation are key
parameters for understanding evolutionary processes in phytoplankton but they
are essentially unknown for Southern Ocean diatoms. The extent to which these
two factors determine plasticity and adaptability in field populations and the
interaction between them will influence how and whether cold-adapted diatoms can
respond to changing environments. This project includes a combination of field
work to identify genetic diversity within diatoms using molecular approaches and
experiments in the lab to assess the range of physiological variation in
contemporary populations of diatoms and evolution experiments in the lab to
assess how the combination of genetic diversity and physiological variation
influence the evolutionary potential of diatoms under a changing environment.
This research will uncover general relationships between physiological
variation, genetic diversity, and evolutionary potential that may apply across
microbial taxa and geographical regions, substantially improving efforts to
predict shifts in marine ecosystems. Results from this study can be integrated
into developing models that incorporate evolution to predict ecosystem changes
under future climate change scenarios.