* 1543364
* Polar Experiment Network for Geospace Upper-atmosphere Investigatins -- PENGUIn: Interhemispheric Investigations along the 40-degree Magnetic Meridian
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Michael Hartinger, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Moore
* 08/31/2021
* USD 998,363.00

The near-Earth space and upper atmosphere (Geospace) is a complex natural system
that can impact various human technologies deployed in space and on the ground.
To forecast, and thus mitigate that impact, it is necessary to develop accurate
understanding of the interaction processes between the solar wind and Earth's
magnetosphere and ionosphere. These processes are mainly initiated on the
planet's dayside and can be observed at high latitudes in both hemispheres, near
the ionospheric intersection of geomagnetic field lines that map from the high-
altitude interaction region. A variety of coupled phenomena at multiple spatial
and temporal scales are produced by this interaction that transfer the solar
wind energy and momentum through the magnetosphere down to the ionosphere and
upper atmosphere. Developing our understanding of these interaction processes
and how they couple to both polar ionospheres is important for developing
physical models that can describe and predict "space weather" disturbances ? a
major goal of the recently adopted National Space Weather Strategy. This goal
has been hampered so far by the lack of sufficient data to investigate processes
and to validate global models, particularly in the Southern
hemisphere.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will overcome the above problem
through the operation and use of data from a new generation of autonomous
instrument platforms strategically deployed in the Southern polar cap. This
research will continue studies of various physical mechanisms involved in the
solar wind interaction with the Earth's magnetosphere for better understanding
of the multi-scale, global, and interhemispheric electrodynamic coupling within
the entire Geospace system. Important aspects of these investigations include
operation of a new chain of autonomous low-power ground-based instruments
deployed along the 40-degree geomagnetic meridian in the East Antarctic. These
stations are geomagnetically conjugate to the Greenland West Coast chain of
long-term-running magnetometers supported by Danish scientists. These
interhemispheric connections are crucial for interpretation of satellite
observations (such NASA's THEMIS and MMS missions) in and near the magnetopause
and for further understanding of the global geospace system's dynamics. The
project will employ young scientists in the operation of remote Antarctic
stations, as well as investigate space weather events, and, thus, contribute to
the development of the nation?s scientific workforce. Use of the project's data
to validate space weather models can provide benefit to society as a whole as it
aids to protect various navigation, communications, and defense technologies
that can be impacted by space weather.