* 1543204
* The Evaluation of a Model Spatial Thinking Curriculum for Building Computational Skills in Elementary Grades K-5
* EHR,DRL
* 11/01/2015,05/31/2019
* Gary Scott, University of Redlands
* Standard Grant
* Arlene de Strulle
* 05/31/2019
* USD 695,151.00

The Evaluation of a Model Spatial Thinking Curriculum for Building Computational
Skills in Elementary Grades K-5 project advances objectives of the
STEM+Computing Partnership (STEM+C) program, which seeks to advance new
approaches to, and evidence-based understanding of, the integration of
Computational Thinking and computation into STEM teaching and learning. The
project will address a significant challenge in preparing elementary-aged
children to enter the STEM workforce in coming decades: developing visuospatial
and computational skills that underlie success in gatekeeping high school and
college STEM courses. Visuospatial skills, those related to visual perception of
the spatial relationships of objects, have been documented to vary by gender and
may be influenced by socioeconomic factors. By developing instructional and
assessment strategies that are effective across socioeconomic categories and
work particularly well for subcategories of students who have been found to lag
behind in visuospatial abilities at key grade levels, this project will apply
educational justice theory to help children achieve equal access to quality
instruction, resources, and other educational opportunities. The goal of the
Evaluation of a Model Spatial Thinking Curriculum for Building Computational
Skills in Elementary Grades K-5 project is to iteratively develop and evaluate
supplemental instructional activities that build early computational skills in
elementary-aged children. The project will accomplish this goal by improving
childrens' innate capacities for spatial thinking. Iterative development of the
curriculum over a two-year period will be complemented with a comparison group
study of spatial and Computational Thinking development and achievement.
Formative evaluation conclusions from the curriculum development process and
research findings from the comparison group study will be used to refine the
activities into a format that can be integrated into formal instruction at a
partnering school district, disseminated and evaluated nationally, and built
into in-service and pre-service teacher education programs beginning with the
program at the University of Redlands in California. An e-book containing the
curriculum will be made freely available.