* 1543001
* EBP: The Digital NEST: Building Pathways to Computing Education and Careers for Latino/a Youth
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2015,04/30/2019
* Louise Lyon, ETR Associates
* Standard Grant
* Fay Cobb Payton
* 04/30/2019
* USD 598,612.00

This work examines the extent to which community-based technology centers that
incorporate open educational resources can provide the educational structure
needed to motivate and prepare underserved high school students, particularly
Latino/a students in rural communities, for careers in computer science (CS).
Community centers are uniquely positioned to provide access to relevant
technology and instruction, scaffolding for CS learning, and a network of
support, but there is little research on how to optimize their impact for youth
that are poorly served by their local school systems. This project will lead to
a model for other community technology centers to build educational and career
pathways by leveraging online resources, linking them to national CS standards
as well as local industry needs and supporting that learning with effective
mentorship. It will result in a set of recommended strategies that informal
education centers can use to effectively deliver and complement formal school-
based CS education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is a partnership between a
research organization, ETR Associates and the Digital NEST, a community
technology center that serves Latino/a high school students. The work examines
the efficacy of a suite of educational techniques tailored specifically for CS
education in informal settings. The pedagogical component focuses on the
effective use of badges as motivational learning devices through the development
of digital credentials. Students will engage in hybrid online CS courses aligned
with CSTA K-12 CS standards. In the process, this work assesses the social and
motivational factors that affect engagement and retention in CS education in
community-based informal settings. Given that less than a quarter of all high
schools in the United States offer formal computing education, this research is
positioned to address the growing need for CS education in informal settings and
particularly students in rural settings.