* 1543875
* EAGER: Rheo-NMR measurement of spatiotemporal dynamics in shear banding wormlike micelle solutions
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2017
* Jennifer Brown, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 07/31/2017
* USD 99,999.00

It has been found that during the processing of a class of fluids, e.g.,
surfactants and polymers, the applied shear can lead to non-homogeneities in the
solution, a phenomenon called shear-induced banding. This is a proposal to
develop accurate and elegant experiments to understand this process, impacting
current practice in several industries and potentially allowing the design of
better manufacturing techniques for such materials. Research with impact in
manufacturing addresses an area identified as an area of National need.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The banding of macromolecular soft materials is currently
under investigation theoretically, but there are very few laboratories in the
world that have the capability to conduct the experiments that will determine
the fundamental mechanism behind this phenomenon. The PI's laboratory is one of
these, and she is proposing to develop a molecular level experimental technique
to dynamically observe shear banding. It is proposed to provide experimental
spatiotemporal velocity and microstructure data in order to test existing theory
and inform future modeling efforts relevant to the dynamics of shear banding in
warmlike micelle solutions (WLMs) under time dependent conditions. Specific
objectives include: (1) detect shear banding in WLMs using rapid Rheo-NMR
velocity imaging to test the university criteria proposed by prior theories, (2)
measure and quantify time and lengthscales of velocity fluctuation, as
correlated with transient stress responses, using rapid Rheo-NMR velocity
imaging and flow compensated pulsed gradient spin echo (PGSE) NMR, and (3)
measure molecular level ordering for WLM solutions via 2H spectroscopy as
correlated with shear banding and velocity fluctuation. Rheo-NMR techniques are
non-invasive, non-destructive and offer information ranging from the macroscopic
to the microscopic, providing insight into the formation of shear bands under
start-up conditions and oscillatory flow as well as the coupling between the
flow field, microstructure and transient stress. The proposed work will have an
impact on the polymer, surfactant, chemical and food industry, where control of
material properties and of complex fluids is important. Graduate and
undergraduate student participation is proposed, as well as outreach activities
to URM students across Montana.