* 1543639
* EAGER: Collaborative Research: Computer-Aided Response-to-Intervention for Reading Comprehension Disabilities
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2018
* Chia-LIng Tsai, IONA UNIVERSITY
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 06/30/2018
* USD 165,787.00

The Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS), adopted by 44 states and the District
of Columbia, define the skills a student should demonstrate by the end of each
grade. One key skill emphasized by CCLS is reading ability, which is the
precursor for learning in all content areas. In New York State, students in
grades 3-8 take an English Language Arts (ELA) test each spring to measure their
CCLS achievement in reading. An ELA test contains both multiple choice questions
and open-ended questions based on short text passages; to do well, students
should be able to read a passage closely for textual evidence and draw logical
inferences from it. To report the results, the number of correct student
responses is converted into a scale score; this in turn is divided into four
performance levels: NYS Level 1 for well below proficient, NYS Level 2 for
partially proficient, NYS Level 3 for proficient, and NYS Level 4 for
exceptional in grade-level standards. Schools arrange academic intervention
services for students whose performance level is either NYS Level 1 or NYS Level
2. To drive change in students who are at risk for not meeting academic
expectations, the Response-to-Intervention model aims to deliver instructions as
a function of these assessment outcomes. But the PIs argue that a single
performance score as the assessment outcome is often insufficient for
identifying underlying learning problems, especially in reading comprehension.
In this exploratory project they will focus on discovering error patterns in
assessment outcomes at the lexical level, in the expectation these will
ultimately lead to improved understanding of how the raw data from a pool of
underperforming text-based analytic reading assessments can be transformed into
an informative and understandable structure for delivery of effective reading
comprehension interventions. Project outcomes will complement the current
scoring system by supporting diagnosis at an individual level, and by
facilitating grouping of students with similar reading disabilities in the same
intervention group in order to optimize school teaching resources. The approach
will also support a data-driven instruction framework by maximizing the
information gain from each test, which can result in fewer tests taken and more
hours for teaching per school year.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is an
interdisciplinary collaboration between a computer scientist (Tsai) and an
expert in literacy education (Zakierski). PI Tsai will be responsible for
computer algorithm development and data analysis, whereas PI Zakierski will be
in charge of data collection and evaluation of the proposed approach based on
findings in literacy and pedagogy. The team will build a database containing
words with lexical properties from literature for children up to grade 3,
assessment materials from NYS ELAs, and intervention records. They will annually
collect ELA assessment materials from a pool of approximately 120 third grade
students with performance at NYS Level 2 or below, for both research development
and evaluation. They will develop a computer-aided intervention system that
performs data-mining on underperforming individual ELA assessment materials to
discover error patterns, which should assist the teacher in identifying a
student's underlying reading comprehension problems in order to prepare a more
effective instruction plan. And they will evaluate the performance by doing both
formative and summative assessments, the former to consist of questionnaires for
teachers and mock ELA tests for students taken during the period of
intervention, and the latter being the real ELA tests in April following the
intervention. From the computer science perspective, the main challenge is the
small size of the dataset. The PIs will develop new techniques that are domain-
knowledge driven for performing meaningful analysis to discover error patterns
in such situations; if successful, the approach will open the door to broad
research opportunities in other cases where "small data" is easier to come by.
In addition, the exploration of data mining on literacy education itself will
constitute a unique contribution, since the marriage of the two fields has not
yet received much attention from the research community and there are many
interesting questions waiting to be addressed using computational approaches.