* 1543144
* Integrating Computational Thinking and Environmental Science: Design Based Research on Using Simulated Ecosystems to Improve Student Understanding of Complex System Behavior
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2019
* Robert Chen, New York Hall of Science
* Standard Grant
* Arlene de Strulle
* 08/31/2019
* USD 1,214,739.00

The Computational Thinking in Ecosystems (CT-E) project is funded by the
STEM+Computing Partnership (STEM+C) program, which seeks to advance new
approaches to, and evidence-based understanding of, the integration of computing
in STEM teaching and learning. The project is a collaboration between the New
York Hall of Science (NYSCI), Columbia University's Center for International
Earth Science Information Network, and Design I/O. It will address the need for
improved data, modeling and computational literacy in young people through
development and testing of a portable, computer-based simulation of interactions
that occur within ecosystems and between coupled natural and human systems;
computational thinking skills are required to advance farther in the simulation.
On a tablet computer at NYSCI, each participant will receive a set of virtual
"cards" that require them to enter a computer command, routine or algorithm to
control the behavior of animals within a simulated ecosystem. As participants
explore the animals' simulated habitat, they will learn increasingly more
complex strategies needed for the animal's survival, will use similar
computational ideas and skills that ecologists use to model complex, dynamic
ecological systems, and will respond to the effects of the ecosystem changes
that they and other participants elicit through interaction with the simulated
environment. Research on this approach to understanding interactions among
species within biological systems through integration of computing has potential
to advance knowledge. Researchers will study how simulations that are similar to
popular collectable card game formats can improve computational thinking and
better prepare STEM learners to take an interest in, and advance knowledge in,
the field of environmental science as their academic and career aspirations
evolve. The project will also design and develop a practical approach to
programing complex models, and develop skills in communities of young people to
exercise agency in learning about modeling and acting within complex systems;
deepening learning in young people about how to work toward sustainable
solutions, solve complex engineering problems and be better prepared to address
the challenges of a complex, global society. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Computational
Thinking in the Ecosystems (CT-E) will use a design-based study to prototype and
test this novel, tablet-based collectable card game-like intervention to develop
innovative practices in middle school science. Through this approach, some of
the most significant challenges to teaching practice in the Next Generation
Science Standards will be addressed, through infusing computational thinking
into life science learning. CT-E will develop a tablet-based simulation
representing six dynamic, interconnected ecosystems in which students control
the behaviors of creatures to intervene in habitats to accomplish goals and
respond to changes in the health of their habitat and the ecosystems of which
they are a part. Behaviors of creatures in the simulation are controlled through
the virtual collectable "cards", with each representing a computational process
(such as sequences, loops, variables, conditionals and events). Gameplay
involves individual players choosing a creature and habitat, formulating
strategies and programming that creature with tactics in that habitat (such as
finding food, digging in the ground, diverting water, or removing or planting
vegetation) to navigate that habitat and survive. Habitats chosen by the
participant are part of particular kinds of biomes (such as desert, rain forest,
marshlands and plains) that have their own characteristic flora, fauna, and
climate. Because the environments represent complex dynamic interconnected
environmental models, participants are challenged to explore how these models
work, and test hypotheses about how the environment will respond to their
creature's interventions; but also to the creatures of other players, since
multiple participants can collaborate or compete similar to commercially
available collectable card games (e.g., Magic and Yu-Go-Oh!). NYSCI will conduct
participatory design based research to determine impacts on structured and
unstructured learning settings and whether it overcomes barriers to learning
complex environmental science.