* 1543242
* PFI: AIR - TT:  Single Channel Communication using Full Duplex Systems.
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Ahmed Eltawil, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 08/31/2018
* USD 246,154.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on translating Full-Duplex
(FD) technology to fill the need for efficient use of wireless spectrum
resources in current and emerging wireless communication systems. FD technology
is important because it allows wireless communication devices to receive and
broadcast simultaneously, on the same frequency, thus effectively doubling
spectrum utilization. The project will result in a prototype FD transceiver that
can be easily integrated into current systems, leading to improved capacity and
quality of service. By utilizing FD systems, spectrum assets worth billions of
dollars can be redirected to create new opportunities for growth. This FD
transceiver has the following unique features: a) Fully digital signal
processing, b) reduced cost and c) compact footprint. These features allow for
rapid deployment of compact, low cost, FD wireless systems capable of operating
at double the spectral efficiency of competing Half-Duplex systems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By utilizing smart training heuristics that control a
beam-steerable antenna and new digital cancellation transceiver architectures, a
reduction of more than 100 dB of the self-interfering signal is achievable, thus
allowing for FD communication. Technology gaps between research discovery and
commercial application that will be addressed include developing new heuristics
that are capable of adapting to the dynamic indoor and outdoor wireless
channels, as well as novel robust channel estimation and non-linearity
estimation and mitigation algorithms. Finally, new interference management and
avoidance techniques will be designed to enable robust FD systems. The novelty
of the proposed research is that it aims to bridge the gap between theoretical
performance of FD systems and practical considerations that take into account
the unique features associated with FD systems. In addition, undergraduate and
graduate students affiliated with this project will receive structured
innovation and entrepreneurship experiences through the University of
California, Irvine, Institute for Innovation, which is a hub that connects a
vibrant community of students, scholars, industries and entrepreneurs.