* 1543887
* Meeting: SICB 2016 Parasites and Pests in Motion: Biology, Biodiversity and Climate Change, Portland, Oregon, 3-7 January 2016
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/2015,03/31/2016
* Jason Williams, Dowling College
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 03/31/2016
* USD 8,932.00

Environmental changes related to global temperature may accelerate over time and
impact where species occur on the earth. As a result, species may become exposed
to new enemies, including parasites, pathogens, and predators. Some of these
enemies are of particular interest to humans because they occur in large numbers
as pests with commercial and ecological impacts. Ecologists have increasingly
stressed the importance of predators and parasites in keeping host populations
in check and providing other vital services in ecosystems. Thus, understanding
how changing climate impacts the relationship between parasites and hosts has
broad implications. This research will have direct consequences on issues of
national importance, including: medicine (parasites of humans, disease vectors),
veterinary science (parasites of pets, livestock), and food safety and
biosecurity (parasites, pathogens and pests in agriculture, aquaculture,
livestock). With increasingly numerous reports of plants and animals appearing
in new places, it is timely to examine their potential impacts in those places.
This symposium will provide such an examination.

The objective of the symposium is to bring together researchers working on a
wide variety of natural enemies to exchange knowledge on how aspects of global
change (e.g., warming, sea level rise, ocean acidification, altered
precipitation) may alter the distribution and interactions of pests, parasites,
and host species. Most previous work has overlooked impacts of global change on
interactions between species that have not previously encountered one another.
Speakers are diverse in terms of career development (doctoral students to senior
researchers) and diversity (women and traditionally underrepresented groups).
The symposium will include researchers working on parasites and pests in
terrestrial, marine and freshwater ecosystems. An important outcome of this
symposium will be an edited volume and a broad, new foundation for accurately
modeling and predicting ecological impacts resulting from co-occurring shifts in
the distributions of pathogens, parasites, and hosts.