* 1543744
* Travel Awards for 2015 IEEE International Conference on Bioinformatics and Biomedicine (BIBM-2015)
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2016
* Amarda Shehu, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 07/31/2016
* USD 21,761.00

Bioinformatics and biomedicine research is fundamental to our understanding of
complex biological systems, impacting the science and technology of fields
ranging from agricultural and environmental sciences to pharmaceutical and
medical sciences. This research requires close collaboration among multi-
disciplinary teams of researchers in quantitative sciences, life sciences, and
their interfaces. The 9th Annual IEEE International Conference on Bioinformatics
and Biomedicine (BIBM-2015; http://cci.drexel.edu/ieeebibm/bibm2015/) will
provide an open and interactive forum to promote multi- and interdisciplinary
research and education in Bioinformatics and biomedicine, facilitating the
cross-fertilization of ideas and bridging of knowledge
gaps.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scientific program of BIBM-2015 will cover
synergistic themes on genomics, systems biology, translational bioinformatics,
and cross-cutting bioinformatics infrastructure to promote new research
collaborations. Two special panels, Big Data and Bioinformatics, and the
Bioinformatics Educational Workshop will foster discussions on research and
education opportunities and barriers. IEEE BIBM 2015 engages world-renowned
scientists as keynote speakers and invited speakers, contributed talks at a
highly competitive acceptance rate (the BIBM regular paper acceptance rate is
always less than 20% since its inception), special issue publications in top
scientific journals (so far, BIBM 2015 has confirmed the special issues
publications with 6 journals: IEEE Transactions on NanoBiosciences, IEEE/ACM
Transactions on Computational Biology and Bioinformatics, International Journal
of Data Mining and Bioinformatics, BMC Bioinformatics, BMC Systems Biology, and
BMC Genomics), as well as the board participation of the research community
serving on the Program Committee and the organizing committees for workshops,
tutorials and posters. As an effort to engage young researchers, IEEE BIBM 2015
has involved them in the meeting organization and has included mentoring
activities in the conference program. This award provides the crucial funding
needed to support the participation of early career researchers and graduate
students, especially those from underrepresented groups, as a training
opportunity for the next generation of scientists and engineers, thereby,
broadening the scientific impact of this international conference.