* 1543175
* Integrated STEM and Computing Learning in Formal and Informal Settings for Kindergarten to Grade 2
* EHR,DRL
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2019
* Sean Brophy, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Arlene de Strulle
* 09/30/2019
* USD 2,044,930.00

a result, the STEM+Computing Partnership (STEM+C) program seeks to integrate the
use of computational approaches in K-12 STEM teaching and learning and
understand how this integration can improve STEM learning, engagement, and
persistence. Computational Thinking (CT) is a relatively new educational focus
and a clear need for learners as a 21st century skill. This proposal tackles
this challenging new area for young learners, an area greatly in need of
research and learning materials. The Principal Investigators will develop and
implement integrated STEM+C museum exhibits and integrate CT in their existing
engineering design based PictureSTEM curriculum for K-2 students. They will also
pilot assessments of the CT components of the PictureSTEM curriculum. This work
will make a unique contribution to the available STEM+C learning materials and
assessments. There are few such materials for the kindergarten to second grade
(K-2) population they will work with. They will research the effects of the
curriculum and the exhibits with a mixed methods approach. First, they will
collect observational data and conduct case studies to discover the important
elements of an integrated STEM+C experience in both the formal in-school setting
with the curriculum and in the informal out-of-school setting with families
interacting with the museum exhibits. This work will provide a novel way to
understand the important question of how in- and out-of-school experiences
contribute to the development of STEM and CT thinking and learning. Finally,
they will collect data from all participants to discover the ways that their
activities lead to increases in STEM+C knowledge and interest.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Principal Investigators will build on an integrated
STEM curriculum by integrating CT and develop integrated museum exhibits. They
base both activities on engineering design implemented through challenge based
programming activities. They will research and/or develop assessments of both
STEM+C integrated thinking and CT. Their research strategy combines Design Based
Research and quantitative assessment of the effectiveness of the materials for
learning CT. In the first two years of their study, they will engage in
iterations on the design of the curriculum and the exhibits based on observation
and case-study data. There will be 16 cases that draw from each grade level and
involve data collection for the case student in both schools and museums. They
will also use this work to illuminate what integrated STEM+C thinking and
learning looks like across formal and informal learning environments. Based in
some part on what they discover in this first phase, they will conduct the
quantitative assessments with all (or at least most) students participating in
the study.