* 1543432
* Collaborative Research:  Present and Projected Future Forcings on Antarctic Peninsula Glaciers and Ice Shelves using the Weather Forecasting and Research (WRF) Model
* GEO,OPP
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2021
* Regine Hock, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Cutler
* 03/31/2021
* USD 380,000.00

Hock/1543432&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over the last half century the Antarctic
Peninsula has been among the most rapidly warming regions in the world. This has
led to increased glacier melt, widespread glacier retreat, ice-shelf collapses,
and glacier speed-ups. Many of these changes are driven by changing
precipitation and increased melt due to warmer air temperatures. This project
will use a combination of two models - a regional atmospheric model and a model
of processes at the glacier surface - to simulate future changes in temperature
and snowfall, and the resulting changes in glacier mass. The combination of
models will be tested against the observational record (since 1979 when
satellite observations became available), to verify that it can reproduce
observed change, and then run to the year 2100. Results will provide better
estimates of the impacts of future climate changes over the Antarctic Pensinsula
and the expected glacier mass changes driven by the evolving climate.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will use the large changes observed on the
Peninsula to validate a model framework suitable for understanding the impact of
these changes on the glaciers and ice shelves there, with the goal of developing
optimally constrained future climate and surface mass change scenarios for the
region. The framework will provide both a coherent picture of the impacts of
past changes on the region?s ice cover, and also the best available constraints
on forcings that will determine ice mass loss from this region going forward
under a standard scenario. The Weather Forecasting and Research (WRF) Model will
be used over the domain of the Antarctic Peninsula and neighboring islands to
quantify trends in spatio-temporal patterns of mass change with a focus on
surface melt. The WRF model will be enhanced to account for the specific
conditions of glacier surfaces, and the modified model will be used to simulate
climate conditions and resulting surface mass budgets and melt over the period
1979-2100. Tying modeled past climate changes to the surface and satellite-based
observational record will provide a foundation for interpreting projected future
change. Results will be validated using available weather station observations,
surface mass-balance data, and satellite-derived records of melt. The activity
will foster partnerships through collaboration with colleagues in Spain, Germany
and The Netherlands and will support an early-career postdoctoral researcher and
two graduate students, introduce undergraduate and high-school students to
original research and provide training of students through inclusion of data and
results in course curriculums.