* 1543367
* Middle-Late Devonian Vertebrates of Antarctica
* GEO,OPP
* 07/15/2016,05/31/2022
* Neil Shubin, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Michael E. Jackson
* 05/31/2022
* USD 373,962.00

This research will provide new insights into the relationships and history of
sharks, fish and limbed animals. Understanding these relationships forms the
backbone for both basic and applied science because fish often serve as models
of human traits and diseases. Some of the main lines of evidence for these
relationships come from fossils in rocks over 380 million years old that were
originally deposited as ancient rivers and streams. Because rocks of this type
and age are abundantly exposed along a number of the dry valleys and mountains
of Antarctica, the investigation of these areas holds exceptional promise for
discoveries that can have a broad impact. The fieldwork will involve geological
mapping and assessment of the rocks with detailed reconnaissance for the fossils
that they may hold. Fossil discoveries form the backbone for public
communication of the methods and results of scientific research-- these studies
will be used as vehicles for training of students at multiple levels as well as
communication of science to the broader non-science citizen
base.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The discovery, description, and analysis of Middle to
Late Devonian (390-355 Million years ago) vertebrates and depositional
environments provide important data on the emergence of novel anatomical
structures, faunas, and habitats during a critical interval in the history of
life and earth. Biological innovation during this time includes the early
evolution of freshwater fish, the origins of major groups of vertebrates (e.g.,
sharks, lobe and ray-finned fish, tetrapods), and the expansion and elaboration
of non-marine ecosystems. Accordingly, expanding our knowledge of vertebrate
diversity during the Middle and Late Devonian will provide new evidence on the
relationships of the major groups of vertebrates, the assembly of novelties that
ultimately enabled tetrapods to invade land, the origin and early evolution of
sharks and their relatives, and the assembly and expansion of non-marine
ecosystems generally. The Aztec Siltstone of Antarctica Middle-Late Devonian;
Givetian-Frasnian Stages) has exceptional potential to produce new
paleontological evidence of these events and to illuminate the temporal,
ecological, and geographic context in which they occurred. It is essentially
fossiliferous throughout its known exposure range, something that is rare for
Middle-Late Devonian non-marine rocks anywhere in the world. In addition, fine-
grained meandering stream deposits are abundantly exposed in the Aztec Siltstone
and are recognized as an important locus for the discovery of well-preserved
Devonian fish, including stem tetrapods and their relatives. Given the
exceedingly fossiliferous nature of the Aztec Siltstone, the large number of
taxa known only from partial material, and the amount of promising exposure yet
to be worked, a dedicated reconnaissance, collection, and research effort is
designed to recover important new fossil material and embed it in a
stratigraphic and sedimentological context. The first major objective of this
study is the recovery, preparation, and description of Middle-Late Devonian
fossil taxa. Ensuing investigation of the phylogenetic affinities, taphonomic
occurrence, and stratigraphic position of fossil assemblages will allow both
local and global comparisons of biotic diversity. These analyses will inform: 1)
higher level phylogenetic hypotheses of jawed vertebrates, 2) biostratigraphic
and biogeographic analysis of the distribution of the Middle-Late Devonian fish,
and 3) paleobiological investigation of the elaboration of terrestrial and
freshwater habitats. The broader impacts are derived from the utility of
paleontology and Antarctic expeditionary science as educational tools with
powerful narratives. Specific goals include affiliations with local urban
secondary schools (using established relationships for broadening participation)
and collegiate and graduate training. Wider dissemination of knowledge to the
general public is a direct product of ongoing interactions with national and
international media (print, television, internet).