* 1543325
* Collaborative Research:  Implementing Low-power, Autonomous Observing Systems to Improve the Measurement and Understanding of Antarctic Precipitation
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Scott Landolt, University Corporation For Atmospheric Res
* Standard Grant
* David Sutherland
* 08/31/2021
* USD 276,671.00

Accurately measuring precipitation in Antarctica is important for purposes such
as calculating Antarctica?s mass balance and contribution to global sea level
rise, interpreting ice core records, and validating model- and satellite-based
precipitation estimates. There is a critical need for reliable, autonomous,
long-term measurements of Antarctic precipitation in order to better understand
its variability in space in time. Such records over time are essentially absent
from the continent, despite their importance. This project will deploy and test
instrumentation to measure and record rates of snowfall and blowing snow in
Antarctica.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project goals are based on installation of four
low-power, autonomous Antarctic precipitation systems (APS) co-located at
automatic weather station (AWS) sites in the Ross Island region of Antarctica.
The APSs are designed with an integrated sensor approach to provide multiple
types of observations of snow accumulation types at the test sites. The APSs are
designed to construct an accurate timeline of snow accumulation, and to
distinguish the water equivalent of fallen precipitation from surface blowing
(lofted) snow, a prime confounding factor. The standard suite of instruments to
be deployed includes: precipitation gauge with double Alter windshield, laser
disdrometer, laser snow height sensor, optical precipitation detector,
anemometer at gauge height, and a visible /infrared webcam. These instruments
have previously been shown to work well in cold regions applications.