* 1543361
* Collaborative Research:  Tephrochronology of a South Pole Ice Core
* GEO,OPP
* 04/01/2016,08/31/2022
* Martin Yates, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* Paul Cutler
* 08/31/2022
* USD 242,023.00

Dunbar/1543454&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Antarctic ice cores offer unparalleled
records of earth?s climate back to almost one million years and perhaps beyond.
Layers of volcanic ash (tephra) embedded in glacial ice can be used to establish
an accurate ice core chronology. In order to use a visible or ultrafine volcanic
ash layer as a time-stratigraphic marker, a unique geochemical fingerprint must
be established, and this forms the basis of our research. This award will
investigate the volcanic record in the 1751 m ice core that was completed at the
South Pole during the 2015/16 field season. The core is in an ideal location to
link the existing, established, volcanic records in East and West Antarctica,
and therefore to connect and integrate those records, allowing the climate
records of ice cores to be directly compared, as well as to focus research on
the most widespread and significant volcanic eruptions from West Antarctica.
Tephra derived from well-dated, large, tropical volcanic eruptions that may have
had an impact on climate will also be studied. Recent success in identifying and
analyzing very fine ash particles from these types of eruptions makes it likely
that we will be able to pinpoint some of these eruptions, which will allow the
sulfate peaks associated with these layers to be positively identified and
dated. Volcanic forcing time series developed from earlier South Pole ice cores
based on preserved sulfate were crucial for testing climate models, but without
tephra analysis, the origin of these layers remains uncertain.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Work on the tephra layers in the South Pole ice core has a
number of significant specific objectives, some with practical applications to
the basic science goals of Antarctic ice coring, and others that represent
independent scientific contributions in their own right. These include: (1)
providing independently dated time-intervals in the core, particularly for the
deepest ice, (2) quantitatively linking tephra records across Antarctica with
the goal of allowing direct and robust climate comparisons between these
different parts of the continent, (3) providing information for large local
eruptions, that will lead to direct estimates of eruption magnitude and
dispersal patterns of Antarctic volcanoes, several of which will likely erupt
again. The initial stages of the work will be carried out by identifying
silicate-bearing horizons in the ice core, using several methods. Once found,
silicate particles will be imaged so that morphological characteristics of the
particles can be used to identify volcanic origin. Particles identified as
tephra will then be chemically analyzed using electron microprobe and laser
ablation ICP-MS. Samples that yield a robust chemical fingerprint will be
statistically correlated to known eruptions, and this will be used to address
the goals described above. Broader impacts of this project fall into the areas
of education of future generation of researchers, outreach and international
cooperation. These activities will continue to promote forward progress in
integrating the Antarctic tephra record and more broadly tying it to the global
volcanic record.