* 1543841
* CBMS Conference: Topological Data Analysis: Topology, Geometry and Statistics, May 23-27, 2016; Austin, TX
* MPS,DMS
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2016
* Lizhen Lin, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 12/31/2016
* USD 37,541.00

This award will support a 5-day conference in topological data analysis at the
University of Texas at Austin in the spring of 2016. Topological data analysis
(TDA) has recently emerged as an active new field of research, which has
generated great interest across mathematics, statistics, computer science,
machine learning, and electrical engineering communities. TDA is being applied
to image analysis, neuroscience, networks analysis, morphology, genetics,cancer
research and other problems. The interdisciplinary nature of TDA naturally leads
to the literature and the active researchers being scattered across different
fields. This lack of a cohesive disciplinary home makes it difficult for junior
researchers and in particular graduate students from statistics to obtain
exposure to the field. The proposed workshop strives to fill this gap by
focusing on tutorial and overview talks on topological data analysis and
providing hands-on data analysis sessions. The conference will feature Professor
Sayan Mukherjee from Duke University as the principal lecturer, and five
additional invited speakers. The goal of the conference is to introduce graduate
students and junior researchers to TDA, an active new field, which lies at the
exciting intersection of topology, geometry, and statistics. This conference
will also serve as an opportunity to foster research collaborations and chart
possible future directions for research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The program will
provide an overview of how geometry and topology can be used for statistical
inference. The proposed outline develops a framework for how geometry and
topology is used for some common tasks in statistical inference including
mixture models, modeling surfaces and shapes, extensions of spectral clustering,
as well as machine learning aspects such as semisupervised learning. There will
be some applied and data analysis aspects to the lecture where some common
Topological Data Analysis codes will be used to model shape data, specifically
computerized tomography (CT) scans of bones and organs. Applied aspects of the
program will include applications of the methodology developed in quantitative
genetics, statistical genetics, as well as computer vision applications. Another
component of the program is focusing on the role of geometry in statistics. Some
of the invited speakers such as Professors Rabi Bhattacharya and Susan Holmes
will deliver lectures on this topics.