* 1543136
* Broadening Participation of Elementary School Teachers and Students in Computer Science through STEM Integration and Statewide Collaboration
* EHR,DRL
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2021
* Joyce Malyn-Smith, Education Development Center
* Standard Grant
* M. Alejandra Sorto
* 09/30/2021
* USD 2,740,793.00

Computing has become an integral part of the practice of in modern science,
technology engineering, and mathematics (STEM) fields. As a result, the
STEM+Computing Partnership (STEM+C) program seeks to integrate the use of
computational approaches in K-12 STEM teaching and learning and understand how
this integration can improve STEM learning, engagement, and persistence.
Computational Thinking (CT) is a relatively new educational focus and a clear
need for learners as a 21st century skill. This proposal tackles this
challenging new area for young learners, an area greatly in need of research and
learning materials. This project will develop integrated STEM and CT modules for
grades 1-6 that follow new Massachusetts standards for Digital Literacy and
Computer Science. They will partner with the Massachusetts Department of
Elementary and Secondary Education (ESE) for the development and implementation.
There are almost no curriculum materials and accompanying assessments developed
and tested for CT in this grade band. This development work alone would give the
proposal potential for broader impact. However, a set of materials and
accompanying Professional Development (PD) for teachers who will employ the
materials of the quality that the authors propose has a tremendous potential for
broader impact. This is improved by the strong partnership with the
Massachusetts Department of Elementary and Secondary Education for both
development and implementation and the alignment with newly developed standards
for Digital Literacy and Computer Science in Massachusetts. 100 teachers will
participate in the PD. The set of modules will be used in the 1,154 elementary
schools in Massachusetts immediately and they plan to disseminate further. The
assessments the team will develop and share will enable many researchers to
quickly improve their research in CT learning, as currently, there are no strong
assessments available. The research plan will not only examine the effectiveness
of the curriculum by examining both changes in student and teacher learning and
attitudes towards CT, it will also investigate how the modules are implemented
and deepen the field's understanding of what is effective STEM+C integration
practices and of how teachers can best address the challenges that arise.

This project will develop, implement and test 18 integrated STEM and CT modules
for grades 1-6 based on the new Massachusetts standards for Digital Literacy and
Computer Science. They will partner with the Massachusetts Department of
Elementary and Secondary Education for the development and implementation. Their
first research question investigates how teachers teach with the materials and
how to help teachers overcome obstacles in this area. They will use a
combination of survey and Design Based research methodologies to address this
question through activity feedback and summary logs for teachers for each
module, notes from teacher professional learning community meetings, selected
classroom field notes, and through developing and employing a fidelity of
implementation measure. The second research question investigates the effects of
the modules on student and teacher learning and attitudes of CT. The will
develop and/or adapt a teacher survey and student CT assessments. The will use
these in a comparison study with approximately 200 classrooms, half in a control
condition and half in the treatment condition, resulting in approximately 2500
students per condition. In addition to the traditional dissemination methods of
journal and conference publications and presentations, these modules and the
associated assessments will immediately become part of Massachusetts elementary
school curriculum, and will be available at no cost from the State of
Massachusetts Department of Elementary and Secondary Education website.