* 1543771
* Grace Hopper Celebration of Women in Computing (GHC) Scholarship Program
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2016
* Roshni Kasad, Anita Borg Institute for Women and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Kamau Bobb
* 06/30/2016
* USD 157,860.00

This award provides funding for approximately one hundred undergraduate and
graduate students to attend the 2015 Grace Hopper Celebration (GHC), an annual
conference focused on the needs of technical women in computing. It brings
research and career interests of women in computing to the forefront in order to
encourage and support women to pursue, remain, and advance in computing. NSF
scholarship support allows students who could not otherwise attend to
participate and to become part of the larger community of computing
professionals that is cultivated at the conference. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual merit of this project lies in the access to the many technical
presentations and researchers at GHC. The conference exposes students to a wide
range of leading edge scientists, researchers, and visionaries from industry and
academia who serve as role models and mentors. It showcases participants'
technical success and provides a forum for exploration of the frontiers of the
discipline and a dialogue between students and leading practitioners and
researchers while offering opportunities for professional
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Past GHC conferences have been shown to break
down the barriers to women pursuing careers in computing. The broader impacts of
students participating in this conference include: increased student intention
to remain in computing and pursue higher studies; broadening of attendees'
knowledge of technical fields; breaking the feelings of isolation common among
women in computing disciplines; and instilling confidence to pursue computing
careers. This travel scholarship support provides a unique opportunity to
directly affect the careers of future computer scientists and meet the challenge
of broadening participation in computing.