* 1543383
* Antarctic Fish and MicroRNA Control of Development and Physiology
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Harry Detrich, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Burns
* 08/31/2019
* USD 870,151.00

Icefish live in frigid Antarctic seas, and have unique traits such as the
absence of red blood cells, enlarged hearts, large diameter blood vessels, low
bone mineral densities, and fat droplets that disrupt their muscles. These
features would be harmful in other animals. In mammals and fish inhabiting warm
waters, development of organs involved in these traits is modulated by genes
that encode specific proteins, but the rate of protein production is often
regulated by short RNA molecules called microRNAs (miRNAs). Genes that code for
proteins must first make an RNA copy, and the actual protein is made from this
RNA copy intermediate. MiRNAs regulate the amount of protein that is made by
binding to the RNA intermediate and interrupting its production of protein.
Binding of miRNAs to RNA depends strongly on temperature. Regulation of genes by
miRNAs has not been studied in Antarctic fish, which live in seas with
temperatures below the freezing point of fresh water. This project will compare
miRNA regulation 1) in Antarctic fish vs. warm-water fish to learn how miRNAs
regulate gene expression in constant cold; and 2) in Antarctic icefish with no
red blood cells, enlarged hearts, and reduced bone density vs. closely related
Antarctic fish containing red blood cells, normal hearts, and dense bones. The
project will have broad impacts to science and society nationally and globally.
First, this will be the first study of important factors in gene regulation
(miRNAs) in Antarctic fish, which are an essential component of the entire
ecology of the Southern Ocean, and will shed light on how these fish might
respond to the warming of Antarctic waters. Second, it will bring Antarctic
science to under-represented high school students at a local alternative
downtown high school by conducting video conferences during the Antarctic field
seasons and hosting student investigations of Antarctic fish in the research
laboratory.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;microRNAs (miRNAs) are key post-
transcriptional regulators of gene expression that modulate development and
physiology in temperate animals. Although miRNAs act by binding to messenger
RNAs (mRNAs), a process that is strongly sensitive to temperature, miRNAs have
yet not been studied in Antarctic animals, including Notothenioid fish, which
dominate the Southern Ocean. This project will compare miRNA regulation in 1)
Antarctic vs. temperate fish to learn the roles of miRNA regulation in
adaptation to constant cold; and in 2) bottom-dwelling, dense-boned, red-blooded
Nototheniods vs. high buoyancy, osteopenic, white-blooded icefish to understand
miRNA regulation in specialized organs after the evolution of the loss of
hemoglobin genes and red blood cells, the origin of enlarged heart and
vasculature, and the evolution of increased buoyancy, which arose by decreased
bone mineralization and increased lipid deposition. Aim 1 is to test the
hypothesis that Antarctic fish evolved miRNA-related genome specializations in
response to constant cold. The project will compare four Antarctic Notothenioid
species to two temperate Notothenioids and two temperate laboratory species to
test the hypotheses that (a) Antarctic fish evolved miRNA genome repertoires by
loss of ancestral genes and/or gain of new genes, (b) express miRNAs that are
involved in cold tolerance, and (c) respond to temperature change by changing
miRNA gene expression. Aim 2 is to test the hypothesis that the evolution of
icefish from red-blooded bottom-dwelling ancestors was accompanied by an altered
miRNA genomic repertoire, sequence, and/or expression. The project will test the
hypotheses that (a) miRNAs in icefish evolved in sequence and/or in expression
in icefish specializations, including head kidney (origin of red blood cells);
heart (changes in vascular system), cranium and pectoral girdle (reduced bone
mineral density); and skeletal muscle (lipid deposition), and (b) miRNAs that
evolved in icefish specializations had ancestral functions related to their
derived roles in icefish, as determined by functional tests of zebrafish
orthologs of icefish miRNAs in developing zebrafish. The program will isolate,
sequence, and determine the expression of miRNAs and mRNAs using high-throughput
transcriptomics and novel software. Results will show how the microRNA system
evolves in vertebrate animals pushed to physiological extremes and provide
insights into the prospects of key species in the most rapidly warming part of
the globe.