* 1543098
* PFI:AIR - TT:  High-precision, low-cost GPS cloud service
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2015,02/28/2018
* Akos Ledeczi, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 02/28/2018
* USD 202,231.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project addresses the void between
expensive, survey-grade outdoor GPS-based localization technologies and low-
cost, lower-accuracy techniques, such as the ones found in smartphones. The
technology is based upon a novel GPS-based methodology that marries the
precision found in industrial-grade methodologies with the low costs of off-the-
shelf consumer-grade components. Current competing solutions (RTK, D-GPS, etc.)
suffer from high cost, technical complexity, and other constraints, making them
inaccessible to a large market segment of potential users. The lack of
affordable and accurate solutions restricts the availability of further
innovations and better product offerings by companies and developers in
location-aware markets that would be otherwise inclined to use such solutions,
including applications such as sports tracking, self driving cars, drones, and
do-it-yourself land surveying. Successful completion of this project will result
in a robust and scalable prototype, providing accuracies approaching those of
professional-grade positioning in a viable consumer-grade price range. This will
enable further innovation in this field, and it may lead to new application
areas that have not yet been conceived due to limitations of the current state
of the art.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project addresses a number of known
technology gaps as it translates from research discovery toward commercial
application, including 1) developing a novel approach for combining inertial and
GPS measurements without a stationary calibration phase, 2) making the
technology robust in challenging GPS environments such as dense urban areas and
forests, and 3) devising a new approach to "Localization as a Service" by
integrating the algorithms in a scalable cloud platform, utilizing a potentially
crowd-sourced network of low-cost base stations for increased robustness and
accuracy. Some of these contributions are novel research areas themselves and
some are based on known techniques, but each one is made possible due to the
interplay between the contributions as a whole and the basic GPS-based
localization research upon which this translation project is built. The result
of overcoming these technical hurdles and integrating them into a cloud-based
platform will be an easy-to-use, low-complexity localization service that can
provide professional-grade accuracies at a fraction of the cost of existing
commercial solutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to producing an
industrial-grade prototype, the team members involved in this project, including
a postdoctoral researcher and a graduate student, will receive invaluable
entrepreneurial and academia-to-industry technology translation experiences, not
only through continued interactions with potential customers, but also by
navigating the business and legal landscape of licensing the existing IP from
Vanderbilt University, developing strategic partnerships with businesses who
desire to integrate this product into their own, and learning how to best
utilize the resources available, both from academia and from industry.