* 1543031
* Seasonality, Summer Cooling, and Calibrating the Approach of the Icehouse in Late Eocene Antarctica
* GEO,OPP
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2021
* Scott Samson, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Michael E. Jackson
* 03/31/2021
* USD 353,719.00

In order to understand what environmental conditions might look like for future
generations, we need to turn to archives of past times when the world was indeed
warmer, before anyone was around to commit them to collective memory. The
geologic record of Earth's past offers a glimpse of what could be in store for
the future. Research by Ivany and her team looks to Antarctica during a time of
past global warmth to see how seasonality of temperature and rainfall in coastal
settings are likely to change in the future. They will use the chemistry of
fossils (a natural archive of these variables) to test a provocative hypothesis
about near-monsoonal conditions in the high latitudes when the oceans are warm.
If true, we can expect high-latitude shipping lanes to become more hazardous and
fragile marine ecosystems adapted to constant cold temperatures to suffer. With
growing information about how human activities are likely to affect the planet
in the future, we will be able to make more informed decisions about policies
today. This research involves an international team of scholars, including
several women scientists, training of graduate students, and a public museum
exhibit to educate children about how we study Earth's ancient climate and what
we can learn from it.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Antarctica is key to an understanding
how Earth?s climate system works under conditions of elevated CO2. The poles are
the most sensitive regions on the planet to climate change, and the equator-to-
pole temperature gradient and the degree to which high-latitude warming is
amplified are important components for climate models to capture. Accurate proxy
data with good age control are therefore critical for testing numerical models
and establishing global patterns. The La Meseta Formation on Seymour Island is
the only documented marine section from the globally warm Eocene Epoch exposed
in outcrop on the continent; hence its climate record is integral to studies of
warming. Early data suggest the potential for strongly seasonal precipitation
and runoff in coastal settings. This collaboration among paleontologists,
geochemists, and climate modelers will test this using seasonally resolved
del-18O data from fossil shallow marine bivalves to track the evolution of
seasonality through the section, in combination with independent proxies for the
composition of summer precipitation (leaf wax del-D) and local seawater (clumped
isotopes). The impact of the anticipated salinity stratification on regional
climate will be evaluated in the context of numerical climate model simulations.
In addition to providing greater clarity on high-latitude conditions during this
time of high CO2, the combination of proxy and model results will provide
insights about how Eocene warmth may have been maintained and how subsequent
cooling came about. As well, a new approach to the analysis of shell carbonates
for 87Sr/86Sr will allow refinements in age control so as to allow correlation
of this important section with other regions to clarify global climate
gradients. The project outlined here will develop new and detailed paleoclimate
records from existing samples using well-tuned as well as newer proxies applied
here in novel ways. Seasonal extremes are climate parameters generally
inaccessible to most studies but critical to an understanding of climate change;
these are possible to resolve in this well-preserved, accretionary-macrofossil-
bearing section. This is an integrated study that links marine and terrestrial
climate records for a key region of the planet across the most significant
climate transition in the Cenozoic.