* 1543929
* BREAD ABRDC: Advanced Technologies to Get Improved Yams in Farmers Hands
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2024
* Wayne Curtis, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 05/31/2024
* USD 647,733.00

Dioscorea (or yam) is a vital cash crop in the developing world and particularly
for farmers in Africa and throughout the tropics. A critical need for growing
yam economically is to develop low-cost plant growth systems that permit
production and breeding of yam crops that are free from disease, resistant to
stress and highly productive. Costs of breeding must be minimal for shareholder
farmers to ensure food security. This research project is developing the low-
cost methods to generate disease-free yam tubers, which are the underground
edible stems that can also serve as starting material for continued propagation.
The project is developing an efficient and improved bioreactor, or vessel, that
will enable proliferation of "starter" yams from non-seed tissue, such as
leaves, stems or flowers. By hormonal and nutrient manipulation in the
bioreactor, the project will develop inexpensive methods to propagate disease-
free and stress-resistant strains of yams. The project collaborates with the
University of Ibadan in Nigeria and the International Institute for Tropical
Agriculture in Kenya to reduce costs for shareholder farmers by improving
bioreactor technology. In the process, undergraduate students will be trained
and educated in advanced breeding methods. Web-based resources and multimedia
efforts will help educate the public, other researchers and farmers. The project
includes direct involvement of researchers in Africa and direct educational
programs with smallholder farmers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Temporary immersion
bioreactor (TIB) systems will be developed utilizing open-source and inexpensive
technology to generate plants as inexpensively as possible in a format that can
be translated into relatively low-technology implementation environments. The
specific focus on Dioscorea (yam) species provides a target plant species that
has important economic impact on countries such as Nigeria where it is an
important food source and cash crop to smallholder farmers. Since tissue culture
methods of yam are minimally developed, the work will include other plant
species such as Musa (banana) and cassava, which have efficient regeneration
systems in place, while further developing tissue culture methods for yam.
Recent advances in TIB systems have demonstrated the ability to inexpensively
control the composition of the liquid as well as the gas phase. Therefore, a
focus of the research is to utilize this control to improve the rates of plant
production. Genomics and bioinformatics have made it possible to quickly
identify embryogenic proteins. These proteins will be produced by expression in
bacteria, and then tested for ability to improve embryogenesis in yam and more
generally in plants. A web resource will be generated to facilitate
collaboration that identifies people, methods and literature as well as provide
a forum for disseminating the results of the research through videos,
instructions, etc. The project will culminate with a workshop held in Africa to
engage and educate yam stakeholders with a focus on providing education to
farmers and others to take advantage of the open technology that has been
developed.