* 1543863
* Proposal for Supporting US-Based Students to Attend the 2015 IEEE International Conference on Data Mining; Atlantic City, NJ; November 14-17, 2015.
* CSE,IIS
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2016
* Yong Ge, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 06/30/2016
* USD 24,000.00

This grant provides travel support for U.S. based graduate student participants
to attend the 2015 International Conference on Data Mining (ICDM 2015), which
will be held in Atlantic City, NJ, USA on November 14-17, 2015. ICDM has
established itself as the world's premier research conference in data mining. It
provides an international forum for presentation of original research results,
as well as exchange and dissemination of innovative, practical development
experiences. The conference covers all aspects of data mining, including
algorithms, software and systems, and applications, as well as related areas
such as data management, machine learning and bioinformatics. The conference
proceedings are published by IEEE. The conference seeks to continuously advance
the state-of-the-art in data mining. With the growth of the Web, the Internet,
and data intensive technologies such as Sensor Networks, and Bioinformatics,
Data Mining is an extremely important area in Information Technology. Besides
the technical program, the conference features workshops, tutorials, panels,
data mining contest, and since this year, the Ph.D. forum. A strong
representation of U.S. researchers at the Conference is useful in maintaining
U.S. competitiveness in this important area. The total number of ICDM
participants in the past has been in excess of 500, with a majority of the
participants from the U.S., then Europe and Asia. It is expected to provide
scholarships to 16 U.S. based graduate student participants. This grant will
partially support the travel costs for the U.S. based graduate student
participants. This project will promote students? exposure to research and
enhance the integration of research and education. This project will greatly
broaden the dissemination of research results to more graduate students.
Particularly, the committee will consider candidates who are under-
representative in the past meetings, and thus enhance the diversity in the
field. The award results will be announced at the ICDM 2015 conference website
(http://icdm2015.stonybrook.edu).