* 1543061
* Research on Practice Using STEM Inquiry Embedded with Computational Thinking in Elementary School
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2021
* Andrew Elby, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Arlene de Strulle
* 08/31/2021
* USD 1,013,651.00

The project will research the results of integrating scientific inquiry and
computational thinking in elementary schools, focusing on grades 2-5. The need
for strengthening computational thinking within STEM education is now recognized
as an important priority, but computational thinking receives little attention
in our nation's classrooms. Most resources like this to date have been seen as
add-ons to the curriculum and have not been widely adopted. In collaboration
with teachers, the project will create exemplar lessons that will embed
computational thinking in scientific inquiry rather than teaching it as an
isolated topic. In intensive summer workshops and afterschool meetings during
the academic year, teachers will be engaged in their own adult-level
computational thinking and scientific inquiry, to help them develop their own
sense of what scientific inquiry and computational thinking are. Starting with
the exemplar lessons, the project will work with the teachers to iteratively
modify, implement, and refine those lessons. The project research will
investigate how and to what extent this approach enhances teacher and subsequent
student understanding (through the lessons they have developed) of computational
thinking and inquiry. The project will directly impact 20 teachers in 3 schools,
and over 1000 students. The resulting model of integrated curriculum and teacher
professional development will be widely disseminated at professional conference
for researchers and teachers. The model of integrated curriculum and teacher
professional development developed by this exploratory project will be developed
for potential future scale-up. Computing has become an integral part of everyday
practice within modern fields of science, technology, engineering, and math
(STEM). As a result, the STEM+Computing Partnerships (STEM+C) program seeks to
advance new approaches to, and evidence-based understanding of, the integration
of computing in STEM teaching and learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
will research the effectiveness of teaching computational thinking by embedding
it in the process of science inquiry rather than teaching coding and
computational thinking separately and then imposing that on science inquiry.
Instead of directly teaching coding, the project will introduce computational
ways of thinking, such as algorithmic thinking, problem decomposition,
flowcharts, debugging, loops, etc., that can be used in the inquiry process. The
project will research if the prototype curriculum supports integrated
computational thinking and inquiry, how the curriculum influences student
perceptions toward computing and science inquiry, and how teacher professional
development activities improve their computational thinking and influences their
classroom practices. The research will use a variety of research techniques,
including think-aloud interviews, surveys, analysis of classroom video,
classroom observations and field notes.