* 1544559
* MATH:  CONFERENCE:  Broadening Participation in Mathematics Education through Practitioner Inquiry
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2016
* Estela Bensimon, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* John Haddock
* 07/31/2016
* USD 49,957.00

A National priority is to increase the diversity of the science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics (STEM) workforce. One important way to accomplish
this is to increase the racial and ethnic diversity of students entering and
graduating in STEM disciplines. In line with this, mathematics faculty members
play a significant role as instructors, mentors, and curriculum developers in
student success and progress towards a STEM degree. However, few mathematics
faculty are provided professional training that exposes them to teaching
practices tailored to support the success, for example, of African American,
Latino, and Native American students. This project is a conference/workshop with
a threefold purpose. (1) The investigators will engage approximately thirty-five
(35) mathematics faculty members from community colleges in Colorado - where
mathematics curriculum reform is already underway - in learning techniques to
develop culturally inclusive pedagogical practices and increase the success of
historically underserved students in mathematics coursework. These techniques
are based on an approach to data use and educational change known as
practitioner inquiry. Recent studies of curricular and pedagogical reforms in
STEM fields provide evidence that strategies involving practitioner inquiry are
promising approaches to bringing about cultural and organizational change. (2)
The researchers will gather information on conference participants' willingness
to undertake curriculum reforms, and if so, under what conditions of
institutional support. (3) Conference evaluation results will be analyzed to
design future interventions involving mathematics faculty in community colleges,
thereby supporting a United States goal to broaden participation in
STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main goals of the workshop are to gauge faculty
attitudes, beliefs, and willingness to engage in inquiry as a technique to
enable math faculty to incorporate new knowledge and cultural competencies into
their educational practice. The conference evaluation will support the
investigation by exploring the following research questions: What information,
concepts, and models from existing practice stimulate interest among mathematics
educators to learn about culturally inclusive pedagogies? What information,
concepts, and models from existing practice have a positive influence on
mathematics educators' intentions to participate in practitioner inquiry and
carry out curricular and pedagogical changes designed to broaden participation
in mathematics coursework? Mathematics faculty members' experience of the
conference will inform the design of new inquiry methods as well as outreach and
dissemination strategies that further promote mathemtics faculty implementation
of culturally inclusive pedagogy.