* 1544174
* Research Initiation: Effectively Integrating Sustainability within an Engineering Program
* ENG,EEC
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2018
* Carolyn Plumb, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Julie Martin
* 12/31/2018
* USD 150,000.00

The engineering curriculum typically focuses exclusively on the technical
aspects of the engineering profession. This technical emphasis alone can be a
barrier for students to enter engineering. Furthermore, students receiving only
technical preparation are less able to approach complex problems involving
multiple perspectives, e.g. ethics, economics, social justice, etc.
Sustainability is a fundamentally complex issue that covers many of these
additional perspectives. Thus, topics in sustainable energy engineering, such as
hydraulic fracture oil well stimulation (fracking), can be used to not only
teach technical engineering concepts but also expose students to broader issues.
By considering these complex engineering problems more holistically, students
from a range of diverse backgrounds (particularly women and Native Americans)
will more likely enter and remain in engineering. These students will then be
better prepared to address the major challenges facing society. This project is
initiating research into how best to integrate these sustainability topics
throughout the curriculum to maximize these benefits in engineering education.
To spread successful elements, the research team is facilitating
institutionally-sponsored effective teaching and sustainability workshops for
engineering faculty as well as K-12 STEM teachers. More broadly, the results
will increase awareness of the engineering profession and its association with
issues in sustainability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall research aim is to
improve the professional formation (recruitment, retention, and preparation) of
diverse engineering students by integrating sustainability within engineering
education programs. This research is studying the effectiveness of integration
approaches within different required and elective undergraduate engineering
courses, as well as within engineering faculty development and outreach
activities. Two basic questions are being addressed related to the integration
methods: (1) does it work? and (2) what are the barriers? Framing the proposed
research are theoretical models describing student learning styles; cognitive,
social and professional development; sustainability literacy; as well as the
ontology of and attitudes toward engineering. These aims are being accomplished
by leveraging existing resources within the Chemical Engineering program at
Montana State University: a recently-tenured engineering faculty member (PI);
two unique engineering elective courses including a large, entry-level "energy
and sustainability" university-core science course aimed at non-STEM majors, and
a smaller upper-level engineering elective course focused on "sustainable
energy"; a pre-tenure engineering faculty collaborator (Co-PI) who instructs a
large required engineering course (fluid mechanics); an established educational
psychologist (Co-PI) experienced with theoretical frameworks, assessment, and
data collection and analysis; and, ongoing outreach activities including
engineering student presentations to local 4th grade classrooms and workshops
for both MSU engineering faculty and K-12 teachers on Native American
reservations. The PIs are systematically investigating the integration of
contemporary sustainability issues within the three undergraduate engineering
courses and various workshop and outreach activities. Ad hoc interdisciplinary
teams of professionals within academia and industry are being established to
grow engineering education research capacity and help align future research
directions with industry needs. Validated and/or adapted assessment instruments
and analyses of candid research participant comments will provide rich
quantitative and qualitative data sets from unique research participant cohorts.
Periodic assessment of participant cohorts and control groups is being conducted
to determine legacy impacts, and results will help inform future research and
innovation in engineering education.