* 1544621
* CPS: Breakthrough: Collaborative Research: WARP: Wide Area assisted Resilient Protection
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2015,07/31/2019
* Rajesh Kavasseri, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 07/31/2019
* USD 314,074.00

The electric power grid experiences disturbances all the time that are routinely
controlled, managed, or eliminated by system protection measures- designed by
careful engineering studies and fine-tuned by condensing years of operational
experience. Despite this, the grid sometimes experiences disruptive events that
can quickly, and somewhat unstoppably catapult the system towards a blackout.
Arresting such blackouts has remained elusive - mainly because relays
(protection devices) operate on local data, and are prone to hidden faults that
are impossible to detect until they manifest, resulting in misoperations that
have sometime been precipitators or contributors to blackouts. Inspired by the
Presidential policy directive on resilience -- meaning the ability to
anticipate, prepare, withstand, and recover from disruptive events, this project
proposes "WARP: Wide Area assisted Resilient Protection", a paradigm that adds a
layer of finer (supervisory) intelligence to supplement conventional protection
wisdom - which we call resilient protection. Exploiting high fidelity
measurements and computation to calculate and analyze energy function components
of power systems to identify disturbances, WARP would allow relays to be
supervised - correct operations would be corroborated, and misoperations will be
remedied by judiciously reversing the relay operation in a rational time-frame.
The project also envisions predicting instability using advanced estimation
techniques, thus being proactive. This will provide power grid the ability to
auto-correct and bounce back from misoperations, curtailing the size, scale and
progression of blackouts and improving the robustness and resilience of the
electric grid -- our nation's most critical
infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In WARP, disruptive events are deciphered
by using synchrophasor data, energy functions, and dynamic state information via
particle filtering. The information is fused to provide a global data set and
intelligence signal that supervises relays, and also to predict system
stability. Resilience is achieved when the supervisory signal rectifies the
misoperation of relays, or endorses their action when valid. This endows relays
with post-event-auto-correct abilities &amp;#8232;- a feature that never been
explored/understood in the protection-stability nexus. Architectures to study
the effect of latency and bad data are proposed. WARP introduces new notions:
global detectability and distinguishability for power system events, stability
prediction based on&amp;#8232;the sensitivity of the energy function components
and uses a novel factorization method: (CUR) preserving data interpretability to
reduce data dimensionality. All the proposed&amp;#8232;tools will be wrapped
into a simulation framework to assess scalability and accuracy-runtime
tradeoffs, and quantify the degree of resilience achieved. The effectiveness of
the proposed scheme during extreme events will be measured by reenacting two
well-documented blackout sequences. In addition, simulations on benchmarked
systems will be performed to assess scalability and accuracy-runtime tradeoffs,
and quantify the degree of resilience achieved.