* 1544192
* Research Initiation: Assessing the Effectiveness of the Professional Formation of Engineering Students at The College of New Jersey
* ENG,EEC
* 10/01/2015,03/31/2018
* Seung-yun Kim, The College of New Jersey
* Standard Grant
* Julie Martin
* 03/31/2018
* USD 149,986.00

Creating and retaining a robust workforce of highly-skilled engineers is very
important for sustaining and improving the United States and global economies,
which are increasingly reliant on technical innovation that comes from the field
of engineering. Equally important is the development of highly ethical and
professional standards within this group of innovative practitioners. The School
of Engineering at The College of New Jersey (TCNJ) has formulated a well-
balanced liberal arts core integrated with a solid and robust engineering
curricular sequence that promises to: (1) improve the retention of engineering
students, (2) instill highly ethical and professional standards throughout the
four years of the engineering curriculum, and (3) for alumni: a) inspire and
strongly encourage them to enhance their engineering knowledge and skills, and
b) strive for setting challenging professional goals and achieving them in a
timely manner. The architects of this curriculum model have joined forces with
faculty from the Department of Sociology to construct the necessary surveying
tools and procedures for a comprehensive examination of the degree of
effectiveness and the timing of the different interventions and reinforcements
built into this promising model. The findings from these evaluations would
enable this multi-disciplinary research team to develop a much deeper
understanding for further calibration of this curriculum for optimal results.
The techniques, surveying tools, and procedures used for conducting this two-
year study, along with a summary of the results, will be made available at the
national level for potential adoption, examination of similar models, and future
collaborations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The School of Engineering at The College of
New Jersey (TCNJ), in close collaboration with faculty from the Department of
Sociology, has initiated a research program that assesses the effectiveness of a
liberal arts core program combined with a strong vertical engineering
professional sequence on the professional formation of engineering students. In
this study, the multi-disciplinary team examines the influence of a number of
curricular and extracurricular education interventions such as engineering-
specific ethics case studies, lessons on professional licensure, interaction
with alumni through a formal mentoring program, liberal arts coursework, solving
open-ended design problems, internships, and/or undergraduate research
experiences. The project consists of two phases: (1) creation of the instruments
based on existing measures and development of new measures using qualitative
methods in Year 1, and (2) pilot studies in Year 2 that are designed to validate
the created instruments. Formative evaluation during these phases allows for
modification of measures and timing, and may influence the delivery
interventions, based on early analysis of data collected. Summative evaluation
provides the validity of the instruments that can then be applied to larger
populations. The objective of this initial study is to create and validate
instruments that can be used to assess the effectiveness of this promising
model. The instruments may be used in future research programs to evaluate the
effectiveness of various factors postulated to influence professional
development in engineering students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An additional area of
interest focuses on how professional formation is influenced by demographic
factors, and how professional formation is related to persistence and post-
graduation success. Results of the planned research program provides insight
into the connection between professional formation and individual
characteristics that have been demonstrated elsewhere to predict persistence and
post-graduation success in populations underrepresented due to gender,
race/ethnicity, and socioeconomic status. The assessment instruments developed
in this study enable professional formation within these cohorts to be better
understood, potentially leading to specific interventions that strengthen
professional identity for these special populations. Dissemination of the
results to the engineering education community will spread the impact of the
results nationally.