* 1544196
* EAGER: Emergent order of hydrodynamically coupled microrotors
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2016
* Petia Vlahovska, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 08/31/2016
* USD 100,001.00

1544196(Vlahovska)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of the proposed research
is to investigate theoretically and experimentally a new class of active fluids,
that of suspensions of self-rotating particles. Active fluids are fluids that
behave in unique ways, because of the presence of active particles that can
self-assemble, or can move and pack in different ways, giving different
macroscopic properties to the fluid. Certain complex fluids and biofluids fall
in this category. Even a flock of birds, or a school of fish, where each moving
animal moves on its own, but the motion of all follows a pattern at a much
larger scale than the individual, are examples of active
fluids.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is proposed to examine dense suspensions of
rotating spheres (rotors). It has very recently been found that in a monolayer
of rotors with initially randomly distributed up or down spins, same-spin rotors
spontaneously segregate and collectively move in traffic lanes or circulate in
large vortices. When the rotor density gets close to maximum packing, the rotors
jam into crystals that continuously melt, reassemble, and move. It is proposed
to study these phenomena with a combined computational and experimental approach
to understand how this collective behavior emerges from the hydrodynamic
interactions between the rotors. The numerical simulations are based on the
immersed boundary method. The experimental system relies on the Quincke effect,
which is the spontaneous spinning of a dielectric sphere in an applied uniform
electric field. The proposed research aims to (1) include the electrostatic
interactions in the numerical simulations, and (2) investigate the dynamics of a
pair and monolayer of Quincke rotors. In addition to advancing basic knowledge,
the research will uncover novel dynamic structures that could be exploited for
design of `smart' materials responsive to the external environment. The PIs will
incorporate the results from this research in graduate courses and will also
leverage successful outreach programs at Brown University to communicate the
relevance and significance of the work to the general public.