* 1544167
* Collaborative Research: Developing Methodological Foundations for Empirical Evaluations of Non-Experimental Methods in STEM Intervention Evaluations
* EHR,DGE
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2020
* Vivian Wong, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Finbarr Sloane
* 08/31/2020
* USD 366,707.00

The Promoting Research and Innovation in Methodologies for Evaluation (PRIME)
program seeks to support research on evaluation with special emphasis on: (1)
exploring innovative approaches for determining the impacts and usefulness of
STEM education projects and programs; (2) building on and expanding the
theoretical foundations for evaluating STEM education and workforce development
initiatives, including translating and adapting approaches from other fields;
and (3) growing the capacity and infrastructure of the evaluation field. Three
types of proposals will be supported by the program: Exploratory Projects that
include proof-of-concept and feasibility studies; more extensive Full-Scale
Projects; and workshops and conferences. The proposed research attends carefully
to item 1 above. This research will establish a coherent framework for the
design, implementation, and analysis of within-study comparisons for evaluating
non-experimental methods. It will also establish an infrastructure for
conducting an ongoing quantitative synthesis of results from within-study
comparison designs.

This research study will develop the methodological foundations for using
within-study comparison designs (WSCs) to evaluate non-experimental methods in
STEM evaluation settings. In WSC designs, treatment effects from a non-
experiment are compared to those produced by a randomized experiment that shares
the same target population. The purpose of a WSC is to determine whether the
non-experiment can replicate results from an experimental benchmark, and the
contexts and conditions under which these methods perform well in field
settings. The project has two overarching research aims.