* 1544454
* KUMUNU 2015; Columbia, MO, October 24 - 25, 2015
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2017
* Steven Cutkosky, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 08/31/2017
* USD 12,580.00

The conference KUMUNU 2015 will be held at the University of Missouri-Columbia
on October 24 and 25, 2015. KUMUNU is the annual weekend conference anchored by
the University of Kansas (KU), University of Missouri (MU), and University of
Nebraska (NU). It was founded by the algebraists in these three institutions in
1999 to promote interaction among faculty, post docs and graduate students in
commutative algebra and related disciplines. The three institutions are within 5
hours driving distance and with modest travel and lodging support the weekend
KUMUNU conferences continue to have significant regional impact. The KUMUNU
conference has a strong tradition of playing an important mentoring role for
graduate students, recent PhDs, and early career faculty in research
institutions and four-year colleges. KUMUNU provides an annual venue for these
groups to come together with senior researchers at KU, MU and NU along with two
or three senior researchers from some institutions not so near. The conference
also features talks by three graduate students, one each from KU, MU and NU who
present their developing theses. KUMUNU stimulates interactions by having talks
on current research accessible to graduate students with ample time and
opportunity for interaction outside of talks in an informal and friendly
setting. Kumunu 2015 will feature talks by Professors Craig Huneke(Virginia),
Christel Rotthaus (Michigan State) and Anurag Singh (Utah) and three talks by
faculty from KU, MU and NU. In addition to faculty and students from KU, MU and
NU, and other institutions from Kansas, Missouri and Nebraska, KUMUNU draws
participants from neighboring states such as Colorado, Illinois, Indiana,
Kentucky, Michigan, Oklahoma, and North Dakota. One of the main goals is to
showcase research of young faculty, helping enrich the research programs of
recent PhDs and graduate students in commutative algebra and related fields by
both formal and informal mentoring from experienced researchers. In addition,
KUMUNU serves to enhance the existing strengths at these three institutions. The
conference website is http://kumunu.missouri.edu&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The KUMUNU
2015 will provide an opportunity for mathematicians to interact and establish
research connections with each other; in particular, the participants will
interact with other researchers and hear and discuss recent developments in the
field and its relationships with other areas. The primary impacts of the
conference will be its dissemination of recent ideas in commutative algebra and
algebraic geometry, and stimulation and enrichment of the research careers of
students and early career participants. Participants will take ideas from the
conference back to their colleagues and students, stimulating further research
and mathematical enrichment at their home institutions. The relatively small
size of the meeting and its geographic and disciplinary focus will be
particularly effective at enabling participants to establish productive
collaborative relationships. Encouragement and mentoring that begins at the
conference will significantly contribute to the success and professional
development of early career mathematicians whether in research institutions or
primarily teaching institutions. The travel and lodging support provided by NSF
for this conference is a key element for the success of the conference.