* 1544924
* CPS: Frontier: Collaborative Research: VeHICaL: Verified Human Interfaces, Control, and Learning for Semi-Autonomous Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2022
* Cynthia Sturton, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Ralph Wachter
* 08/31/2022
* USD 500,000.00

This NSF Cyber-Physical Systems (CPS) Frontier project "Verified Human
Interfaces, Control, and Learning for Semi-Autonomous Systems (VeHICaL)" is
developing the foundations of verified co-design of interfaces and control for
human cyber-physical systems (h-CPS) --- cyber-physical systems that operate in
concert with human operators. VeHICaL aims to bring a formal approach to
designing both interfaces and control for h-CPS, with provable
guarantees.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The VeHICaL project is grounded in a novel
problem formulation that elucidates the unique requirements on h-CPS including
not only traditional correctness properties on autonomous controllers but also
quantitative requirements on the logic governing switching or sharing of control
between human operator and autonomous controller, the user interface, privacy
properties, etc. The project is making contributions along four thrusts: (1)
formalisms for modeling h-CPS; (2) computational techniques for learning,
verification, and control of h-CPS; (3) design and validation of sensor and
human-machine interfaces, and (4) empirical evaluation in the domain of semi-
autonomous vehicles. The VeHICaL approach is bringing a conceptual shift of
focus away from separately addressing the design of control systems and human-
machine interaction and towards the joint co-design of human interfaces and
control using common modeling formalisms and requirements on the entire system.
This co-design approach is making novel intellectual contributions to the areas
of formal methods, control theory, sensing and perception, cognitive science,
and human-machine interfaces. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cyber-physical systems
deployed in societal-scale applications almost always interact with humans. The
foundational work being pursued in the VeHICaL project is being validated in two
application domains: semi-autonomous ground vehicles that interact with human
drivers, and semi-autonomous aerial vehicles (drones) that interact with human
operators. A principled approach to h-CPS design --- one that obtains provable
guarantees on system behavior with humans in the loop --- can have an enormous
positive impact on the emerging national ``smart'' infrastructure. In addition,
this project is pursuing a substantial educational and outreach program
including: (i) integrating research into undergraduate and graduate coursework,
especially capstone projects; (ii) extensive online course content leveraging
existing work by the PIs; (iii) a strong undergraduate research program, and
(iv) outreach and summer programs for school children with a focus on reaching
under-represented groups.