* 1544277
* Research Initiation: Transformative Approaches to Teaching User-Centered Design
* ENG,EEC
* 10/01/2015,01/31/2018
* Morgan Hynes, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Julie Martin
* 01/31/2018
* USD 150,000.00

The objective of this proposal is to initiate research on how compassionate
design activities can help develop engineering students' self and social
awareness. Engineers design solutions within complex contexts that often have
broader social, political, economic, and environmental impact. However, research
has shown a culture of disengagement in the professional formation of engineers.
This culture of disengagement is one where engineers often separate the
technical aspects of their work from the social context of the solution in an
attempt to be impartial and objective in their decision making. Yet the complex
social contexts in which engineers design are becoming more and more important
as engineered solutions now have an expanding reach in our global society. To
more fully engage engineering students' in social contexts, the work of this
proposal will challenge engineering students to be compassionate in their design
work to develop solutions that address users' fears, dignity, freedom, and
emotional well-being. For example, they may design cancer diagnostic equipment
that moves away from the sterile, robotic aesthetic toward a softer, friendlier
experience for these highly emotional situations. The research team will explore
how this kind of design experience develops engineering students' self and
social awareness as well as their overall approach to the engineering design
process. Engineering societies and accrediting boards have recognized a need to
develop a more well-rounded engineer who has: a commitment to all aspects of
innovation where they will need to assess societal impact, a better systems
perspective, and greater strength in understanding design contexts. This project
impacts the professional formation of engineers, helping students to become
ready to solve the complex issues currently facing
society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research initiation proposal aims to explore
issues related to these outcomes in the professional formation of engineers by
addressing three primary objectives: 1) Integrate perspectives from mechanical
engineering and engineering education scholars to develop a robust Compassionate
Design framework for raising first-year and mechanical engineering students'
self and social awareness; 2) Initiate research on the efficacy and impact of
the Compassionate Design framework on students' professional formation related
to both their professional and technical skills; and 3) Develop a proposal to
more fully explore the technical and social relevance of the Compassionate
Design approach. The team will test out potentially transformative approaches to
teaching engineering design in mechanical and first-year contexts (locally) to
initiate the development of a more comprehensive education and research project
to impact the teaching of engineering design more broadly (nationally). The
research team will test these activities in a first-year engineering course as
well as sophomore and senior mechanical engineering design courses. A series of
surveys, reflection assignments, and interviews will be administered and
analyzed to provide insights into the effectiveness of this approach in raising
students' awareness and ability to consider multiple perspectives (an important
ability in engineering design). While this is a research initiation proposal
where the initial work will be to more systematically develop a research plan,
the PIs have begun to conceptualize a plan for the research. This plan follows a
design research approach and will take place in the PI's design courses for
initial testing and preliminary data collection as the team builds toward a
larger research proposal. The team will work to address three guiding research
questions: RQ1: Does compassionate design enable students to develop self/social
awareness?; RQ2: Does compassionate design appeal to a different type of
engineering student?; RQ3: How does the compassionate design framework impact
the students' design process? The broader impact of such a professional
orientation could attract and retain a new kind of student in engineering as
well as promoting a professional orientation that emphasizes the humanitarian
values of engineering.