* 1544358
* Random spatial systems and ground states of short-range spin glasses
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2015,07/31/2017
* Michael Damron, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 07/31/2017
* USD 103,130.00

The projects herein study spatial stochastic models, specifically percolation
and short-range (realistic) spin glasses. The main questions concern first-
passage percolation, independent percolation models at the critical threshold,
and ground (zero-temperature) states of the Edwards-Anderson spin glass model.
Viewed analytically, some of the projects seek to understand the structure and
fluctuations of the maximum, or minimum, of a collection of correlated random
variables; this applies not only to questions of geodesics and estimation of
variance in first-passage percolation, but also to the organization of spin
glass states. On the other hand the techniques have a geometric flavor,
including tools from ergodic theory and Bernoulli percolation. It is expected
that the results obtained will influence other mathematical areas, for instance
polymer models, particle systems and questions in theoretical computer
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The theory of random spatial systems has grown to
include models of random distances, fluid flow through porous media, random
growth models and magnetic properties of dilute metallic alloys. The projects
studied here center on such models and concern the connection between the small-
scale rules that define the random environment and the large-scale properties of
the system. While some of these properties are highly dependent on the nature of
the local rules, others are ``universal'' and seem to only depend on the
dimension of the ambient space. A main goal of this project is to understand the
origin of this universal behavior. The results should have consequences not only
for related mathematical areas, but for topics of current interest in physics,
computer science, biology and financial mathematics.