* 1544138
* Electromagnetic Inverse Problems: Visibility and Invisibility
* MPS,DMS
* 10/24/2014,06/30/2018
* Ting Zhou, Northeastern University
* Continuing Grant
* Justin Holmer
* 06/30/2018
* USD 35,463.00

This project aims to address several fundamental problems in the mathematical
theory of inverse problems involving electromagnetic wave propagation as modeled
by the Helmholtz and Maxwell equations. The first part of the project concerns
the question of determining the internal properties of a medium by making
electromagnetic (EM) measurements at the boundary. Challenging questions include
recovering the shape information of electromagnetic inclusions and obstacles
from boundary data, full reconstruction of EM parameters for an isotropic medium
with incomplete boundary data, and the inverse problem for anisotropic media,
where the unique reconstruction is possible only up to a change of variables.
Such loss of uniqueness in the latter case leads to the second major topic of
the project, namely, transformation-optics-based invisibility. The proposed
study covers the regularized approximate electromagnetic cloaking scheme, whose
limiting behavior provides important physical and mathematical implications for
the singular structure required in an ideal cloaking design. The last part of
the proposed project considers thermo-acoustic tomography (TAT), a hybrid
medical imaging modality that combines low frequency electromagnetic waves with
acoustic waves through the physical "photo-acoustic' effect. In particular, the
principal investigator plans to address the problem of reconstructing the
electrical parameters and refractive indices of the medium from the internal
absorbed radiation map.

The fundamental task of science is to probe the world around us. The most
powerful tool to do this is to use waves (e.g., electromagnetic waves, acoustic
waves, elastic waves), because waves can interact with different media in
nonintrusive ways. Such nonintrusive investigation is greatly appreciated in
many areas of science and technology, including medical imaging, geophysics,
nondestructive testing, remote sensing, and so on. The fundamental mathematical
theory behind such enhancement of "visibility" is the main topic of inverse
problems, while another aspect is to hide an object from detection by waves,
that is, to make it "invisible." The proposed project concerns both aspects,
visibility and invisibility, for electromagnetic waves. For visibility, the
proposer plans to develop mathematical techniques to address some of the
challenging questions in inverse problems that will undoubtedly have real world
applications in the future. For instance, the thermo-acoustic tomography (TAT)
medical imaging modality has the potential to detect breast cancer cells at a
much earlier stage than what is currently feasible. The development of
mathematical theory of TAT will also shed light on a larger class of inverse
problems with internal data such as PAT (photo-acoustic tomography), TE
(transient elastography), UMT (ultrasound modulated electrical and optical
impedance tomography), as well as other similar hybrid imaging modalities. The
simultaneous improvement in contrast and resolution is the subject of intensive
mathematical study and also of this project. As for invisibility, the
development of "meta-materials" that have electromagnetic or acoustic properties
not found in nature has inspired the transformation-optics based blueprint of
the invisible cloak. Experimental and theoretical results indicate that
invisibility is no longer just science fiction. This theoretical study seeks to
understand and confront the difficulties under a realistic approximate scheme,
which will benefit experimental endeavors. It provides an effective way to
bridge the gap between reality and imagination that is still vast for current
technology.