* 1544259
* Contextualized Evaluation Framework for Advanced STEM MOOCs
* EHR,DGE
* 11/01/2015,10/31/2019
* Heidi Diefes-Dux, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* John Cherniavsky
* 10/31/2019
* USD 799,534.00

The Promoting Research and Innovation in Methodologies for Evaluation (PRIME)
program supports research on evaluation with special emphasis on: (1) exploring
innovative approaches for determining the impacts and usefulness of STEM
education projects and programs; (2) building on and expanding the theoretical
foundations for evaluating STEM education and workforce development initiatives,
including translating and adapting approaches from other fields; and (3) growing
the capacity and infrastructure of the evaluation field. The PI and co-PIs at
Purdue University will undertake an important research study designed to create
a new paradigm for evaluating STEM MOOCs that go beyond analyzing clickstream
data and could be used for evidence-based decision making. The goal of this new
paradigm is to contextualize evaluation metrics by taking into consideration
learner characteristics, course characteristics, and stakeholder goals. It is
envisioned that this new paradigm would guide the development of the next
generation of STEM MOOCs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed full-scale, three-
year PRIME project will develop and test a contextualized evaluation framework
on over 56,000 learners enrolled in 15 advanced STEM (nanotechnology-related)
MOOCs offered through the Purdue X and edX partnership, in conjunction with
nanoHUB-U and Boeing. The project will result in the creation of data collection
instruments and an evaluation method that make sense of diverse forms of learner
data for action-oriented decisions to support learning and institutional goals
in providing STEM MOOCs. The research study will employ a multiphase mixed
methods approach to address the following research questions: (1) What
constructs contribute to learners? behavior and performance in advanced STEM
MOOCs? (2) What information is needed to inform stakeholders decision-making
regarding the value of offering advanced STEM MOOCs? How do stakeholders needs
drive the design of MOOCs? (3) What is a context sensitive, generalizable
framework of evaluation for advanced STEM MOOCs? The results from the research
study have the potential to make significant theoretical contributions to the
evaluation field by developing a novel evaluation framework that would be more
effective for determining the value of offering STEM MOOCs and the impact on
learning outcomes.