* 1544044
* Support for COMBINE 2015
* CSE,CCF
* 06/15/2015,05/31/2016
* Chris Myers, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 05/31/2016
* USD 10,000.00

Standards for data exchange are critical to the development of any field. They
enable researchers and practitioners to exchange information reliably, apply a
variety of tools to their problems, and reproduce scientific results. The
COmputational MOdeling in Biology NEtwork (COMBINE) was created in 2010 to
organize standardization efforts for systems biology. This effort includes,
among others, the systems biology markup language (SBML) for mathematical
modeling, the biological pathways exchange language (BioPaX) for describing
pathways, the systems biology graphical notation (SBGN) for visual
representations, and the synthetic biology open language (SBOL). While synthetic
biology has many unique requirements, there are also a lot of overlapping
features such as the need to construct mathematical models, describe pathways,
and provide visual representations. It makes a lot of sense for these efforts to
collaborate, such that, the synthetic biology community can leverage existing
standards enabling the sharing of tools and other infrastructure. The COMBINE
organization holds two workshops per year to discuss standards for biology. The
purpose of this grant is to support travel expenses for students, postdoctoral
scholars, and participants from underrepresented groups to attend COMBINE 2015
to be held at the University of Utah in Salt Lake City, UT from October 12th to
16th, 2015. Workshops like this one are instrumental in making progress in the
development of these standards. Currently, most standardization efforts are
either unfunded or only have very limited support. Indeed, the success of these
standards has been due to the donation of time from many individuals to
participate in discussions, write specifications, serve as standard editors, and
attend workshops. Many of these individuals working on the development of
standards are students based in the US who would otherwise find it difficult to
find the funds to attend this meeting. Therefore, this grant would help support
travel, lodging, and registration expenses for these US-based students,
postdoctoral scholars, and participants from underrepresented groups working on
systems and synthetic biology standards. Not only would this be a valuable
experience for these participants, but it would also greatly enhance our goal of
bringing together researchers in synthetic biology with those working in systems
biology leading to integrated standards and shared software and infrastructure.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The major goals of this workshop are:
(1) Develop synergistic relationships between systems and synthetic biology
researchers. (2) A tighter integration of standard development for systems and
synthetic biology. (3) Outreach to modelers and experimentalists. (4) A
coordinated effort to advocate the use of standards in publications and archival
databases. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The development of standards
has the potential for tremendous broader impact. Standards enable researchers to
share models and software tools. They improve science in that results encoded in
standards are more readily reproducible. Furthermore, both systems and synthetic
biology have numerous potential applications in health, such as a better
understanding of diseases and the development of new drugs. This workshop will
also be a valuable educational experience for the student participants.