* 1544385
* EAGER: Collaborative: Computational Cognitive Modeling of User Security and Incentive Behaviors
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2015,02/29/2016
* Kaiqi Xiong, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 02/29/2016
* USD 82,354.00

User behavior is a critical element in the success or failure of computer
security protections. The field of Human Security Informatics (HSI) combines
security informatics and human-computer interaction design to learn how the
design of a human-computer interface can affect the security of a computer
system. This research project is contributing to the scientific foundations of
HSI by modeling how multitasking users behave when making security-critical
decisions. In particular, the researchers are modeling user behavior when the
users are engaged in typical PC-based mobile messaging with security concerns
such as phishing or spam. The project is evaluating how well the models capture
the impact of incentives and interventions on user security
behaviors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project extends the cognitive modeling
(CogM) architecture to characterize and improve user security decision-making
and behaviors. Focusing on cognitive constructs in the ACT-R and Soar
architectures, it models the multi-tasking application and security activities
with varying cognitive traits and security constraints, through representations
of productions and information chunks, as well as their utility and activation
calculations. An analytic user model not only describes a problem in making a
security decision, but also can explain why and how it happens for incentive and
intervention selection. Moreover, CogM models and empirical user testing
comparatively study common and advanced users in typical messaging applications,
regarding security mistakes and efficiency in task completion. This project is
focused on establishing the principles for analytically modeling user cyber
behaviors and bridging the gap from understanding security behaviors to
effectively improving security performance.