* 1544969
* CPS: Synergy: Collaborative Research: Extracting Time-Critical Situational Awareness from Resource Constrained Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2021
* Amit Roy-Chowdhury, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 09/30/2021
* USD 576,000.00

The goal of this project is to facilitate timely retrieval of dynamic
situational awareness information from field-deployed nodes by an operational
center in resource-constrained uncertain environments, such as those encountered
in disaster recovery or search and rescue missions. This is an important cyber
physical system problem with perspectives drawn at a system and platform level,
as well as at the system of systems level. Technology advances allow the
deployment of field nodes capable of returning rich content (e.g., video/images)
that can significantly aid rescue and recovery. However, development of
techniques for acquisition, processing and extraction of the content that is
relevant to the operation under resource constraints poses significant
interdisciplinary challenges, which this project will address. The focus of the
project will be on the fundamental science behind these tasks, facilitated by
validation via both in house experimentation, and field tests orchestrated based
on input from domain experts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order to realize the
vision of this project, a set of algorithms and protocols will be developed to:
(a) intelligently activate field sensors and acquire and process the data to
extract semantically relevant information; (b) formulate expressive and
effective queries that enable the near-real-time retrieval of relevant
situational awareness information while adhering to resource constraints; and,
(c) impose a network structure that facilitates cost-effective query propagation
and response retrieval. The research brings together multiple sub-disciplines in
computing sciences including computer vision, data mining, databases and
networking, and understanding the scientific principles behind information
management with compromised computation/communication resources. The project
will have a significant broader impact in the delivery of effective situational
awareness in applications like disaster response. The recent :World Disaster
Report" states that there were more than 1 million deaths and $1.5 trillion in
damage from disasters within the past decade; the research has the potential to
drastically reduce these numbers. Other possible applications are law
enforcement and environmental monitoring. The project will facilitate a strong
inter-disciplinary education program and provide both undergraduate and graduate
students experience with experimentation and prototype development. There will
be a strong emphasis on engaging the broader community and partnering with
programs that target under-represented students and minorities.