* 1544395
* CPS: Synergy: Collaborative Research: Computationally Aware Cyber-Physical Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2021
* Hal Tharp, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Ralph Wachter
* 08/31/2021
* USD 368,000.00

The objective of this work is to generate new fundamental science that enables
the operation of cyber-physical systems through complex&lt;br/&gt;environments.
Predicting how a system will behave in the future requires more computing power
if that system is complex. Navigating&lt;br/&gt;through environments with many
obstacles could require significant computing time, which may delay the issue of
decisions that have to be&lt;br/&gt;made by the on-board algorithms.
Fortunately, systems do not always need the most accurate model to predict their
behavior. This project&lt;br/&gt;develops new theory for deciding between the
best model to use when making a decision in real time. The approach involves
switching between different predictive models of the system, depending on the
computational burden of the associated controller, and the
accuracy&lt;br/&gt;that the predictive model provides. These tools will pave the
way for more kinds of aircraft to navigate closely and safely with one another
through the National Air Space (NAS), including Unmanned Air Systems
(UAS).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results from this project will enable more
accurate and faster trajectory synthesis for controllers with nonlinear plants,
or&lt;br/&gt;nonlinear constraints that encode obstacles. The approach utilizes
hybrid control to switch between models whose accuracy is
normalized&lt;br/&gt;by their computational burden of predictive control
methods. This synergistic approach enables computationally-aware cyber-
physical&lt;br/&gt;systems (CPSs), in which model accuracy can be jointly
considered with computational requirements. The project advances the knowledge
on&lt;br/&gt;modeling, analysis, and design of CPSs that utilize predictive
methods for trajectory synthesis under constraints in real-time cyber-physical
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results will include methods for the design of
algorithms that adapt to the computational limitations of autonomous
and&lt;br/&gt;semi-autonomous systems while satisfying stringent timing and
safety requirements. With these methods come new tools to account
for&lt;br/&gt;computational capabilities in real-time, and new hybrid feedback
algorithms and prediction schemes that exploit
computational&lt;br/&gt;capabilities to arrive at more accurate predictions
within the time constraints. The algorithms will be modeled in terms of
hybrid&lt;br/&gt;dynamical systems, to guarantee dynamical properties of
interest. The problem space will draw from models of UAS in the NAS.