* 1544226
* NeTS: Student Travel Support for the 2015 CoNEXT Conference
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2015,06/30/2017
* Aruna Balasubramanian, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* John Brassil
* 06/30/2017
* USD 20,000.00

This project partially supports the travel of 16 US-based graduate students to
the 11th International Conference on emerging Networking EXperiments and
Technologies (CoNEXT), which will take place from December 1 to December 4, 2015
in Heidelberg, Germany. CoNEXT is a highly selective, high-quality conference
sponsored by the ACM Special Interest Group on Data Communication (SIGCOMM). The
conference is a major forum for presentation and discussion of novel networking
protocols and technologies. This project integrates research and education of
students through exposure to a premier technical meeting in computer networks
and communications. Students will have the opportunity to observe high-quality
presentations and interact with senior researchers in the field both in the main
conference and the associated workshops. Special emphasis will be placed on
encouraging the participation of women and under-represented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The support amount provided to each student will be
$1,250 or the actual documented amount of expenses, whichever amounts to less.
Each student will need to cover expenses in excess of the fixed amount from
other funds. Preference in the award of the travel grants will be given to
students who have their work accepted to the CoNEXT student workshop which will
take place the first day of the conference. Other criteria will include evidence
of a serious interest in networking, as demonstrated by coursework and/or
project experience.