* 1544406
* Math: Conference: Collaborations Between Academic Levels to Promote Successful Student Transitions from Secondary to Post-Secondary Mathematics
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2018
* Jodie Styers, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Talitha Washington
* 09/30/2018
* USD 49,956.00

High failure rates and increasing enrollments in developmental mathematics
courses are key indicators that undergraduate students often struggle with the
secondary to post-secondary mathematics transition. Although great efforts have
been undertaken at the secondary level to improve the preparation of students
for college-level mathematics by providing resources and support to help
students be successful, there seems to be little collaborative effort between
secondary and post-secondary institutions. In particular, instructors at the two
levels rarely have opportunities to discuss students' strengths and weaknesses,
learning outcomes, teacher expectations, assessment strategies, and common
instructional practices. Thus, in addition to facing challenging mathematical
content, post-secondary students enrolled in introductory mathematics courses
also are challenged with navigating a cultural shift between the two academic
levels. The purpose of this conference is to address the issue of secondary to
post-secondary transitions in mathematics by encouraging communication between
instructors at both academic levels and by engaging a team of researchers in
describing features of both academic cultures which influence students' success.
As a result of this collaboration, suggestions for how to better merge students'
experiences in mathematics across academic levels will be developed. Although
responsibility for students' preparedness for college-level mathematics tends to
fall on secondary schools, both academic levels play an important role in
facilitating a smooth and successful transition from secondary to post-secondary
mathematics. There are three main components to this project: (1) professional
development partnerships between one secondary and one post-secondary
mathematics instructor, (2) research groups (one calculus and one algebra-
focused group), and (3) workshops and a conference to facilitate professional
development and dissemination of findings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary goal
of this proposal is to foster collaboration between mathematics instructors at
the secondary and post-secondary level to share best practices and engage in
discussions about facilitating a smoother transition between academic levels.
This goal will be met in two ways. First, professional development partnerships
between a secondary and post-secondary mathematics instructor will allow for
equal sharing of best practices and opportunities to better understand
expectations at the other academic level. Second, two research teams will be
formed to allow the investigators to immerse themselves in a high school and
college course with the intent of comparing the academic cultures. This will
inform the body of research on mathematical expectations and classroom norms at
both levels. The professional development partnerships consisting of one
secondary and one post-secondary mathematics instructor will develope a list of
best practices for preparing students for and facilitating a smooth transition
between academic levels. These best practices will be shared at the Best
Practices in Teaching and Learning Mathematics Conference--one of the components
of the project. It is also the intention to develop recommendations suitable for
publication in pedagogical journals. The research teams will be conducting
formal research by comparing the secondary and post-secondary mathematics
culture through two lenses: algebra and calculus. The research findings will
lead to intellectual contributions to the mathematics community regarding how
particular topics (e.g., slope and limits) are conveyed at each academic level
as well as a broader description of classroom norms which may impact students'
abilities to successfully navigate the transition between academic levels.