* 1544871
* CPS: TTP Option: Synergy: Collaborative Research: Hardening Network Infrastructures for Fast, Resilient and Cost-Optimal Wide-Area Control of Power Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2020
* Alexandra Duel-Hallen, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 08/31/2020
* USD 600,000.00

The wide-area measurement systems technology using Phasor Measurement Units
(PMUs) has been regarded as the key to guaranteeing stability, reliability,
state estimation, and control of next-generation power systems. However, with
the exponentially increasing number of PMUs, and the resulting explosion in data
volume, the design and deployment of an efficient wide-area communication and
computing infrastructure is evolving as one of the greatest challenges to the
power system and IT communities. The goal of this NSF CPS project is to address
this challenge, and construct a massively deployable cyber-physical architecture
for wide-area control that is fast, resilient and cost-optimal (FRESCO). The
FRESCO grid will consist of a suite of optimal control algorithms for damping
oscillations in power flows and voltages, implemented on top of a cost-effective
and cyber-secure distributed computing infrastructure connected by high-speed
wide-area networks that are dynamically programmable and reconfigurable. The
value of constructing FRESCO is twofold (1) If a US-wide communication network
capable of transporting gigabit volumes of PMU data for wide-area control indeed
needs to be implemented over the next five years then power system operators
must have a clear sense of how various forms of delays, packet losses, and
security threats affect the stability of these control loops. (2) Moreover, such
wide-area communication must be made economically feasible and sustainable via
joint decision-making processes between participating utility companies, and
testing how controls can play a potential role in facilitating such economics.
Currently, there is very limited insight into how the PMU data transport
protocols may lead to a variety of such delay patterns, or dictate the economic
investments. FRESCO will answer all of these questions, starting from small
prototypical grid models to those with tens of thousands of buses. Our eventual
goal will be to make FRESCO fully open-source for Transition to Practice (TTP).
We will work with two local software companies in Raleigh, namely Green Energy
Corporation and Real-Time Innovations, Inc. to develop a scalable, secure
middleware using Data-Distribution Service (DDS) technology. Thus, within the
scope of the project, we also expect to enrich the state-of-the-art cloud
computing and networking technologies with new control and management
functions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;From a technical perspective, FRESCO will answer
three main research questions. First, can wide-area controllers be co-designed
in sync with communication delays to make the closed-loop system resilient and
delay-aware, rather than just delay-tolerant This is particularly important, as
PMU data, in most practical scenarios, will have to be transported over a shared
resource, sharing bandwidth with other ongoing applications, giving rise to not
only transport delays, but also significant delays due to queuing and routing.
Advanced ideas of arbitrated network control designs will be used to address
this problem. The second question we address is for cost. Given that there are
several participants in this wide-area control, how much is each participant
willing to pay in sharing the network cost with others for the sake of
supporting a system-wide control objective compared to its current practice of
opting for selfish feedback control only Ideas from cooperative game theory will
be used to investigate this problem. The final question addresses security how
can one develop a scientific methodology to assess risks, and mitigate security
attacks in wide-area control? Statistical and structural analysis of attack
defense modes using Bayesian and Markov models, game theory, and discrete-event
simulation will be used to address this issue. Experimental demos will be
carried out using the DETER-WAMS network, showcasing the importance of cyber-
innovation for the sustainability of energy infrastructures. Research results
will be broadcast through journal publications, and jointly organized graduate
courses between NCSU, MIT and USC.