* 1544084
* EAGER: Engineering a Low-Cost Polymer Composite Based on Recycled Carbon Fibers
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/15/2015,12/31/2016
* Mahmoud Reda Taha, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 12/31/2016
* USD 98,200.00

Carbon fiber reinforced polymer composites have high strength-to-weight ratios
and are corrosion free which make them attractive to the aerospace and
automotive industries. Recycling carbon fiber composites from end-of-life
products leads to resource and energy savings, with a variety of benefits
including a reduction in the need for landfills currently used for end-of-life
composite products. This EArly-concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER)
project capitalizes on a novel technology to recycle carbon fiber composites
where the polymer matrix, including all its toxic byproducts, are removed, and
minimal damage, if any, occurs to the carbon fibers. A new class of polymer
composites based on recycled carbon fibers will be investigated. This novel
composite is estimated to cost only 20 percent of the cost of virgin carbon
fiber composites and is expected to achieve an acceptable combination of
mechanical properties. The research will be conducted at University of New
Mexico, which is a Minority and Hispanic-Serving Institution (MHSI), will
include a local industrial partner, Adherent Technologies Inc., and will also
engage students at the Southwestern Indian Polytechnic Institute (SIPI) who will
be participate in the composite recycling, fabrication, and testing.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research aims at investigating the fundamental
processes required to develop a new class of low-cost carbon fiber reinforced
composites, from recycled carbon fibers, with appreciable strength and
ductility, yet with a stiffness suitable for a wide range of applications.
Understanding the processing-structure-mechanical property relationships in
these novel recycled composites is key to realizing their potential. This
research will investigate the role of fiber-fiber interactions, fiber length and
morphology, fiber volume fraction, fiber surface quality and reactivity, and
sizing-matrix compatibility on the mechanical behavior of this new composite.
The recycled carbon fibers can produce a new class of composites containing
long, entangled fibers and are therefore different from both conventional
continuous and chopped fiber composites. This unique feature provides an
opportunity to engineer the composite by manipulating fiber orientation and
length as well as altering the fiber-matrix interfaces to achieve a combination
of mechanical properties not possible using current fibers.