* 1544268
* Service-Learning in Undergraduate Geosciences: A Public Workshop
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2015,02/28/2017
* Heidi Schweingruber, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 02/28/2017
* USD 267,578.00

Strategies for increasing the number of students who obtain degrees in STEM
fields and broadening the diversity of students who declare STEM majors are the
focus of considerable national attention (PCAST, 2012). This national
conversation is particularly important in the geosciences where there is a
disparity in the number of underrepresented minorities who pursue geoscience
majors. In addressing these needs, STEM educators seek to identify and employ
evidence-based best practices for engaging and teaching students. Service-
learning is a method for teaching and learning which engages students in
classroom-based inquiry experiences that incorporate meaningful service to the
community, thereby both improving student learning and fostering a sense of
civic responsibility. Service-learning in the STEM disciplines is a promising
strategy for providing a rigorous and relevant STEM curriculum and giving
students the skills needed to succeed in the 21st
century.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The National Academy of Science (NAS) Board on
Science Education (BOSE) is convening in early 2016 a 2-day public workshop on
the role of service-learning in undergraduate geoscience education. This
workshop provides a venue for an in-depth exploration of how service-learning is
being used in geoscience education, an analysis of the potential benefits of
this approach, and evaluation of the strength of the evidence base regarding
impacts. Participants in the workshop will be discussing which student outcomes
are most likely to be influenced by a service-learning experience, what "best
practices" for service-learning in the geosciences might look like (informed
both by geoscience exemplars and exemplars from other STEM disciplines), the
potential challenges to implementing service-learning approaches in
undergraduate geoscience courses, and areas where additional research might be
needed. Six outside experts in this field are being commissioned to prepare
white papers in advance of the workshop. A final workshop report will be printed
and distributed to relevant stakeholder audiences at the completion of the
project.