* 1544449
* I-Corps for Learning: Fostering Evidence-based Innovation for STEM Education
* EDU,DUE
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2020
* Ashok Agrawal, American Society For Engineering Education
* Standard Grant
* John Jackman
* 06/30/2020
* USD 1,074,816.00

Through this project the American Society for Engineering Education (ASEE) is
conducting as series of NSF Innovation Corps for Learning (I-Corps-L) activities
to help achieve the goal of educational transformation through propagation and
scale-up of educational innovations. ASEE will work in collaboration with an
instructional team led by Dr. Karl Smith. The I-Corps for Learning project
addresses the problem of developing a well-prepared STEM workforce that is
crucial to the Nation's economic health and prosperity. I-Corps for Learning
helps accelerate and scale-up in a sustainable manner the novel and effective
practices developed by educational innovators. The acceleration process is
accomplished through a series of workshops and mentoring of a cohort of a group
of teams seeking to achieve wider impact of their advances in educational
practice. The approach taken in I-Corps-L is based on the application of
insights concerning how product discoveries are brought to market and
commercialized in the broader economy. This approach creates an entrepreneurial
mindset in to bringing learning innovations into situations where they can
maximize benefit to society. An educational innovation in this case applies to
developments that address K-12, undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral
research, as well as learning in informal science education environments. By
propagating effective educational innovations and helping to achieve scale up in
a sustainable manner, this project has the potential of helping to achieve the
goal of improving STEM education in diverse environments across the
nation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The center of the I-Corps for Learning model is the
participation of three-person teams. Each team is composed of a principal
investigator, an entrepreneurial lead, and a mentor. The principal investigator
is an individual who has developed an education innovation through prior support
from the National Science Foundation. The entrepreneurial lead serves as team
leader in the process of understanding the scale-up process. The mentor draws on
an understanding of the nature of successful educational innovations to help
guide the team. The I-Corps-L process is based on a series in-person and online
interactive workshops. Training begins with an introductory three-day training
session. This is followed by five online sessions, and a closing two-day
training session. I-Corps-L follows a process of investigation and hypothesis
testing to clarify user needs. In addition to logistical and organizational
services ASEE is conducting an evaluation to assess individual sessions within
the face-to-face meetings, overall elements of the multi-day training workshops,
and handling of meeting logistics. This project is designed to fill the gap
between educational innovations of proven effectiveness in enhancing student
learning and the widespread use of such practices. The development of a
systematic hypothesis-driven approach to determining the alignment between the
benefits of an educational innovation and the specific needs of potential
adopters will help researchers by broaden the impact of innovations in teaching
and learning science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM).