* 1544857
* CPS: Synergy: Learning to Walk - Optimal Gait Synthesis and Online Learning for Terrain-Aware Legged Locomotion
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2019
* Erik Verriest, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* David Corman
* 09/30/2019
* USD 799,982.00

Legged robots have captured the imagination of society at large,
through&lt;br/&gt;entertainment and through the dissemination of research
findings. Yet,&lt;br/&gt;today's reality of what (bipedal) legged robots can do
falls short of&lt;br/&gt;society's vision. A big part of the reason is that
legged robots are&lt;br/&gt;viewed as surrogates for humans, able to go wherever
humans can as aids&lt;br/&gt;or as assistants where it might also be too
dangerous or risky. It is&lt;br/&gt;in the expectation of robustness and walking
facility that today's&lt;br/&gt;research hits its limits, especially when the
terrain has granular&lt;br/&gt;properties. Impeding progress is the lack of a
holistic approach to the&lt;br/&gt;cyber-physical modeling and control of legged
robots. The vision of&lt;br/&gt;this work is to unite experts in granular
mechanics, optimal control,&lt;br/&gt;and learning theory in order to define a
methodology for advancing&lt;br/&gt;cyber-physical systems (CPS) involving a
tight coupling of the physical with&lt;br/&gt;the cyber through dynamic
interactions that must be learned online. The&lt;br/&gt;proposed work will
advance the science of cyber-physical systems by more&lt;br/&gt;explicitly tying
sensing, perception, and computing to the optimization&lt;br/&gt;and control of
physical systems whose properties are variable and&lt;br/&gt;uncertain.
Achieving reliable, adaptive legged locomotion over terrain&lt;br/&gt;with
arbitrary granular properties would transform several
application&lt;br/&gt;domain areas of robotics; e.g., disaster response,
agricultural and&lt;br/&gt;industrial robotics, and planetary robotics. More
broadly, the same&lt;br/&gt;tools would apply to related CPS with regards to
terrain aware&lt;br/&gt;exoskeleton and rehabilitation prosthetics for persons
with missing,&lt;br/&gt;non-functional, or injured legs, as well as to energy
networks with&lt;br/&gt;time-varying, nonlinear dynamics
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CPS platform to be studied is that
of a bipedal robot locomoting&lt;br/&gt;over granular ground material with
uncertain physical properties (sand,&lt;br/&gt;gravel, dirt, etc.). The proposed
work seeks to overcome current&lt;br/&gt;impediments to reliable legged
locomotion over uncertain terrain type,&lt;br/&gt;which fundamentally relies on
the controlled interaction of the robot's&lt;br/&gt;feet with the physical
environment. The research goal is to improve the&lt;br/&gt;perception and
control of legged locomotion over granular media for the&lt;br/&gt;express
purpose of achieving robust, adaptive, terrain-aware locomotion.&lt;br/&gt;It
revolves around the hypothesis that simple models with
decent&lt;br/&gt;predictive performance and low computational overhead are
sufficient for&lt;br/&gt;the optimal control formulations as the compute-
constrained adaptive&lt;br/&gt;subsystem will both learn and classify the
peculiarities of the terrain&lt;br/&gt;online. The main research objectives will
involve: [1] a validated&lt;br/&gt;co-simulation platform for legged robot
movement over granular media;&lt;br/&gt;[2] terrain-dependent, stable gait
generation and gait transition&lt;br/&gt;strategies via optimal control; [3]
online, compute-constrained learning&lt;br/&gt;of granular interactions for
adaptation and terrain classification; and&lt;br/&gt;[4] validated contributions
using experimental testbeds involving&lt;br/&gt;variable and unknown (to the
robot) granular media. Given the high&lt;br/&gt;value of the robotic platforms
and the research with regards to outreach&lt;br/&gt;and participation, they will
be used as outreach tools and to create new&lt;br/&gt;educational modules for
promotion of STEM fields. Further, the&lt;br/&gt;multi-disciplinary nature of
the work will be highlighted in order to&lt;br/&gt;emphasize its
importance.&lt;br/&gt;