* 1544705
* CPS: Synergy: Architecture for Future Distribution Systems Including Active Consumers with Rooftop Solar Generation
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2019
* Xinming Ou, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 09/30/2019
* USD 700,000.00

Power systems have seen many changes over the last decade including the
increased penetration of renewable generation, electric vehicles and new
technologies for sensing, communication and control of a Smart Grid. The most
significant impact of these changes are being felt at the consumer level. The
ability for consumers and end devices to buy and sell energy and related
services in a dynamic and interactive manner is expected to create a transactive
energy market as highlighted in the Dec 2014 report of GridWise Alliance.
Modeling and preparing the physical system to respond to the somewhat
unpredictable behavior of active consumers over a cyber-infrastructure will be
critical for maintaining grid reliability. Understanding the impact of such
active consumers on the operational and business policies of the distribution
utility requires advances in core system science that spans the areas of power
engineering, economics, statistical signal processing, game theory, distributed
control, multi-agent systems and cyber security. In conjunction with industrial
partners, Westar Energy (the largest electric company in Kansas) and Kansas City
Power and Light, the PIs plan to develop an architecture that requires little
change to the existing investment in power distribution systems while allowing
for the dynamic, adaptive control required to integrate active consumers with
current and future combinations of high-variability distributed power sources,
such as Photo-voltaic (PV) generators and storage batteries.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In contrast to prior related efforts that primarily focus
on demand response and distributed generation management with a single home/user
centric approach, the proposed approach takes a holistic system perspective that
includes cumulative modeling of multiple stochastic active consumers and the
cyber infrastructure over which they may interact. Specific research thrusts
include: (1) a general, extensible, and secure cyber architecture based on
holonic multi-agent principles that provides a pathway to the emerging area of
transactive energy market in power distribution systems, but also provides
foundation for other engineered systems with active consumers; (2) new
analytical insights into generalized stochastic modeling of consumer response to
real]time price of electricity and the impact of such active consumers on grid
reliability and security, and (3) novel methodology for comprehensive
distributed control and management of power distribution systems with active
consumers and high penetration of distributed renewable resources. Active
consumers are an integral part of the Smart City vision where cyber systems are
integrated into the transportation, energy, healthcare and biomedical, and
critical infrastructure systems. Successful completion of this project will
result in modeling, control, analysis and simulation architectures for all such
active consumer driven CPS domains. The resulting gains in operating efficiency,
economics, reliability and security will result in overall welfare for the
society.