* 1544455
* EAGER: Toward Transparency in Public Policy via Privacy-Enhanced Social Flow Analysis with Applications to Ecological Networks and Crime
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Daniel Kifer, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 08/31/2018
* USD 276,991.00

Recent improvements in computing capabilities, data collection, and data science
have enabled tremendous advances in scientific data analysis. However, the
relevant data are often highly sensitive (e.g., Census records, tax records,
medical records). This project addresses an emerging and critical scientific
problem: Privacy concerns limit access to raw data that might reveal information
about individuals. Techniques to "sanitize" such data (e.g., anonymization)
could have negative impact on the quality of the scientific results that use the
data. How can we provide data that protect the privacy of individuals but also
accurately support scientific analyses? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
addresses challenges regarding analysis of privacy-preserving sanitized data:
(1) How can sanitized data be analyzed so that conclusions will stand up to peer
review? (2) What workflows and visualizations must be supported by privacy
technology? (3) How can scientists assess bias introduced by sanitization
without access to the raw data? The project focuses specifically on "social flow
analysis," in which data analysis is performed on sensitive social flow data
(e.g., commuting patterns, migration trajectories) of individuals or families.
The researchers are developing an ecological model of networks of neighborhoods
that are linked by social flows and studying how social flows are formed and
maintained. The project is cataloging the types of data access and visualization
needed to develop such theories, studying alternative analyses that are both
scalable and statistically robust, developing preliminary privacy-preserving
data protection methods, and evaluating whether the privacy-preserving methods
enable the same conclusions as access to the raw data.