* 1544388
* MATH:EAGER Understanding faculty barriers in adopting evidence-based integrated mathematics curricula
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Zoi Rapti, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Karen Keene
* 08/31/2019
* USD 299,207.00

Successful experiences in mathematics during the first two years of college are
critical to students' persistence and learning in engineering. There is a need
within engineering to examine courses in the engineering program in order to
both provide appropriate learning experiences that increase students' knowledge
and retention of content and support their persistence in engineering. This
project will address this with an integrated mathematics and engineering course
that connects the mathematics students need to engineering tasks and contexts.
The goal of the project is to explore an engineering mathematics course designed
within the college of engineering. The first objective is to design and teach
the course while collecting data about students' performance, persistence and
their mathematics understanding. The second objective is to investigate faculty
perceptions of students' knowledge of mathematics to understand the structural
barriers that may prevent the adoption of such a course. The EHR Core Research
program, which supports this work, emphasizes fundamental STEM education
research that generates foundational knowledge in the field. Investments are
made in critical areas that are essential, broad and enduring: STEM learning and
STEM learning environments, broadening participation in STEM, and STEM workforce
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The integrated engineering and mathematics
course is important for supporting students' learning and application of
knowledge from mathematics within engineering. Each mathematics topic in the
course will include an engineering perspective and tasks. The project will
specifically investigate the perception of students' mathematical maturity by
mathematics faculty. The research design includes a case study of the
mathematics department using interviews with faculty and students as well as the
collection of other documents that describe the context. The case study data
will also include clinical interviews with students from the engineering
mathematics course and a comparable course to document their mathematical
understanding and beliefs.