* 1544324
* MATH:EAGER: Guide to Evidenced-Based Instructional Practices in Undergraduate Mathematics
* EDU,DUE
* 11/01/2015,10/31/2019
* Douglas Ensley, Mathematical Association of America
* Standard Grant
* Sandra Richardson
* 10/31/2019
* USD 359,940.00

A strong background in mathematics is expected of college graduates so that they
can thrive in the workforce as science, technology, engineering, mathematics
(STEM) professionals, and professionals in other technical and non-technical
fields, as well as citizens able to navigate the variety of information
available through the media and other sources. To this end, there have been
efforts in the mathematical sciences to improve the learning and teaching of
undergraduate mathematics. A body of research on learning and teaching now
exists that provides evidence pointing to effective strategies for teaching of
mathematics to college students. This project will produce an instructional
practices guide to emphasize evidence-based student-centered pedagogies. This
instructional practices guide will serve as a research-based resource for
mathematics instructors, both faculty and graduate students, at all types of
higher education institutions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Mathematical
Association of America (MAA) is the largest professional organization focused on
undergraduate mathematics and is the leading source for mathematics faculty
professional development as well as resources for teaching and learning
undergraduate mathematics. As such, the MAA is the natural and optimal lead
organization to produce a resource intended to infuse research-based pedagogies
into the teaching of undergraduate mathematics. For each topic addressed, the
instructional practices guide will include a summary and synthesis of current
literature on that topic. In producing these summaries, the project team expects
to discover areas of research in which the evidence-base is better developed
than for others. Thus, the project will also address two primary research
questions: (1) What general pedagogies and/or specific instructional practices
have a well-established empirical basis demonstrating their effectiveness (or
lack thereof)? (2) What general pedagogies and/or specific instructional
practices are in need of further research to establish an empirical basis
demonstrating their effectiveness (or lack thereof)?