* 1544337
* Math: EAGER: Researching the HyFlex+ Instructional Model of Blended Learning
* EDU,DUE
* 11/01/2015,10/31/2018
* Tailen Hsing, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Karen Keene
* 10/31/2018
* USD 247,969.00

As postsecondary enrollments in the United States continue to increase, there is
pressure for colleges and universities to provide 21st Century delivery options
for courses to accommodate access for a diverse student population, including
students who have caregiver responsibilities for children, siblings, or parents;
student athletes; students who face commutes that can be dangerous under certain
weather conditions or other mobility challenges; and students who become ill.
One promising model, first developed by Dr. Brian Beatty at San Francisco State
University, is called HyFlex. The primary feature of the HyFlex model is to
combine online and face-to-face components ("hybrid") in a single course and
allow students to choose when and how they attend class ("flexible"). This
project will design, develop, and research the implementation of a HyFlex model
in a large introductory statistics course at the University of Michigan. The
HyFlex+ introductory statistics course will provide equivalency for students
attending class face-to-face or synchronously online by incorporating a
backchannel communication system -- a web-based or mobile chat room, like
twitter and other social media. In the HyFlex+ model, the backchannel will be
monitored by graduate students in order to facilitate real-time conversation
among students and the faculty instructor during a class
session.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Students, faculty, and institutions are interested
in efficient and effective use of resources. Although the HyFlex model has
existed for nearly a decade, relatively little research exists about the
effectiveness of this model for student learning within higher education. Thus,
the core of this proposed research project will be a mixed methods (quantitative
and qualitative data collection) study designed to answer pressing questions,
including: What are the benefits and challenges of the use of the HyFlex+ model
in introductory statistics courses for students and for the institution? What
are the costs of the HyFlex+ instructional model on the instructor's and
graduate teaching assistants' time? What aspects of the HyFlex+ model contribute
to its success or failure in meeting the needs of students and the institution?
Why do students choose the attendance mode they do? Is this choice consistent,
or does it vary? Is the backchannel equally effective for students in both
attendance modes? How and why or why not? What cognitive and non-cognitive
student outcomes are affected by the model and how?