* 1544254
* EAGER:  Using High School Transcript Data and Diagnostic Information to Fine-Tune Placement Policy and Tailor Instruction in Developmental Math
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2020
* Tatiana Melguizo, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Sandra Richardson
* 09/30/2020
* USD 299,753.00

Using High School Transcript Data and Diagnostic Information to Fine-Tune
Placement Policy and Tailor Instruction in Developmental
Math&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mathematical ability is critical for students'
continued success in school, access to postsecondary education, and preparation
for future employment. People who succeed in mathematics in high school and
college have better employment prospects than others and can expect to earn
more. Clearly, mathematical literacy is a growing need in our increasingly
technological society. However, many students come to college unprepared for
success; depending on the college, up to 40 percent of these students are placed
in developmental courses their freshman year. Developmental mathematics is a
college course, generally aimed to remediate areas missed in high school
mathematics and prepare students for higher-level college mathematics.
Unfortunately, many students do not complete or pass their developmental
courses; college completion rates within six years are less than 60 percent at
many colleges. In addition, even if they do succeed in these courses, they are
not necessarily prepared to succeed in more advanced courses. Research that
contributes to improving this situation is greatly needed. This Early Concept
Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) will use diagnostic testing and high
school performance data to improve the process of determining which mathematics
courses students start with as they begin their college careers. They will also
conduct research to investigate the effects of accurately placing students in
mathematics courses on student retention in college and in STEM fields,
graduation rates, and time to graduation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
combine information from assessments and high school and college performance
data to improve the accuracy of students' placement in mathematics courses upon
entering college. They will use the Mathematics Diagnostic Testing Project
(MDTP) assessment to obtain a detailed view of students' mathematical skills and
areas in need of remediation. They will collect high school transcript data from
Mathematics and English courses, standardized test scores, and GPA, as well as
demographic data. They will also collect college level performance data
including placement and other assessment results and data on courses taken
including grades, withdrawals, and number of course attempts. They will combine
these data to achieve two primary goals. Using quantitative methods, they will
develop a model to improve placement accuracy. Using qualitative methods, they
will identify ways to personalize instruction in college mathematics. They will
work with students and instructors at two large urban community colleges in the
Los Angeles Community District (LACCD).