* 1544741
* CPS: Synergy: Collaborative Research: Learning control sharing strategies for assistive cyber-physical systems
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2015,02/28/2021
* Brenna Argall, Rehabilitation Institute of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 02/28/2021
* USD 363,937.00

CPS: Synergy: Collaborative Research: Learning control sharing strategies for
assistive cyber-physical systems&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Assistive machines - like
powered wheelchairs, myoelectric prostheses and robotic arms - promote
independence and ability in those with severe motor impairments. As the state-
of-the-art in these assistive Cyber-Physical Systems (CPSs) advances, more
dexterous and capable machines hold the promise to revolutionize ways in which
those with motor impairments can interact within society and with their loved
ones, and to care for themselves with independence. However, as these machines
become more capable, they often also become more complex. Which raises the
question: how to control this added complexity? A new paradigm is proposed for
controlling complex assistive Cyber-Physical Systems (CPSs), like robotic arms
mounted on wheelchairs, via simple low-dimensional control interfaces that are
accessible to persons with severe motor impairments, like 2-D joysticks or 1-D
Sip-N-Puff interfaces. Traditional interfaces cover only a portion of the
control space, and during teleoperation it is necessary to switch between
different control modes to access the full control space. Robotics automation
may be leveraged to anticipate when to switch between different control modes.
This approach is a departure from the majority of control sharing approaches
within assistive domains, which either partition the control space and allocate
different portions to the robot and human, or augment the human's control
signals to bridge the dimensionality gap. How to best share control within
assistive domains remains an open question, and an appealing characteristic of
this approach is that the user is kept maximally in control since their signals
are not altered or augmented. The public health impact is significant, by
increasing the independence of those with severe motor impairments and/or
paralysis. Multiple efforts will facilitate large-scale deployment of our
results, including a collaboration with Kinova, a manufacturer of assistive
robotic arms, and a partnership with Rehabilitation Institute of Chicago.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal introduces a formalism for assistive mode-
switching that is grounded in hybrid dynamical systems theory, and aims to ease
the burden of teleoperating high-dimensional assistive robots. By modeling this
CPS as a hybrid dynamical system, assistance can be modeled as optimization over
a desired cost function. The system's uncertainty over the user's goals can be
modeled via a Partially Observable Markov Decision Processes. This model
provides the natural scaffolding for learning user preferences. Through user
studies, this project aims to address the following research questions: (Q1)
Expense: How expensive is mode-switching? (Q2) Customization Need: Do we need to
learn mode-switching from specific users? (Q3) Learning Assistance: How can we
learn mode-switching paradigms from a user? (Q4) Goal Uncertainty: How should
the assistance act under goal uncertainty? How will users respond? The proposal
leverages the teams shared expertise in manipulation, algorithm development, and
deploying real-world robotic systems. The proposal also leverages the teams
complementary strengths on deploying advanced manipulation platforms, robotic
motion planning and manipulation, and human-robot comanipulation, and on robot
learning from human demonstration, control policy adaptation, and human
rehabilitation. The proposed work targets the easier operation of robotic arms
by severely paralyzed users. The need to control many degrees of freedom (DoF)
gives rise to mode-switching during teleoperation. The switching itself can be
cumbersome even with 2- and 3-axis joysticks, and becomes prohibitively so with
more limited (1-D) interfaces. Easing the operation of switching not only lowers
this burden on those already able to operate robotic arms, but may open use to
populations to whom assistive robotic arms are currently inaccessible. This work
is clearly synergistic: at the intersection of robotic manipulation, human
rehabilitation, control theory, machine learning, human-robot interaction and
clinical studies. The project addresses the science of CPS by developing new
models of the interaction dynamics between the system and the user, the
technology of CPS by developing new interfaces and interaction modalities with
strong theoretical foundations, and the engineering of CPS by deploying our
algorithms on real robot hardware and extensive studies with able-bodied and
users with sprinal cord injuries.