* 1544383
* The Digital Fly Brain
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Aurel Lazar, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 07/31/2019
* USD 795,056.00

Several highly ambitious, large-scale, billion-pound research projects that aim
to understand the human brain are currently under way. In Europe, The Human
Brain Project is focused on accelerating brain research by integrating data
available from a multitude of disparate research projects through the
development of a multi-scale, multi-level model of the human brain - the 100
billion neurons modelling and simulation challenge. In the US, The Brain
Initiative aims to reconstruct the full record of neural activity across
complete neural circuits - the 100 billion neurons recording challenge. These
are clearly huge, but worthy challenges that can benefit from an understanding
of the principles of neural computation of much smaller yet sufficiently complex
brains. The fruit fly brain has become one of the most popular model organisms
to study neural computation and for relating brain structure to function. Many
of the genes and proteins expressed in the mammalian brain are also conserved in
the genome of the fruit fly. Remarkably, the fruit fly is capable of a host of
complex nonreactive behaviors that are governed by a brain containing only
~100,000 neurons. The relationship between the fly's brain and its behaviors can
be experimentally probed using a powerful toolkit of genetic techniques for
manipulation of the fly's neural circuitry. Novel experimental methods for
precise recordings of the fly's neuronal responses to stimuli and for mapping
neurons and synapses in Drosophila nervous system have provided access to an
immense amount of valuable data regarding the fly's neural connectivity map and
its processing of sensory stimuli. These features coupled with the growing
ethical and economic pressures to reduce the use of mammals in research, explain
the growing interest in Drosophila-based brain models, not only to understand
sensing, perception and neural computation, but also to gain mechanistic
insights that may inform our efforts to address neurodegenerative diseases, such
as Alzheimer's disease, in humans.

This project aims to design, implement and experimentally evaluate a potentially
transformative open-source fly brain simulation platform capable of simulating
~135,000 neurons that make up the adult Drosophila brain. This computational
infrastructure will be based on the recently established Graphic Processor Units
(GPU)-enabled Neurokernel software platform. The modular simulation platform
will integrate all knowledge about the Drosophila brain as a set of
interconnected simulation modules which describe the operation of about 41 Local
Processing Units (LPUs), six hubs and their interconnections, partly elucidated
by detailed EM imaging studies. The simulation platform will be used to develop
and validate a first draft model that incorporates the most advanced biophysical
and/or functional models of the neurons and the latest published synaptic
connections maps. The main focus will be on developing detailed models of the
early visual system (retina, lamina, medulla) and of the early olfactory system
(OSNs, antennal lobe, mushroom body, lateral horn). These models will integrate
complete models of the visual and olfactory systems. The brain simulation
platform will enable for the first time the isolated and integrated emulation of
fly brain model neural circuits and their connectivity patterns (e.g., sensory
and locomotion systems) and other parts of the fly's nervous system on clusters
of GPUs. Using the Neurokernel simulation platform it will be possible to
generate data sufficiently fast to enable researchers to compare and tune the
input-output characteristics of virtual neurons on-line, while the experiment is
running.