* 1544686
* CPS: Synergy: Collaborative Research: Cyber-physical digital microfluidics based on active matrix electrowetting technology: software-programmable high-density pixel arrays
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2019
* Philip Rack, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Ralph Wachter
* 08/31/2019
* USD 299,999.00

Laboratory-on-a-chip (LoC) technology is poised to improve global health through
development of low-cost, automated point-of-care testing devices. In countries
with few healthcare resources, clinics often have drugs to treat an illness, but
lack diagnostic tools to identify patients who need them. To enable low-cost
diagnostics with minimal laboratory support, this project will investigate
domain-specific LoC programming language and compiler design in conjunction with
device fabrication technologies (process flows, sensor integration, etc.). The
project will culminate by building a working LoC that controls fluid motion
through electronic signals supplied by a host PC; a forensic toxicology
immunoassay will be programmed in software and executed on the device. This
experiment will demonstrate benefits of programmable LoC technology including
miniaturization (reduced reagent consumption), automation (reduced costs and
uncertainties associated with human interaction), and general-purpose software-
programmability (the device can execute a wide variety of biochemical reactions,
all specified in software). Information necessary to reproduce the device, along
with all software artifacts developed through this research effort, will be
publicly disseminated. This will promote widespread usage of software-
programmable LoC technology among researchers in the biological sciences, along
with public and industrial sectors including healthcare and public health,
biotechnology, water supply management, environmental toxicity monitoring, and
many others.

This project designs and implements a software-programmable cyber-physical
laboratory-on-a-chip (LoC) that can execute a wide variety of biological
protocols. By integrating sensors during fabrication, the LoC obtains the
capability to send feedback in real-time to the PC controller, which can then
make intelligent decisions regarding which biological operations to execute
next. To bring this innovative and transformative platform to fruition, the
project tackles several formidable research challenges: (1) cyber-physical LoC
programming models and compiler design; (2) LoC fabrication, including process
flows and cyber-physical sensor integration; and (3) LoC applications that rely
on cyber-physical sensory feedback and real-time decision-making. By
constructing a working prototype LoC, and programming a representative feedback-
driven forensic toxicology immunoassay, the project demonstrates that the
proposed system can automatically execute biochemical reactions that require a
closed feedback loop. Expected broader impacts of the proposed work include
reduced cost and increased reliability of clinical diagnostics, engagement with
U.S. companies that use LoC technology, training of graduate and undergraduate
students, increased engagement and retention efforts targeting women and
underrepresented minorities, student-facilitated peer-instruction at UC
Riverside, a summer residential program for underrepresented minority high-
school students at the University of Tennessee, collaborations with researchers
at the Oak Ridge National Laboratory, and creation, presentation, and
dissemination of tutorial materials to promote the adoption and use of software-
programmable LoCs among the wider scientific community.