* 1544617
* EAGER: Propulsion of enzyme-coated Janus particles through complex environments
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2017
* Patrick Underhill, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Susan Muller
* 09/30/2017
* USD 151,641.00

CBET - 1544617 PI: Underhill, Patrick

The goals of this project are to synthesize a micron-sized particle that is
capable of self-propulsion and to characterize the motion of the particle in
complex fluids. A portion of the surface of the spherical particle is coated
with an enzyme that reacts with peroxide in the surrounding fluid. The reaction
at the particle surface creates an osmotic pressure difference across the
particle, which causes it to move. The enzymatic reaction can propel the
particle at very low peroxide concentrations in the surrounding media, which
makes the self-propelled particle a candidate for use in biological systems that
are sensitive to peroxide concentration. The velocity of the particle will be
measured for a series of viscous fluids, including complex fluids that are
models of biological media. Self-propelled particles are promising vehicles to
enhance transport and deliver molecular cargoes in complex environments ranging
from multiphase fluid systems to biological tissues. The researchers will
involve undergraduate and high school students in the project and use results of
the research in outreach programs at their institution.

The project comprises experimental and theoretical studies to quantify and
elucidate mechanisms for the self-driven motion of colloidal particles through
non-Newtonian environments. The experiments will utilize a class of Janus
particles that propel themselves using an enzyme coated on part of their
surface. Motion results from the reaction of a peroxide fuel in solution on the
particle surface producing a non-uniform distribution of solutes around the
particle, which leads to propulsion by a mechanism called self-diffusiophoresis.
The project will test predictions of current theories of self-diffusiophoresis
in Newtonian fluids, especially the dependence of particle velocity on fluid
viscosity, and then examine motion in more complex, non-Newtonian fluids that
are homogeneous on the size scale of the propelling particle. This will be done
using polymer solutions in which the polymer radius of gyration is significantly
smaller than the motor. Results will form a foundation for self-propelled
particle design and use in complex and multiphase fluids.