* 1544267
* EAGER: Computational Teichmuller Theory
* CSE,CCF
* 06/15/2015,05/31/2020
* Wei Zeng, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 05/31/2020
* USD 265,989.00

Shape transformation and matching plays a fundamental role in engineering and
biomedicine. Shape metric with powerfully discriminative ability is critical and
highly desired in practice for machine learning in big geometric data. This
project aims to develop the rigorous computational framework for finding the
intrinsic mapping between shapes and the intrinsic shape metric among general
surfaces based on Teichmüller theory. This proposed research will open a new
paradigm for geometric analysis, lay down the theoretical foundation and develop
a new class of algorithms and software tools for shape transformation and
matching. It is expected to greatly increase the applicability of mining and
learning technologies for the emerging ubiquitous large-scale geometric data.
Its success will significantly advance computational/digital geometry and will
enhance the abilities of geometry and topology theories to solve real-world
shape analysis problems. The resulting algorithms will have a broad range of
applications in the fields of science, engineering and biomedicine. Potential
applications include morphometry analysis, cancer detection and abnormality
prediction in medical imaging, motion/deformation tracking and dynamics analysis
in graphics and vision, and facial recognition, expression analysis and
information.

This research aims to develop the rigorous computational framework of
Teichmüller theory for the Teichmüller Map, which is unique and has the minimal
angle distortion in its homotopy class, and the derived Teichmüller Distance
among general surfaces. The computation approach is based on the insight from
the quasiconformal Teichmüller theory and the variational principle. It first
solves the computation of the holomorphic quadratic differentials and then
computes the Teichmüller maps. The discrete Teichmüller theory will be
established, and the existence and uniqueness of the solution is guaranteed. The
results are applied for shape analysis and deep learning in big data, including
facial recognition, expression analysis, brain study, etc. The new paradigm of
discrete Teichmüller theory will make major impacts on computer science,
including geometric modeling, computer graphics, visualization, vision,
networking, and medical imaging. The methodology will also have impacts on pure
sciences, engineering and biomedicine, and potential benefits for homeland
security and national defense. The algorithms developed during the research will
be made freely available on the world wide web. The PI will encourage minority
groups at FIU to pursue research in geometry, and make the research accessible
to more audience through the seminars, course development, workshops and
conferences.