* 1544173
* CPS: TTP Option: Synergy: Collaborative Research: Certifiable, Scalable, and Attack-resilient Submodular Control Framework for Smart Grid Stability
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2019
* Linda Bushnell, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* David Corman
* 09/30/2019
* USD 893,643.00

Exploiting inherent physical structure of the CPS domains can lead to
economically viable and efficient novel algorithms for providing performance,
control, synchronization and an alternate approach to CPS security that does not
rely solely on cryptography. In each of these systems, regardless of the current
state of the network, in the presence of disturbances or adversarial inputs,
there is a need to bring the system to desired state for performance and control
of the network. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project presents one such novel
approach by observing that the CPS applications including smartgrid,
coordinating robotics, formation flights in UAV, and synchronization of
biological systems including brain networks all exhibit a special physical
structure, namely submodularity, with respect to the set of control actions.
Submodularity is a diminishing returns property that enables the development of
efficient algorithms with provable optimality guarantees and in many cases
distributed versions that are locally implementable, and hence scalable. While
it has been widely used in the machine learning and discrete optimization
communities, the use of submodularity in the context of CPS is a fertile
research area. This project initially applies submodularity in the context of
smart grid and show how it can lead to greater system stability and attack
resilience. By defining suitable metrics that capture the submodular structures
underlying the physical dynamics, the researchers develop algorithms that
eliminate the time-consuming and computationally expensive verification of
control actions through simulation. The fundamental properties of
synchronization, convergence, robustness, and attack-resilience considered in
this effort have crosscutting applications to multiple CPS domains, which will
benefit from the submodular approach that we will research and develop.