* 1544396
* CPS: Synergy: Collaborative Research: Computationally Aware Cyber-Physical Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2020
* Ricardo Sanfelice, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Ralph Wachter
* 08/31/2020
* USD 432,000.00

The objective of this work is to generate new fundamental science that enables
the operation of cyber-physical systems through complex environments. Predicting
how a system will behave in the future requires more computing power if that
system is complex. Navigating through environments with many obstacles could
require significant computing time, which may delay the issue of decisions that
have to be made by the on-board algorithms. Fortunately, systems do not always
need the most accurate model to predict their behavior. This project develops
new theory for deciding between the best model to use when making a decision in
real time. The approach involves switching between different predictive models
of the system, depending on the computational burden of the associated
controller, and the accuracy that the predictive model provides. These tools
will pave the way for more kinds of aircraft to navigate closely and safely with
one another through the National Air Space (NAS), including Unmanned Air Systems
(UAS). &#8232;&#8232; The results from this project will enable more accurate
and faster trajectory synthesis for controllers with nonlinear plants, or
nonlinear constraints that encode obstacles. The approach utilizes hybrid
control to switch between models whose accuracy is normalized by their
computational burden of predictive control methods. This synergistic approach
enables computationally-aware cyber-physical systems (CPSs), in which model
accuracy can be jointly considered with computational requirements. The project
advances the knowledge on modeling, analysis, and design of CPSs that utilize
predictive methods for trajectory synthesis under constraints in real-time
cyber-physical systems. &#8232;

The results will include methods for the design of algorithms that adapt to the
computational limitations of autonomous and semi-autonomous systems while
satisfying stringent timing and safety requirements. With these methods come new
tools to account for computational capabilities in real-time, and new hybrid
feedback algorithms and prediction schemes that exploit computational
capabilities to arrive at more accurate predictions within the time constraints.
The algorithms will be modeled in terms of hybrid dynamical systems, to
guarantee dynamical properties of interest. The problem space will draw from
models of UAS in the NAS.