* 1544636
* CPS: TTP Option: Synergy: Collaborative Research: Nested Control of Assistive Robots through Human Intent Inference
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2020
* Cagdas Onal, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 09/30/2020
* USD 200,000.00

Part 1: Upper-limb motor impairments arise from a wide range of clinical
conditions including amputations, spinal cord injury, or stroke. Addressing lost
hand function, therefore, is a major focus of rehabilitation interventions; and
research in robotic hands and hand exoskeletons aimed at restoring fine motor
control functions gained significant speed recently. Integration of these robots
with neural control mechanisms is also an ongoing research direction. We will
develop prosthetic and wearable hands controlled via nested control that
seamlessly blends neural control based on human brain activity and dynamic
control based on sensors on robots. These Hand Augmentation using Nested
Decision (HAND) systems will also provide rudimentary tactile feedback to the
user. The HAND design framework will contribute to the assistive and
augmentative robotics field. The resulting technology will improve the quality
of life for individuals with lost limb function. The project will help train
engineers skilled in addressing multidisciplinary challenges. Through outreach
activities, STEM careers will be promoted at the K-12 level, individuals from
underrepresented groups in engineering will be recruited to engage in this
research project, which will contribute to the diversity of the STEM
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part 2: The team previously introduced the
concept of human-in-the-loop cyber-physical systems (HILCPS). Using the HILCPS
hardware-software co-design and automatic synthesis infrastructure, we will
develop prosthetic and wearable HAND systems that are robust to uncertainty in
human intent inference from physiological signals. One challenge arises from the
fact that the human and the cyber system jointly operate on the same physical
element. Synthesis of networked real-time applications from algorithm design
environments poses a framework challenge. These will be addressed by a tightly
coupled optimal nested control strategy that relies on EEG-EMG-context fusion
for human intent inference. Custom distributed embedded computational and
robotic platforms will be built and iteratively refined. This work will enhance
the HILCPS design framework, while simultaneously making novel contributions to
body/brain interface technology and assistive/augmentative robot technology.
Specifically we will (1) develop a theoretical EEG-EMG-context fusion framework
for agile HILCPS application domains; (2) develop theory for and design novel
control theoretic solutions to handle uncertainty, blend motion/force planning
with high-level human intent and ambient intelligence to robustly execute daily
manipulation activities; (3) further develop and refine the HILCPS domain-
specific design framework to enable rapid deployment of HILCPS algorithms onto
distributed embedded systems, empowering a new class of real-time algorithms
that achieve distributed embedded sensing, analysis, and decision making; (4)
develop new paradigms to replace, retrain or augment hand function via the
prosthetic/wearable HAND by optimizing performance on a subject-by-subject
basis.