* 1544628
* Scalable Bayesian Inference for Interpretable Time-Series Models
* CSE,OAC
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2016
* Finale Doshi-Velez, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Sushil K Prasad
* 06/30/2016
* USD 74,073.00

From healthcare to retail, from governments to education, we are collecting and
storing data. These data sources provide unprecedented opportunities: healthcare
data stores, originally collected for billing purposes, can be mined to better
understand diseases and improve treatments; government data stores, originally
collected for reporting purposes, can be mined to improve national welfare and
security; retail data stores, originally collected for accounting purposes, can
be used to detect complex fraud and improve the customer experience. In
particular, these large data stores allow us to understand the patterns of
patients, customers, citizens, and students over time. Probabilistic models for
time-series analysis can recover patterns such as disease trajectories and
purchasing needs. However, using these data to better understand these patterns
---generally collected and stored for other purposes---is challenging for
several reasons. These data are typically stored in standard relational
databases and subject to complex security protections. They are also often
biased and incomplete; one can use them to discover interesting patterns but the
results must be used with caution. This proposal makes steps toward addressing
these core problems. In particular, we propose to create methods for analyzing
time-series that can run efficiently on existing data management architectures
and provide interpretable results that can be vetted by a domain expert for
accuracy. We apply these approaches to understanding disease progression in
diabetes and psychiatric diseases through the analysis of electronic health
records.

From a technical point of view, this work focuses on a particular probabilistic
time-series model, the Hierarchical Dirichlet Process Hidden Markov Model (HDP-
HMM). Inference in this model is typically performed in a numerical computing
environment using Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC). The first part of our work
involves adapting the MCMC steps so that they can be run efficiently with a
traditional database architectures. Specifically, we will develop methods that
do not require the data to be removed from the database by splitting the
inference into computations that operate directly on the data---to be performed
within the database---and computations that operate on derived statistics---to
be performed in a numerical computing environment. The second part of our work
involves making models learned from sparse, high-dimensional data more
interpretable. Here we will leverage the fact that while these data stores are
typically high-dimensional (tens of thousands of dimensions), these dimensions
are not all independent; in fact, in most real applications there exists
knowledge about how these data are structured. We will apply these knowledge
bases to create sparse models that are easier for domain experts to interpret.
While we focus on our healthcare application for this work, these techniques are
relevant to a variety of applications involving time-series with high-
dimensional, sparsely sampled data.