* 1544651
* Student Support: 10th Manufacturing Science and Engineering Conference (MSEC2015) and 43rd North American Manufacturing Research Conference (NAMRC); Charlotte, NC; June 8-12, 2015
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Frank Pfefferkorn, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Steve Schmid
* 05/31/2016
* USD 18,600.00

This award supports 30 additional graduate and undergraduate students studying
at US institutions to participate in the co-located conference event consisting
of the 2015 International Manufacturing Science and Engineering Conference
sponsored by the American Society of Mechanical Engineers and the 43rd Annual
North American Manufacturing Research Conference sponsored by the North American
Manufacturing Research Institution of the Society of Manufacturing Engineers.
These two leading conferences in the Manufacturing Engineering field act as
global bridges between industries, government laboratories, and academic
institutions. The award provides student participants with opportunities to
exchange ideas with leading researchers and engineers from worldwide industrial
and governmental facilities, as well as with students and faculty from both
domestic and international engineering schools. In addition to nurturing a
global manufacturing vision, participants will learn the latest research areas
and results in manufacturing fields.

The support will cover (1) the registration fee at $350 per student, and (2) the
accommodation cost at $270 per student in a shared room for the entire duration
of the conference. The call for student support applications is disseminated
through posting on main conference websites, promulgation through conference
organizers, track chairs, and symposium organizers, and direct communication
with students involved in poster session, student design competition and student
author research presentation competition. The submitted applications go through
a selection process by the conference committee. The eligibility criteria to
receive the funding include (1) students must be from US institutions and (2)
students must be actively participating in the conference through presenting a
paper or poster, or participating in a competition. The two highest selection
ranks are given to students who have multiple technical papers accepted and
students who present NSF-sponsored technical papers. After the conference, the
list of student awardees will be announced on the main conference website, in
the Manufacturing Science and Engineering 2015 post-conference report in the
Manufacturing Engineering Division's Newsletter, and in the Award and
Recognition section on the North American Manufacturing Research Institution's
website. This award enables these students to improve their knowledge of
manufacturing technologies, and helps them to become engineers and researchers
to lead the next generation of US manufacturing.