* 1544558
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Seasonal Projectile Point Use in Eastern Beringia During the late Pleistocene/early Holocene: An Experimental Approach
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2017
* William Andrefsky, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2017
* USD 17,343.00

Human migration into new territories is relevant for people in all times and
places. How do people exist in lower population densities? How do they adapt to
new contexts and subsistence resources? With Alaska representing an entrance
point for some of the first people coming to the Western Hemisphere,
approximately 14,000 years ago, Alaskan archaeology becomes a natural laboratory
for understanding these adaptive behaviors. This investigations examines
adaptive strategies through the analysis of archaeological and experimental
tools kits used by the first inhabitants of Alaska. Within the broader context
of this project implications regarding the peopling, and colonization, of Alaska
and the highly flexible nature of their toolkits that persisted through much of
time are examined through a unique experimental archaeology approach. Examining
how, and by what means, these individuals were able to adapt to this harsh
frontier is of keen interest to understand the flexible, and complex nature of
humans exploring and utilizing a new landscape.

Based on artifact form and assemblage structure it has been inferred by some
researchers that different cultural complexes may have existed during the late
Pleistocene/early Holocene. However, can an examination of certain artifacts at
archaeological sites really be indicative of different cultural complexes? Is it
feasible that different migrations of people into Alaska would have different
toolkits? These interpretations seem to limit the adaptable nature of humans to
different situations and not view the entire archaeological system. It seems
highly likely that multiple facets (e.g., situational tasks, prey type,
seasonality, and others) impacted the assemblage structure of hunter-gatherers
in the past and each needs to be explored on its own terms. Within this project
experimental archaeology will be implemented to examine the way that different
projectile technologies fare in different temperatures, based on seasonality.
The project will investigate seasonality from current seasonal data,
archaeological sites that have seasonal evidence, the ethnographic record, and
an experimental approach to solidify seasonal implications for Alaska during the
late Pleistocene/early Holocene. For instance if certain tool stone becomes
brittle and fractures in a specific way when propelled in a controlled context
it may be possible to examine the breakage and compare it back to an
archaeological site with no seasonal data and assign a seasonal occupation,
elucidating hunter-gatherer lifeways in prehistory. This approach will address
questions regarding the aspects of different groups of people on the landscape
or a single group using different adaptive strategies based on situational
factors, fracture patterns of projectile technologies, the performance of
different projectile systems, and the susceptibility of different types of tool
stone to cold weather. Data generated through this study will serve as a novel
approach to interpreting human behavior during the earliest periods of
occupation on the landscape of Alaska and hunter-gatherer studies as a whole.