* 1544332
* CPS: TTP Option: Synergy: Safe and Secure Open-Access Multi-Robot Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2019
* Eric Feron, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 09/30/2019
* USD 999,999.00

This proposal addresses the safety and security issues that arise when giving
users remote-access to a multi-robot research test-bed, where mobile robots can
coordinate their behaviors in a collaborative manner. Through a public
interface, users are able to schedule, and subsequently upload, their own code
and run their experiments, while being provided with the scientific data
produced through the experiment. Such an open-access framework has the potential
to significantly lowering the barriers to entry in robotics research and
education, yet is inherently vulnerable from a safety and security point-of-
view. This proposal aims at the development and definition of appropriate cyber-
physical security notions, formal verification algorithms, and safety-critical,
real-time control code for teams of mobile robots that will ultimately make such
a system both useful and safe. On top of the research developments, this
proposal contains a Transition to Practice component that will allow the system
to become a highly usable, shared test-bed; one that can serve as a model for
other open, remote-access test-beds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Safety is of central
importance to the successful realization of any remote-access test-bed and
failure to enforce safety could result in injury in local operators and damaged
equipment. To guarantee safe operation, while allowing users to test algorithms
remotely, new science is required in the domain of safety-critical control. To
address this need, the proposed work follows a three-pronged approach, namely
(1) development and use of novel types of barrier certificates in the context of
minimally invasive, optimization-based controllers with provable safety
properties, (2) formal methods for verification of safety-critical control code
for networked cyber-physical systems, and (3) novel methods for protecting
against machine-to-machine cyber attacks. By bringing together ideas from multi-
agent robotics, safety-critical control, formal verification, and cyber-
security, this project will result in a unified and coherent approach to
security in networked cyber-physical systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
potential impact of the resulting open-access multi-robot test-bed is
significant along the research, education, and general outreach dimensions in
that a future generation of roboticists at institutions across the country will
have open and remote access to a world-class research facility, and educators at
all levels will be able to run experiments on actual robots.