* 1544375
* Math: EAGER: Assessing Impacts on Student Learning in Mathematics from Inclusion of Biological, Real-World Examples
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Louis Gross, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Karen Keene
* 08/31/2018
* USD 299,990.00

Students frequently struggle with mathematical concepts, computations, and
applications because they do not see a direct connection between the mathematics
they are studying and, for example, their academic discipline interests. This
project from the University of Tennessee Knoxville will develop, implement, and
evaluate methods to assess students' mathematical abilities as these are
affected by the use of real-world examples from the life sciences. In
particular, the investigators will design, create, and test a new instrument
that will assess the impact on mathematics education of examples from life
sciences. This approach will address a fundamental research-based issue in
teaching and learning mathematics: placing the mathematics in a concrete, real-
world context helps students learn and understand the mathematical ideas and
enhances their skills in applying the mathematics. While focusing specifically
on life science students and biological examples, the methods developed will
inform mathematical comprehension in other areas of science. In line with this,
the project will contribute to more efficient and effective teaching that, in
turn, will enhance student engagement, retention, and graduation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The underlying goal of this project is to develop and
evaluate an interdisciplinary instrument--a Quantitative Biology Concept
Inventory (QBCI)--which will allow assessment of mathematics and quantitative
concept learning goals in the context of concrete, real-world life science data
examples and models. A research goal of the project is to investigate and
compare the learning impact on the ability of life science student, who take a
mathematics course that places mathematics in a biological context, to develop a
deep understanding of mathematical concepts as well as the skills to transfer
the knowledge and understanding to applications, versus students who have not
had this exposure to examples from the life sciences. The impact on students'
quantitative comprehension and skills, based on different types of life science
examples, also will be determined. This will require an initial concordance on
the key quantitative concepts appropriate for such an instrument to assess,
emphasizing those for which there is reason to expect that explicit examples
based on real-world situations might reduce rates of miscomprehension among life
science undergraduates. In determining the impact on student quantitative
comprehension, the instrument will provide insight as to whether explicit
examples based on experimental or observational data, or more general examples
of biological phenomena (e. g. population growth, drug decay) without explicit
data are equally effective in advancing quantitative understanding. Overall, the
project will provide a novel means to assess different pedagogical approaches to
mathematical and quantitative concepts and skill development for life science
undergraduates. At the national level, the QBCI instrument will serve as a model
to assess the impact of interdisciplinary examples on enhancing mathematical and
quantitative comprehension and skill development, impacting many areas of
undergraduate STEM education beyond life science students.