* 1544374
* MATH:CONFERENCE: Active Learning Approaches in Mathematics Instruction: Practice and Assessment Workshop
* EHR,DUE
* 07/01/2015,12/31/2017
* Ronald Douglas, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Talitha Washington
* 12/31/2017
* USD 25,000.00

There is growing evidence of the effectiveness of active learning approaches to
mathematics instruction. In particular, existing evidence supports the
effectiveness of active learning approaches in deepening student understanding
of mathematics. Moreover, research indicates that many students who have been
less successful in mathematics have a more positive experience through active
learning and are able to communicate what they have learned with others.
However, the use of these pedagogical approaches in colleges and universities
has been limited. Obstacles include lack of a good understanding by many faculty
members of (i) ways to implement these approaches, (ii) awareness of the
positive assessment and evaluation results of active learning, and (iii) how to
overcome the challenges of adopting active learning in the classroom. This
project is for a workshop designed to survey and investigate the
characteristics, challenges, and evaluation of active learning approaches to
collegiate mathematics instruction and to expand the community of individuals
who are knowledgeable about both the methods and important questions involving
active learning. Participants in the workshop will include experts in education
and social science research methods as well as active learning mathematics
practitioners and departmental leaders. An underlying motivation of the project
is to disseminate the knowledge that will be gained from the workshop to help
improve student learning and success to foster the National goal of increasing
the number of highly qualified science, technology, engineering and mathematics
(STEM) majors who will enter the United States STEM workforce.

The goals of the workshop are to: (1) review current active learning evaluation
efforts; (2) clarify barriers to implementing new programs; (3) explore how to
encourage the creation and implementation of new active learning programs; (4)
determine what is needed in terms of national research and evaluation
activities; and (5) promote research activities to refine the understanding of
these issues related to developing, implementing, and engaging students and
faculty in active learning. Several questions will be considered including: What
are effective ways to foster and support faculty implementation of active
learning strategies? How does classroom size impact effective use of various
active learning strategies? How can on-line learning supplements be used to
facilitate active learning strategies in the classroom? What is the level and
nature of active learning experiences necessary to have significant impact on
student learning, understanding, and success? Likewise, a variety of assessment
techniques and results obtained to date will be reviewed to determine the best
metrics for assessing active learning strategies. A follow up, professionally
prepared, summary of conclusions from the meeting will be made available to the
larger community.