* 1544548
* CPS: Breakthrough: Collaborative Research: The Interweaving of Humans and Physical Systems: A Perspective From Power Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2019
* Ramesh Johari, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 09/30/2019
* USD 250,000.00

As information technology has transformed physical systems such as the power
grid, the interface between these systems and their human users has become both
richer and much more complex. For example, from the perspective of an
electricity consumer, a whole host of devices and technologies are transforming
how they interact with the grid: demand response programs; electric vehicles;
"smart" thermostats and appliances; etc. These novel technologies are also
forcing us to rethink how the grid interacts with its users, because critical
objectives such as stability and robustness require effective integration among
the many diverse users in the grid. This project studies the complex
interweaving of humans and physical systems. Traditionally, a separation
principle has been used to isolate humans from physical systems. This principle
requires users to have preferences that are well-defined, stable, and quickly
discoverable. These assumptions are increasingly violated in practice: users'
preferences are often not well-defined; unstable over time; and take time to
discover. Our project articulates a new framework for interactions between
physical systems and their users, where users' preferences must be repeatedly
learned over time while the system continually operates with respect to
imperfect preference information.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We focus on the area of
power systems. Our project has three main thrusts. First, user models are
rethought to reflect the fact this new dynamic view of user preferences, where
even the users are learning over time. The second thrust focuses on developing a
new system model that learns about users, since we cannot understand users in a
"single-shot"; rather, repeated interaction with the user is required. We then
focus on the integration of these two new models. How do we control and operate
a physical system, in the presence of the interacting "learning loops", while
mediating between many competing users? We apply ideas from mean field games and
optimal power flow to capture, analyze, and transform the interaction between
the system and the ongoing preference discovery process. Our methods will yield
guidance for market design in power systems where user preferences are
constantly evolving. If successful, our project will usher in a fundamental
change in interfacing physical systems and users. For example, in the power
grid, our project directly impacts how utilities design demand response
programs; how smart devices learn from users; and how the smart grid operates.
In support of this goal, the PIs intend to develop avenues for knowledge
transfer through interactions with industry. The PIs will also change their
education programs to reflect a greater entanglement between physical systems
and users.