* 1544495
* TeachEngineering: Expanding and Sustaining Curriculum Access for K-12 Teachers
* ENG,EEC
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2019
* Malinda Zarske, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Mary Poats
* 08/31/2019
* USD 1,001,000.00

The TeachEngineering (TE) digital library, at the University of Colorado at
Boulder, has attained a reputation in the K-12 engineering education community
as a high-quality teacher resource of free, classroom-tested, standards-based
lessons. As the disseminator of original K-12 engineering curricula from 46
engineering grantees, the collection is accessed by 2.3M users annually,
realizing 50% annual growth. The TeachEngineering lessons and activities and the
interactive community forums around them support teachers in meeting new
engineering-based standards in their classrooms. Attracting more, and more
diverse, students to engineering for future occupations and satisfying lives
cultivates ambitions in the young while setting the stage for improving and
sustaining the nation's economic future. The proposed strategic improvements and
user-centered research ensure TeachEngineering's ongoing relevance and
sustainability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of this three-year initiative
include making the user experience interactive and community based, expanding
collection size and usage, keeping curricula aligned with evolving K-12 STEM
standards, modernizing the backend architecture for sustainability and
responsiveness, and assessing classroom impact. Activities and approaches
include significant expansion of direct involvement of the K-12 teacher
community through the design and/or implementation of social, community based
and crowdsourced features. The rich new source of information generated by this
user involvement will serve to significantly improve the user experience and
help index the collection for better and automated search, recommender and
standards alignment facilities. Methods to be employed include partnering with
the NAE's LinkEngineering community, creation of a far more integrated metamodel
of the collection, implementing a model-view-controller framework, and
conducting quantitative and qualitative studies on how teachers use TE in the
classroom.