* 1544236
* Planning Cluster Randomized Trials: An Empirical Investigation of Design Parameters for Studies of Science Teacher Interventions
* EHR,DGE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Joseph Taylor, Western Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* Finbarr Sloane
* 08/31/2020
* USD 799,665.00

The Promoting Research and Innovation in Methodologies for Evaluation (PRIME)
program seeks to support research on evaluation with special emphasis on: (1)
exploring innovative approaches for determining the impacts and usefulness of
STEM education projects and programs; (2) building on and expanding the
theoretical foundations for evaluating STEM education and workforce development
initiatives, including translating and adapting approaches from other fields;
and (3) growing the capacity and infrastructure of the evaluation field. Three
types of proposals will be supported by the program: Exploratory Projects that
include proof-of-concept and feasibility studies; more extensive Full-Scale
Projects; and workshops and conferences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study
proposes to build capacity for conducting cluster randomized trials (CRT), a
design permitting causal inference that is especially important in education
given the clustered nature of the U.S. school system, by fleshing out a growing
database of CRT parameter estimates to include those for K-12 science teacher
interventions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study will (1) estimate effect sizes
that use meta-analysis with a reasonable plan for identifying the relevant
literature, coding, and adjusting for publication bias and (2) estimate intra-
class correlation coefficients (ICCs) and R-squared values for both 2- and
3-level CRT models across a range of covariates using a variety of data sources.