* 1544844
* CPS:GOALI:Synergy: Maneuver and Data Optimization for High Confidence Testing of Future Automotive Cyberphysical Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2020
* Barzan Mozafari, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Sandip Roy
* 09/30/2020
* USD 775,000.00

This project addresses urgent challenges in high confidence validation and
verification of automotive vehicles due to on-going and anticipated introduction
of advanced, connected and autonomous vehicles into mass production. Since such
vehicles operate across both physical and cyber domains, faults can occur in
traditional physical components, in cyber components (i.e., algorithms,
processors, networks, etc.), or in both. Thus, advanced vehicles need to be
tested for both physical and cyber-related fault conditions. The goal of this
project is to develop theory, methods, and novel tools for generating and
optimizing test trajectories and data inputs that can uncover both physical and
cyber faults of future automotive vehicles. The level of vehicle reliability and
safety achieved for current vehicles is remarkable considering their mass
production, low cost, and wide range of operating conditions. If successful, the
research advances made in this project will enable achieving similar levels of
reliability and safety for future vehicles relying on advanced driver assistance
technologies, connectivity and autonomy. The project will advance the
&amp;#64257;eld of cyber-physical systems, in general, and their lifecycle
management, in particular. The validation and veri&amp;#64257;cation theory and
methodology for cyberphysical systems will be expanded for uncovering anomalies
and faults, especially using comprehensive case-based and optimization-based
techniques for test scenario generation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The theoretical
advances and case studies will contribute to the state-of-the-art in optimal
control theory, game theory, information theory, data collection and processing,
autonomous and connected vehicles, and automotive control. Sampling-based
vehicle data acquisition and vehicle-aware data management strategies will be
developed which can be applied more broadly, e.g., to cloud-based vehicle
prognostics / conditional maintenance and mobile health-monitoring devices.
Finally, approaches for efficient on-board data collection and aggregation will
be implemented in a Cyber-physical system (CPS) Black Box prototype. The
development of a vehicle-aware data management system (VDMS) will be pursued,
leading to optimized use of data mining and compression inside the CPS Black Box
to aggressively reduce the communication and computational costs.
Synergistically with theoretical and methodological advances, automotive case
studies will be undertaken with both realistic simulations and real experiments
in collaboration with an industrial partner (AVL).