* 1544535
* EAGER: Exploring Job Applicant Privacy Concerns
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2018
* Donald Truxillo, Portland State University
* Standard Grant
* Shannon Beck
* 09/30/2018
* USD 227,709.00

Millions of people in the U.S. and worldwide apply for jobs online, and the use
of online job application systems is growing. Thus, online job applicants are an
important population to study. However, few studies have examined job
applicants' concerns about their privacy and how to protect it. Further, job
applicants' privacy concerns may affect how willing they are to apply for jobs
and even whether job applicants pursue legal action against employers for
privacy violations. This research focuses on job applicants' concerns about the
privacy of information they provide during the job application process.
Specifically, this research examines which privacy issues applicants are most
concerned with and how to ease those concerns. The researchers also examine how
well job applicants understand explanations surrounding the technologies that
employers use to maintain the privacy of applicants' personal information. By
understanding how security issues can be explained effectively to users, the
research will provide recommendations for the development of security practices
in the online job application process and how to explain them to applicants.
Insights resulting from this research will also be applicable in the broader
(and constantly expanding) arenas where online privacy is a
factor.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In Phase 1, the researchers focus on the
intersection between computer science and the social sciences, utilizing an
archival dataset of 77,443 online job applicants for entry-level retail jobs.
The data include the attitudes of these job applicants, such as concerns about
the privacy of their data and attitudes toward the employer, as the applicants
move through the stages of an online job application from the initial
application to its resolution, i.e., when job applicants have received the
hiring decision. In Phase 2, the researchers conduct an online job application
simulation using an experimental design to examine conclusions from Phase 1.
This entails an online study of approximately 4,000 Internet users who will be
asked questions typically asked on a job application. Participants are randomly
assigned to conditions that provide different explanations for the technical
mechanisms-such as encryption-that are used to secure their information and how
the organization will use applicants' data. Participants then complete measures
such as fairness of the process, employer attractiveness, self-perceptions, how
much they want the job, and privacy concerns. The two studies will guide future
research on how to explain privacy issues to job applicants so that applicants
and employers may better protect privacy.