* 1544439
* Musical Interpretation of and Instructional Module on Ross Ice Shelf Wave-Induced Vibrations
* GEO,OPP
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2017
* Glenn McClure, SUNY College at Geneseo
* Standard Grant
* Valentine Kass
* 09/30/2017
* USD 1.00

Glenn McClure, a composer and professor of music, will create an orchestral and
choral musical composition by translating subsonic frequency data, obtained by
the researcher Dr. Peter Bromirski studying the shifting Ross Ice Shelf, into
musical frequencies within the range of human hearing. McClure will also record
audible ambient sounds that will enhance his composition as well as take video
and still images for projection during live performances of his finished piece.
The goal is to deliver an artistic experience of the scientific concepts the
music is based on and convey an emotional experience of the effects of changing
conditions of the Ross Ice Shelf. In addition to his composition, McClure will
create an instructional module with the goal of empowering middle-school
students with the ability to create their own musical works from scientific data
sets.

The project holds relevance for the general public and the educational community
as a new motivational instructional tool for science, in general, and
Antarctica, specifically. The deliverables will include sheet music, rehearsal
recordings, videos to accompany live performances, composer's notes and links to
Antarctic resources for extended study. The educational products will include
the arts integrated instructional module, an online community of practice, other
online resources, and a platform to celebrate exemplary student work. McClure
has identified multiple potential dissemination channels for live performances
of his compositions in addition to YouTube videos and other outreach
opportunities.