* 1544526
* Activity, Preservation and Fossilization of Cryptoendolithic Microorganisms in Antarctica
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2018
* Christopher Omelon, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Michael E. Jackson
* 08/31/2018
* USD 154,814.00

Cryptoendoliths are organisms that colonize microscopic cavities of rocks, which
give them protection and allow them to inhabit extreme environments, such as the
cold, arid desert of the Dry Valleys of Antarctica. Fossilized cryptoendoliths
preserve the forms and features of organisms from the past and thus provide a
unique opportunity to study the organisms? life histories and environments. To
study this fossil record, there needs to be a better understanding of what
environmental conditions allow these fossils to form. A climate gradient
currently exists in the Dry Valleys that allows us to study living, dead, and
fossilized cryptoendoliths from mild to increasingly harsh environments;
providing insight to the limits of life and how these fossils are formed. This
project will develop instruments to detect the biological activity of the live
microorganisms and conduct laboratory experiments to determine the environmental
limits of their survival. The project also will characterize the chemical and
structural features of the living, dead, and fossilized cryptoendoliths to
understand how they become fossilized. Knowing how microorganisms are preserved
as fossils in cold and dry environments like Antarctica can help to refine
methods that can be used to search for and identify evidence for
extraterrestrial life in similar habitats on planets such as Mars. This project
includes training of graduate and undergraduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Little is known about cryptoendolithic
microfossils and their formation processes in cold, arid terrestrial habitats of
the Dry Valleys of Antarctica, where a legacy of activity is discernible in the
form of biosignatures including inorganic materials and microbial fossils that
preserve and indicate traces of past biological activity. The overarching goals
of the proposed work are: (1) to determine how rates of microbial respiration
and biodegradation of organic matter control microbial fossilization; and (2) to
characterize microbial fossils and their living counterparts to elucidate
mechanisms for fossilization. Using samples collected across an increasingly
harsher (more cold and dry) climatic gradient that encompasses living, dead, and
fossilized cryptoendolithic microorganisms, the proposed work will: (1) develop
an instrument to be used in the field that can measure small concentrations of
CO2 in cryptoendolithic habitats in situ; (2) conduct incubation experiments to
target variations in microbial activity in samples containing living, dead, and
fossilized microorganisms as well as limits to microbial activity by measuring
CO2 evolution and delta13C signatures; and (3) use a suite of microscopy
techniques (CLSM, cryo-SEM, FIB-SEM, Âµ-XFM) to correlate laboratory experimental
evidence for microbial viability and activity and to identify the chemical and
morphological characteristics of biosignatures and microbial fossils. A
metagenomic survey of microbial communities in these samples will be used to
characterize differences in diversity, identify if specific microorganisms (e.g.
prokaryotes, eukaryotes) are more capable of surviving under these harsh
climatic conditions, and to corroborate microscopic observations of the
viability states of these microorganisms.