* 1544076
* Meeting: Plant Biology 2015 PUI Networking Workshop; July 25, 2015, Minneapolis Convention Center, Minneapolis, MN
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2016
* Crispin Taylor, American Society of Plant Biologists
* Standard Grant
* elsbeth walker
* 06/30/2016
* USD 15,000.00

The transition from a research-intensive environment to a Primarily
Undergraduate Institution (PUI) such as a small liberal arts college can make it
difficult for scientists to maintain connections with the broader science
community, and ASPB is an important resource for those connections. This pre-
annual meeting extended workshop is designed to enhance the participation of PUI
scientists at the national meeting and to introduce them to research resources
and opportunities that will help them connect to the broader plant biology
research community year round. These connections are critical for PUI scientists
seeking to build and maintain successful research programs. A second goal is to
help graduate students and postdocs become more acquainted with the expectations
for a successful career at a PUI so that they are better prepared to enter the
job market.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The American Society of Plant Biologists (ASPB)
is a leader in supporting career development opportunities for a wide variety of
scientists. In an effort to boost research engagement at Primarily Undergraduate
Institutions (PUIs) for current and prospective faculty, ASPB is offering an
extended workshop prior to the annual meeting (PB2015) in Minneapolis, MN in
July 2015. The workshop is designed to help current faculty share best practices
in experimental design, collaboration, grant writing, and time management for
conducting research in the undergraduate setting. Numerous national studies have
shown that undergraduate research promotes intellectual development and
preparation for science careers. PUI faculty are often removed from the rich
research environment of research-intensive schools and need connections through
societies, such as ASPB, to develop and maintain robust research programs. This
workshop will help PUI faculty develop connections that can be maintained
through year-round networking opportunities in the online ASPB community. This
award will facilitate recruitment of PUI faculty that most need assistance
connecting with the broader plant biology research community to help them better
engage the undergraduates at their institutions in research. The workshop will
also expose graduate students and postdoctoral associates to resources needed
for planning a research career at a PUI. Travel to the annual meeting and
attendance at the workshop poses a financial hardship to many PUI faculty
members without extensive research&lt;br/&gt;support. To offset this hardship
and encourage attendance among faculty who do not already have research support,
this proposal will allow travel awards for participants who need assistance.