* 1544273
* Evaluation for Actionable Change: A Data-Driven Approach
* EDU,DGE
* 01/01/2016,06/30/2021
* Tiffany Barnes, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Jolene Jesse
* 06/30/2021
* USD 799,837.00

This proposal was submitted in response to the Promoting Research and Innovation
in Methodologies for Evaluation (PRIME) solicitation NSF 15-540. The PRIME
program seeks to support research on evaluation with special emphasis on
exploring innovative approaches, building on and expanding the theoretical
foundations, and growing the capacity and infrastructure of the evaluation
field. Increasing pressures for accountability have resulted in a push for
rigorous evaluation of educational programs and practice. Yet rigorous
evaluations such as Randomized Control Trials (RCTs) are expensive and often
show small effects. Even RCTs of widely-adopted digital learning platforms can
show disappointing results and these results have little impact on subsequent
adoptions of programs already entrenched in the educational landscape. New
methods are needed to both estimate effects and to indicate ways of improving
outcomes for already-adopted digital learning tools. With platforms currently in
wide-scale use, novel approaches to assessing use patterns and their relations
with outcomes can both evaluate maximal effectiveness and provide means for
improved effectiveness. This research will develop an evaluation of ST Math, a
K-8 digital learning platform designed to strengthen the mathematical competency
of students through enhancing both their understanding of math concepts and
their motivation for math learning. By investing in evaluation innovations to
improve digital learning platforms such as ST Math, such programs could reach
large numbers of children with maximal effectiveness with each iteration.
Development of automated tools for improvement can also enhance both the
efficiency and efficacy of the digital learning platforms. This work will be
accomplished through a partnership between researchers at North Carolina State
University (NC State) with expertise in educational evaluation, educational data
mining, and assessment with program developers at the non-profit MIND Research
Institute (MIND).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will explore novel, and
noninvasive, approaches for determining the impact of the ST Math digital
learning environment. It will advance the analytical basis for formative
assessment using process data and build algorithms that improve STEM teaching
and learning by facilitating the automatic recognition of teachable moments for
learning. The transformative potential of this research resides in the creation
of new cross-disciplinary approaches that can be used to not only evaluate
impact, but to inform improved teaching and learning in STEM, by leveraging
observed behaviors of students and teachers and educational data mining
techniques. Specifically, this research will explore novel methods for
detecting, visualizing, and evaluating students? puzzle-solving and puzzle-
selection behaviors. The PIs will assess whether the detected patterns are
driven by students? incoming competence or can be used to predict their short
and long-term performance. By linking student and teacher behavior patterns with
important learning and motivational outcomes, the researchers may be able to
recommend promising actions to teachers and potential refinements to developers.
This work has the potential to not only transform the use and success of the ST
Math platform, but to create methods that can be refined and transferred to the
evaluation and implementation of other platforms.