* 1544018
* Physics of Wear, Tear, Aging and Failure in Living and Nonliving Systems Conference
* MPS,PHY
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Herbert Levine, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 05/31/2016
* USD 49,635.00

Biological aging is characterized by loss of structural integrity and functional
decline with time. It is generally believed that these changes occur gradually
with age, leading to the eventual death of the organism. Engineered physical
systems also change as time passes, again losing structural integrity and
eventually failing to perform their designed function. This workshop will
explore the extent to which general ideas regarding these processes can be
applied to both living and nonliving systems. There have been many proposals
regarding the underlying mechanisms of biological aging, most of which focus on
a single molecular process. For example, much work has gone into the issue of
telomere shortening as a very specific driver of cellular senescence. However,
much of this work begs the central question of whether aging is an inevitable
consequence of the physical and chemical processes that take place during life
or alternatively whether it is a modifiable consequence of a genetic and/or
epigenetic program that is being executed by the cells. Most engineered systems
fail not because of prior programmed deterioration of its parts, but because of
the natural physical processes that take place when complex systems interact
with each other. Are living systems similar? These are the questions that the
workshop will address. There are several types of aging processes that take
place in physical systems. Erosion, corrosion, and structural defect formation
are some of the mechanisms contributing to diminished structural integrity,
decrease in fidelity and eventual failure of physical devices. Different systems
are subject to different mixes of some of these fundamental mechanisms. In
living systems, different parts of an organism age differently. For example, the
immune system, the skin, and other organs subject to continuous cell renewal,
are believed to age due to diminishing cell proliferative capacity. The
intracellular mechanisms responsible for the reduction of the proliferative
potential of the cells comprising the tissue are not well understood, although
many "theories" exist of how such reduction could be brought by the physical and
chemical processes taking place in a cell. On the other hand the knee of an
animal ages in a different manner. In this case the friction brought by
continuous use leads to wear of the cartilage, and it gradually becomes harder
and harder to use as a joint. In the first example of aging the organs become
more susceptible with time to various diseases and eventually lead to disease
related death. In the second case the animal cannot compete with its predators
and gets consumed by them. As their parts fail, biological and mechanical
systems can and often are repaired. However, the repair process is also by its
nature prone to errors, and cannot keep up indefinitely. How many cars from the
1950's are still operational? This seems to be true both at the individual level
and at the species level. But, if we consider life as a whole, evolution seems
to have defied this fundamental limitation and life on Earth has been
flourishing for most of the history of the planet. Is this just a question of
our limited experience with life or will evolution always find a viable
strategy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this workshop that will take place May 7 - 8,
2015 at Tysons Corner in Virginia. Approximately 25 scientists representing
Physics, Materials Science, and Biology will discuss the physical principles and
processes underlying aging in living and nonliving system, the similarities and
differences between living and nonliving systems and their repair and failure.
The workshop participants will discuss what is the relation between non-
equilibrium thermodynamics and aging, is there a role for information theory in
describing the aging process and how is this information preserved in life as a
whole, and finally are there lessons for robust technology development that we
can learn from living systems. The workshop especially seeks to have
representation at the workshop of young scientists, who will bring their
perspective on aging and learn from more experienced colleagues.