* 1544356
* Testing the influence of long-term ecological change on evolutionary responses in zooplankton
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2018
* Matthew Walsh, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* John Schade
* 07/31/2018
* USD 219,750.00

Documenting, understanding, and predicting how organisms respond to natural and
anthropogenic change is complicated; some responses may be short-term, but
others may result from evolutionary change. This project will exploit long-term
ecological data to ask when, where, and how often changes observed in aquatic
organisms represent true evolutionary responses. Its value lies in the use and
analysis of existing data to ask new questions about the nature of ecological
changes over time. The University of Texas at Arlington is an Hispanic Serving
Institution; groups under-served in STEM areas comprise 42% of the student
population. The investigator will engage undergraduate and graduate students in
the research activities, with clear plans to recruit students from under-served
groups. He will use his analyses and resulting data in undergraduate inquiry-
based laboratory exercises to demonstrate how to distinguish ecological from
evolutionary responses and to extend his mentoring of under-served groups.
Existing outreach programs at his institution will allow him to engage high
school students in summer research activities. Through public outreach programs,
he will increase awareness of the vulnerability of aquatic ecosystems to
anthropogenic change and the importance of long-term
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Long-Term Ecological Research (LTER) sites have
documented responses of natural populations and communities to rising
temperatures, increased urbanization, eutrophication, and the spread of exotic
species, but have not examined the extent to which these responses reflect
evolutionary change. The five aims comprising this project will quantify
phenotypic responses to long-term ecological change, using phenotype as a signal
for evolutionary responses. Existing data, samples, and experiments from over
twenty lakes in Wisconsin and Alaska will be analyzed to explore changes in
zooplankton traits that might indicate evolutionary responses to invasive
species, land use change, rising temperatures, and changes in nutrient
availability. Appropriate data sets and samples to address these questions have
been identified, although some questions will require new measurements from
archived specimens. Preliminary analyses are provocative. In some cases, changes
in zooplankton body sizes and abundances support predator-induced selection. In
other cases, they contradict predictions from prevailing theory. Exploratory
statistical analyses will be used throughout to relate changes in response
variables to putative selection pressures. Results will allow the tempo and
trajectory of phenotypic change to be compared across sites to ask whether
similar responses occur in temperate and arctic ecosystems. The investigator is
an early-career researcher; his longer-term goal is to build these exploratory
studies into a research program that integrates long-term ecological and
evolutionary studies.