* 1544687
* CPS: Breakthrough: Low-cost Continuous Virtual Energy Audits in Cyber-Physical Building Envelope
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2020
* Ryan Robucci, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Ralph Wachter
* 08/31/2020
* USD 498,117.00

Electricity usage of buildings (including offices, malls and residential
apartments) represents a significant portion of a nation's energy expenditure
and carbon footprint. Buildings are estimated to consume 72% of the total
electricity production in the US. Unfortunately, however, 30% of this energy
consumption is wasted. Virtual energy assessment is an approach that can
optimize building energy efficiency and minimize waste at a low cost with
minimal expert intervention. A virtual energy audit includes a thorough and near
real time analysis of different sources of building energy usage, individualized
energy footprints of load appliances and devices, and proactive identification
of energy holes and air leakages. This project builds a low cost solution that
combines the use of non-intrusive single point energy monitoring and low cost IR
cameras to provide continuous energy audits. The system will provide continuous
virtual audit reports to the landlords or residential users. The system will be
deployed in low-income neighborhoods in Baltimore City, Maryland, where poor
insulation problems are assumed to be fiscally insurmountable and low cost
solutions to determining these issues is important for the landlords.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To develop a scalable low cost virtual energy auditing
system, this breakthrough research pursues the interfaces of smart building
sensing, computing and actuation. The project will be executed under three main
research thrust areas. First, it utilizes an autonomous discovery, profiling and
rule-based predictive model to capture the relationship between disaggregated
power measures and a device's actual usage patterns to pinpoint any abnormal
consumption. Second, the PIs develop zero-energy far-infrared imaging sensors
for low cost low frequency heat map scanning and air leakage detection. Third,
the project engineers and evaluates cyber-physical building sensing system with
a control level design perspective for virtual energy auditing that drives the
realization of deep energy savings and building efficiency. Additionally, the
PIs with collaboration from Constellation will host building energy education
projects and workshop where undergraduate, high school, and underrepresented
group of students would understand how to design and program energy meters and
smart plugs.