* 1544715
* NRT-IGE: Training Graduate Students as Research Mentors for Undergraduates
* EHR,DGE
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2019
* Fiona Doyle, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* John Weishampel
* 08/31/2019
* USD 487,026.00

NRT-IGE: Training Graduate Students as Research Mentors for Undergraduates

This National Science Foundation Research Traineeship (NRT) award in the
Innovations in Graduate Education (IGE) Track to the University of California-
Berkeley will test improvements to the way undergraduates are introduced to
science in research universities through training graduate students to serve as
mentors for undergraduate researchers. Undergraduates are often included in
research projects as beginning steps to becoming scientists. Research on their
experiences points to the formation of good mentoring relationships as a key to
positive experiences in these critical first stages in the practice of science.
Graduate students, who are often present and actively engaged in supervising
undergraduate research projects, have an especially good opportunity to ensure
that undergraduates thrive in their research, leading to more undergraduates
choosing to continue in science fields. Learning to be good mentors also
enhances the career skills of graduate researchers, who go on to be lead
scientists in universities and industries. This project will provide new
insights into the potential positive effects that providing training for
graduate mentors has on undergraduates, on graduate students themselves, and on
the national science community.

Building on a successful test-program at UC-Berkeley, this project will pilot
and assesses the approach's efficacy in training student mentors from a range of
STEM fields and research settings. Participant training will include a semester-
long professional development course prior to practicing their new skills while
mentoring undergraduate researchers. Formative evaluation results will be used
to refine the training elements and course curricula during two additional
iterations of the program. Data on the effectiveness of the training for
graduate students from different disciplines will be used to refine and adapt
the training materials for students from different STEM fields and backgrounds.
By expanding the test population to include graduate student mentors who do not
take the formal mentoring course prior to working with undergraduates, but who
use the training materials, the project will assess how the newly developed
materials will work for students who are self-guided mentors. This project will
produce one of the first systematic investigations of the effects of providing
formal training in research mentoring to graduate students, including examining
variations among discipline clusters on the effectiveness of different
techniques. The project will produce a resource tool-kit for graduate student
mentoring of undergraduate researchers that will be made shared on a national
level.

The NSF Research Traineeship (NRT) Program is designed to encourage the
development and implementation of bold, new, potentially transformative, and
scalable models for STEM graduate education training. The Innovations in
Graduate Education Track is dedicated solely to piloting, testing, and
evaluating novel, innovative, and potentially transformative approaches to
graduate education.