* 1544917
* CPS/Synergy/Collaborative Research: Smart Calibration Through Deep Learning for High-Confidence and Interoperable Cyber-Physical Additive Manufacturing Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Qiang Huang, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 08/31/2020
* USD 350,000.00

Additive Manufacturing holds the promise of revolutionizing manufacturing. One
important trend is the emergence of cyber additive manufacturing communities for
innovative design and fabrication. However, due to variations in materials and
processes, design and computational algorithms currently have limited
adaptability and scalability across different additive manufacturing systems.
This award will establish the scientific foundation and engineering principles
needed to achieve adaptability, extensibility, and system scalability in cyber-
physical additive manufacturing systems, resulting in high efficiency and
accuracy fabrication. The research will facilitate the evolution of existing
isolated and loosely-connected additive manufacturing facilities into fully
functioning cyber-physical additive manufacturing systems with increased
capabilities. The application-based, smart interfacing infrastructure will
complement existing cyber additive communities and enhance partnerships between
academia, industry, and the general public. The research will contribute to the
technology and engineering of Cyber-physical Systems and the economic
competitiveness of US manufacturing. This interdisciplinary research will
generate new curricular materials and help educate a new generation of
cybermanufacturing workforce. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will establish
smart and dynamic system calibration methods and algorithms through deep
learning that will enable high-confidence and interoperable cyber-physical
additive manufacturing systems. The dynamic calibration and re-calibration
algorithms will provide a smart interfacing layer of infrastructure between
design models and physical additive manufacturing systems. Specific research
tasks include: (1) Establishing smart and fast calibration algorithms to make
physical additive manufacturing machines adaptable to design models; (2)
Deriving prescriptive compensation algorithms to achieve extensible design
models; (3) Dynamic recalibration through deep learning for improved predictive
modeling and compensation; and (4) Developing a smart calibration server and APP
prototype test bed for scalable additive cyberinfrastructures.