* 1544134
* Collaborative Research: Research Initiation: Facilitating Design Thinking through Cases
* ENG,EEC
* 11/01/2015,10/31/2018
* Ashlie Martini, University of California - Merced
* Standard Grant
* Julie Martin
* 10/31/2018
* USD 48,884.00

The goal of the proposed project is to use case studies to introduce design
thinking to first-generation and underrepresented students to help them
transition from classroom and lab-based learning to engineering capstone design
and ultimately to their careers in engineering fields. The case studies will be
implemented as part of a new discussion section for a Mechanical Engineering
class at UC Merced, a Hispanic Serving Institution where over 60% of
undergraduates are the first in their families to attend college, more than half
come from bilingual or non-English-speaking homes, and more than 75% of students
receive financial aid. This project also represents the first collaboration
between an associate professor in Mechanical Engineering at UC Merced who
teaches design and is familiar with the challenges students face but has no
formal training in education, and an associate professor in Educational
Psychology at Michigan State University with expertise in case studies and
engineering education. The project will have direct impact on the students at UC
Merced who participate in the pilot program, longer-term and wider-reaching
impact through dissemination of the case studies and evaluation of their
success, as well as on the PIs who will learn from each other's expertise and
use this as the first step towards future collaborative education innovation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The engineering profession is a complex and ill-structured
domain, and it is recognized that the skill sets which will be required for
engineers to successfully fulfill the mission of their profession are much
broader than those honed in traditional engineering curricula. This is the
premise for promoting and cultivating design thinking in engineering students,
and is the focus of the proposed research, which leverages the experiential
contexts to develop desired attributes of future engineers. Specifically, this
project is based the hypothesis that engaging students in a case-based class
before the capstone design course will enable them to both perform better in the
design class and will prepare them for real world engineering. This hypothesis
will be explored by integrating the component-specific instruction of lectures
from an existing Mechanical Component Design course into case studies, with the
goal of introducing the students to design thinking. More specifically, design
thinking will be taught using case studies that involve the five phases of the
Stanford design process: Empathize, Define, Ideate, Prototype, and Test. Given
the complex cognitive nature of design thinking, this structured approach will
allow students to generate and evolve their solutions/ideas while helping them
navigate the challenges of design thinking. The main objectives of this project
are to: (1) Develop the PI's expertise in embedding case studies to teach design
thinking, (2) establish a library of case studies that use design thinking to
expand engineering students' view of problem formulation and solution
development, and (3) evaluate the effectiveness of case-based instruction for
instilling design thinking behavior in a diverse student population.