* 1544814
* CPS: Synergy: Collaborative Research: Adaptive Intelligence for Cyber-Physical Automotive Active Safety - System Design and Evaluation
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2015,12/31/2021
* Panagiotis Tsiotras, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Ralph Wachter
* 12/31/2021
* USD 576,001.00

The automotive industry finds itself at a cross-roads. Current advances in MEMS
sensor technology, the emergence of embedded control software, the rapid
progress in computer technology, digital image processing, machine learning and
control algorithms, along with an ever increasing investment in vehicle-to-
vehicle (V2V) and vehicle-to-infrastructure (V2I) technologies, are about to
revolutionize the way we use vehicles and commute in everyday life. Automotive
active safety systems, in particular, have been used with enormous success in
the past 50 years and have helped keep traffic accidents in check. Still, more
than 30,000 deaths and 2,000,000 injuries occur each year in the US alone, and
many more worldwide. The impact of traffic accidents on the economy is estimated
to be as high as $300B/yr in the US alone. Further improvement in terms of
driving safety (and comfort) necessitates that the next generation of active
safety systems are more proactive (as opposed to reactive) and can comprehend
and interpret driver intent. Future active safety systems will have to account
for the diversity of drivers' skills, the behavior of drivers in traffic, and
the overall traffic conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research aims at
improving the current capabilities of automotive active safety control systems
(ASCS) by taking into account the interactions between the driver, the vehicle,
the ASCS and the environment. Beyond solving a fundamental problem in automotive
industry, this research will have ramifications in other cyber-physical domains,
where humans manually control vehicles or equipment including: flying, operation
of heavy machinery, mining, tele-robotics, and robotic medicine. Making
autonomous/automated systems that feel and behave "naturally" to human operators
is not always easy. As these systems and machines participate more in everyday
interactions with humans, the need to make them operate in a predictable manner
is more urgent than ever.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To achieve the goals of the
proposed research, this project will use the estimation of the driver's
cognitive state to adapt the ASCS accordingly, in order to achieve a seamless
operation with the driver. Specifically, new methodologies will be developed to
infer long-term and short-term behavior of drivers via the use of Bayesian
networks and neuromorphic algorithms to estimate the driver's skills and current
state of attention from eye movement data, together with dynamic motion cues
obtained from steering and pedal inputs. This information will be injected into
the ASCS operation in order to enhance its performance by taking advantage of
recent results from the theory of adaptive and real-time, model-predictive
optimal control. The correct level of autonomy and workload distribution between
the driver and ASCS will ensure that no conflicts arise between the driver and
the control system, and the safety and passenger comfort are not compromised. A
comprehensive plan will be used to test and validate the developed theory by
collecting measurements from several human subjects while operating a virtual
reality-driving simulator.