* 1544887
* CPS: TTP Option: Synergy: Collaborative Research: Dynamic Methods of Traffic Control that Impact Quality of Life in Smart Cities
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2015,02/28/2021
* Mihailo Jovanovic, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Ralph Wachter
* 02/28/2021
* USD 1,248,000.00

In the recent past the term "Smart Cities" was introduced to mainly characterize
the integration into our daily lives of the latest advancements in technology
and information. Although there is no standardized definition of Smart Cities,
what is certain is that it touches upon many different domains that affect a
city's physical and social capital. Smart cities are intertwined with traffic
control systems that use advanced infrastructures to mitigate congestion and
improve safety. Traffic control management strategies have been largely focused
on improving vehicular traffic flows on highways and freeways but arterials have
not been used properly and pedestrians are mostly ignored. This work proposes to
introduce a novel hierarchical adaptive controls paradigm to urban network
traffic control that will adapt to changing movement and interaction behaviors
from multiple entities (vehicles, public transport modes, bicyclists, and
pedestrians). Such a paradigm will leverage several key ideas of cyber-physical
systems to rapidly and automatically pin-point and respond to urban arterial
congestion thereby improving travel time and reliability for all modes. Safety
will also be improved since advanced warnings actuated by the proposed cyber-
physical system will alert drivers to congested areas thereby allowing them to
avoid these areas, or to adapt their driving habits. Such findings have a
tangible effect on the well-being, productivity, and health of the traveling
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary goal is to create a Cyber-Control
Network (CCN) that will integrate seamlessly across heterogeneous sensory data
in order to create effective control schemes and actuation sequences.
Accordingly, this project introduces a Cyber-Physical architecture that will
then integrate: (i) a sub-network of heterogeneous sensors, (ii) a decision
control substrate, and (iii) a sub-actuation network that carries out the
decisions of the control substrate (traffic control signals, changeable message
signs). This is a major departure from more prevalent centralized Supervisory
Control And Data Acquisition (SCADA), in that the CCN will use a hierarchical
architecture that will dynamically instantiate the sub-networks together to
respond rapidly to changing cyber-physical interactions. Such an approach allows
the cyber-physical system to adapt in real-time to salient traffic events
occurring at different scales of time and space. The work will consequently
introduce a ControlWare module to realize such dynamic sub-network
reconfiguration and provide decision signal outputs to the actuation network. A
secondary, complementary goal is to develop a heterogeneous sensor network to
reliably and accurately monitor and identify salient arterial traffic events.
Other impacts of the project include the integration of the activities with
practitioners (e.g., traffic engineers), annual workshops/tutorials, and
outreach to K-12 institutions.