* 1544910
* CPS:Synergy:Security of Distributed Cyber-Physical Systems with Connected Vehicle Applications
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2015,11/30/2019
* James Martin, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 11/30/2019
* USD 800,000.00

This project aims to accelerate the deployment of security measures for cyber-
physical systems (CPSs). A framework is proposed that combines anomaly
identification approaches, which emphasizes on the development of decentralized
cyber-attack monitoring and diagnostic-like components, with robust control
countermeasure to improve reliability and maintain system functionality. Within
this framework, the investigators will (1) implement hybrid observers and active
attack detection methods exploiting system vulnerabilities; and (2) develop and
integrate cyber-attack control countermeasure at the physical system level to
guarantee functionality and resiliency in the presence of identified and
unidentified threats. Specifically, this project focuses on applications to
connected vehicle (CV) systems where vehicles are capable of sharing information
via dedicated short range communication network, with the goal of improving fuel
efficiency and avoiding collision. The project's final objective would be to
create a cyber-secure vehicle connectivity paradigm that incorporates cyber-
attack detection algorithms and executes integrated fault-tolerant
countermeasures at the vehicle level to support vehicle system resiliency and
accelerate the future commercialization of automated vehicles. The research
solutions of this project will impact safety, security and reliability of
networked CPSs by helping accelerate the adoption of threat identification and
attack resilient control countermeasures at the system and network level. The
specific application to connected and automated vehicles should lead to a future
market acceptance of these vehicle technologies with a potential improvement in
traffic conditions, vehicle and personal safety, and energy consumption.

This project involves interdisciplinary research in cyber security for the
development of more secure, scalable and reliable future networked CPSs. It
proposes to conduct fundamental research on a model-based computational strategy
that includes: 1) implement advanced threat models in a hybrid systems
framework; 2) identify system and communication vulnerabilities especially in
the dedicated short range communication network (DSRC) for CVs; 3) derive hybrid
observer based cyber-attack detection algorithms based on stochastic quantized
models and event triggered estimation; 4) establish active attack detection
methods based on system vulnerabilities; 5) develop control counter measures for
each CPS based on game theory and robust control methods; 6) derive control
algorithms against malicious agents in the CV to avoid vehicle collisions; 7)
develop computationally fast and distributed algorithms for the above six
objectives; and 8) evaluate through simulation and experimental validation the
capabilities and impact on the vehicle of the proposed strategies.