* 1544243
* MATH:EAGER:Collaborative Research: SMILES (Student-Made Interactive Learning with Educational Songs) for Introductory Statistics
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2020
* John Weber, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Sandra Richardson
* 08/31/2020
* USD 54,698.00

In our increasingly data-centric world, statistical reasoning--in particular,
reasoning about data in the context of uncertainty--has become central to the
skills our nation needs for students to develop, especially for their future
careers in the workforce. An undergraduate student's first formal experience
with statistical reasoning frequently occurs in classrooms dominated by lectures
rather than active learning experiences. In addition, the classroom instructors
often are relatively untrained in statistics. This is especially true at two-
year colleges where adjunct instructors can find it difficult to take part in
professional development opportunities, often perceive reform-based pedagogies
as taking 'extra work' when they already have an unreasonable workload, perceive
new resources as being difficult to integrate into their current mode of
instruction, and recognize the frequent severe 'statistics anxiety' in their
students. SMILES (Student-Made Interactive Learning with Educational Songs) for
Introductory Statistics--a collaborative project from Pennsylvania State
University - University Park, the University of Texas at El Paso, and Georgia
Perimeter College--will develop and field-test an innovation in online learning
in introductory statistics, where students create a song by filling in key words
associated with a learning objective. These interactive songs will challenge
students to make conceptual connections and construct examples or context,
thereby fostering statistical literacy and reasoning skills. Through a reduction
in statistics anxiety (a key impediment to student success) and an accompanying
enhancement of student learning, the potential impact is
striking.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The underlying goal of the project is to develop
resources that require little instructor time or expertise, but have a high
impact on developing statistical literacy and reasoning and on reducing
statistics anxiety. In connection with this, interactive songs will provide a
novel learning resource that holds great potential for teaching literacy and
reasoning skills in statistics and other STEM disciplines. The web-based,
machine-run, and auto-graded characteristic of this resource will provide easy
access to students anywhere anytime, and will address instructor hesitations
regarding in-class use. For instructors, interactive songs will be readily
adoptable regardless of pedagogy (e.g., as easily incorporated in a flipped
class as in an online class, or a lecture/lab course), and will provide a simple
bridge to the statistics education reform movement for groups like two-year
college adjunct faculty members who might remain otherwise disconnected. Most
importantly, these professional-quality interactive songs will be designed to
engage students, lessen anxiety, and foster active learning, thereby leading to
improved statistical reasoning skills. To enhance their value, the interactive
songs developed by the SMILES project will involve a unique artist/scientist
collaborative to create original high-quality musical resources. To evaluate
their efficacy and assess the value of interactive songs in enhancing student
learning and reducing student anxiety, the project team will conduct a
randomized controlled field test involving twenty (20) college level
introductory statistics instructors for which fifteen (15) will be from two-year
colleges. Response variables will include student answers to multiple-choice
assessment items and levels of anxiety as measured by a pre-Statistics Anxiety
Measure (SAM) and post-SAM measurement. Since students from the two-year
colleges consist predominately of African American and Hispanic student
populations, the research findings of the project will expand knowledge of best
practices for addressing the national need to broaden participation in science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) discipline areas.