* 1544090
* EAGER: A Mathematical Model of Privacy Decisions: A Behavioral Economic Perspective
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Tibor Besedes, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 08/31/2018
* USD 275,769.00

When making decisions about information privacy, people do not always act
rationally according to their best interests. It is thus important to understand
why people express concerns about privacy, but often act contrary to their
stated intentions. This research investigates individuals' privacy decisions,
from a behavioral economic perspective, by: 1) investigating how two systems of
thinking in human minds, affective (system 1) and cognitive (system 2), operate
during privacy decisions; 2) developing affective-cognitive algorithms to
mathematically describe the operation of systems 1 and 2 in privacy decisions;
and 3) testing and evaluating the accuracy of these algorithms. This is the
first step in forming a new mathematical theory of privacy that can describe how
people actually make privacy decisions versus how they are expected to make such
decisions.

Using techniques from discrete mathematics, theoretical computer science and
behavioral economics, and adapting the concept of bounded rationality, the PIs
will develop affective-cognitive algorithms to model human experienced-utility
in privacy decisions (i.e., risks and benefits they perceive in disclosing
privacy). This is fundamentally different from the existing mathematical models
of privacy decisions that assume humans have stable preferences and always
choose the option with the highest expected utility (i.e., the option with the
maximum privacy). The PIs use techniques from behavioral game theory to
rigorously test and evaluate the accuracy of their algorithms. The PIs apply
findings of behavioral economics, mathematical psychology, and previous research
on information privacy to translate operation of systems 1 and 2 into
mathematical models. This research is intended to bridge three streams of
research, namely information privacy, theoretical computer science, and
behavioral and experimental economics. The impacts of this research have
translational potential for application to real online environments and
implementation in decision support tools, such as recommender systems.