* 1544244
* Research Initiation: Investigating Engineering Students Habits of Mind: A Case Study Approach
* ENG,EEC
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2018
* Mireille Boutin, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Julie Martin
* 12/31/2018
* USD 150,000.00

The problems facing engineers in the 21st century are highly complex, involving
often competing requirements related to available technology, societal needs,
environmental considerations, and others. Fostering the ability of students to
solve these complex problems requires going beyond teaching technical skills to
consider the way engineers think. This project is an interdisciplinary study
that aims to characterize undergraduate engineering students' "habits of mind",
which are modes of thinking required for engineering students to become
effective problem solvers capable of transferring such skills to new contexts.
An example of habit of mind is a willingness to make mistakes while trying to
solve a problem, an attitude that allows engineers to successfully attack
problems that were previously unsolved. Students who have these habits of mind
will be prepared to address complex issues such as those described in the NAE
Grand Challenges.

The project will leverage an education website called Rhea (www.projectrhea.org)
along with data acquired as part of an engineering course to identify how
students experience scientific habits of mind as they engage in problem solving.
To this end, qualitative and quantitative research methods enhanced with machine
learning techniques will be combined. This will be accomplished through an
interdisciplinary partnership in which a boundary spanning research program to
identify and validate novel research methods and formative and summative
assessment mechanisms will be initiated. The efforts will center on enhancing
qualitative and quantitative educational research and assessment methods with
machine learning techniques such as automatic data clustering. The rationale for
this project is that its successful completion will (a) enable the research team
to develop collaborative inter-disciplinary efforts where the PI Boutin will
develop expertise in educational research methods and the co-PI Magana will
develop expertise in machine learning; (b) provide a context for an exploratory
study to be used as a baseline to apply for future funding to establish a
program in engineering education research methods and assessment; (c) address
challenges in cultivating a culture of lifelong learning among professional and
future engineers via scientific habits of mind in an engineering context; and
(d) develop new methods to characterize and measure different aspects of
professional formation processes in engineering education. The long term vision
is to develop an interdisciplinary partnership in the field of machine-learning-
assisted education research.