* 1544613
* CPS: TTP Option: Frontiers:  Collaborative Research: Software Defined Control  for Smart Manufacturing Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Elaine Shi, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Ralph Wachter
* 08/31/2019
* USD 302,820.00

Software-Defined Control (SDC) is a revolutionary methodology for controlling
manufacturing systems that uses a global view of the entire manufacturing
system, including all of the physical components (machines, robots, and parts to
be processed) as well as the cyber components (logic controllers, RFID readers,
and networks). As manufacturing systems become more complex and more connected,
they become more susceptible to small faults that could cascade into major
failures or even cyber-attacks that enter the plant, such as, through the
internet. In this project, models of both the cyber and physical components will
be used to predict the expected behavior of the manufacturing system. Since the
components of the manufacturing system are tightly coupled in both time and
space, such a temporal-physical coupling, together with high-fidelity models of
the system, allows any fault or attack that changes the behavior of the system
to be detected and classified. Once detected and identified, the system will
compute new routes for the physical parts through the plant, thus avoiding the
affected locations. These new routes will be directly downloaded to the low-
level controllers that communicate with the machines and robots, and will keep
production operating (albeit at a reduced level), even in the face of an
otherwise catastrophic fault. These algorithms will be inspired by the
successful approach of Software-Defined Networking. Anomaly detection methods
will be developed that can ascertain the difference between the expected
(modeled) behavior of the system and the observed behavior (from sensors).
Anomalies will be detected both at short time-scales, using high-fidelity
models, and longer time-scales, using machine learning and statistical-based
methods. The detection and classification of anomalies, whether they be random
faults or cyber-attacks, will represent a significant contribution, and enable
the re-programming of the control systems (through re-routing the parts) to
continue production.

The manufacturing industry represents a significant fraction of the US GDP, and
each manufacturing plant represents a large capital investment. The ability to
keep these plants running in the face of inevitable faults and even malicious
attacks can improve productivity -- keeping costs low for both manufacturers and
consumers. Importantly, these same algorithms can be used to redefine the
production routes (and machine programs) when a new part is introduced, or the
desired production volume is changed, to maximize profitability for the
manufacturing operation .