* 1544208
* Illuminating the black box: Using consensus in student survey reports as an indicator of instructional microclimates in mathematics and science
* EDU,DGE
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2018
* Jose-Felipe Martinez-Fernandez, Rand Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Finbarr Sloane
* 12/31/2018
* USD 455,500.00

The Promoting Research and Innovation in Methodologies for Evaluation (PRIME)
program seeks to support research on evaluation with special emphasis on: (1)
exploring innovative approaches for determining the impacts and usefulness of
STEM education projects and programs; (2) building on and expanding the
theoretical foundations for evaluating STEM education and workforce development
initiatives, including translating and adapting approaches from other fields;
and (3) growing the capacity and infrastructure of the evaluation
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of this study have the potential to
contribute to our understanding of the nature and organization of effective
teaching, and the mechanisms through which valued instructional practices are
organized inside the mathematics and science classroom to impact learning for
different students or groups of students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using data from
the Measures of Effective Teaching project, this study uses an innovative mixed-
methods design to examine whether within-classroom variation in student
responses to Tripod Student Perception Survey may be used to identify
instructional microclimates, and whether these microclimates moderate the
relationship between aggregate measures of instructional practice and student
achievement in mathematics and science classrooms. To this effect, investigators
will combine evidence from quantitative analysis of student survey data, with
in-depth qualitative analysis of lesson videos of the same classrooms.