* 1544635
* CPS: Synergy: Collaborative Research: Learning from cells to create transportation infrastructure at the micron scale
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2019
* Srinivasa Salapaka, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/2019
* USD 262,435.00

Cells, to carry out many important functions, employ an elaborate transport
network with bio-molecular components forming roadways as well as vehicles. The
transport is achieved with remarkable robustness under a very uncertain
environment. The main goal of this proposal is to understand how biology
achieves such functionality and leveraging the knowledge toward realizing
effective engineered transport mechanisms for micron sized cargo. The
realization of a robust infrastructure that enables simultaneous transport of
many micron and smaller sized particles will have a transformative impact on a
vast range of areas such as medicine, drug development, electronics, and bio-
materials. A key challenge here is to probe the mechanisms often at the
nanometer scale as the bio-molecular components are at tens of nanometer scale.
The main tools for addressing these challenges come from an engineering
perspective that is guided by existing insights from biology.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The proposal will bring together researchers from
engineering and biology and it provides an integrated environment for students.
Moreover, it is known that an impaired transport mechanism can underlie many
neurodegenerative maladies, and as the research here pertains to studying
intracellular transport, discoveries hold the potential for shedding light on
what causes the impaired transport. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Robust infrastructure
that enables simultaneous transport of many micron and smaller sized particles
will have a transformative impact on a vast range of areas such as medicine,
drug development, electronics, and bio-materials. Daunting challenges from the
underlying highly uncertain and complex environments impede enabling robust and
efficient transport systems at micro-scale. Motivated by transport in biological
cells, this work proposes a robust and efficient engineered infrastructure for
transporting micron/molecular scale cargo using biological constructs. For
probing and manipulating the transport network, the proposal envisions
strategies for coarse and fine resolution objectives at the global and local
scales respectively. At the fine scale of monitoring and control, scarce and
expensive physical resources such as high resolution sensors have to be shared
for interrogation/control of multiple carriers. In this proposal, the principles
for joint control, sensor allocation and scheduling of resources to achieve
enhanced performance objectives of a high resolution probing tool, will be
developed. A modern control perspective forms an essential strategy for managing
multiple objectives. At the global scale, entire traffic will be monitored to
arrive at real-time and off-line inferences on traffic modalities. Associated
principles for dynamically identifying and tracking clusters of carriers and
their importance will be built. This categorization of physical elements and
their importance will determine the dynamic allocation of computational
resources. Associated study of trade-offs will guide a combined strategy for
allocation of computational resources and gathering of information on physical
elements. Methods based on the reconstruction of graph topologies for reaching
inferences that are suited to dynamically related time trajectories for the
transportation infrastructure will be developed. The research proposed is
transformative as it will enable a new transport paradigm at the cellular scale,
which will also provide unique insights into intracellular transport where it
will be possible to investigate multiple factors under the same experimental
conditions.