* 1544011
* EAGER: Understanding and Improving Collegiate Persistence and STEM Opportunities for Developmental Mathematics Students
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2017
* Edgar Fuller, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Talitha Washington
* 08/31/2017
* USD 299,818.00

Nationally, approximately half of all students entering college are placed into
developmental mathematics courses, which focus on basic arithmetic and pre-
algebra topics. In addition, often, the credit hours for developmental
mathematics courses do not count toward college graduation hours. Some
undergraduates who place into developmental mathematics are interested in
pursuing a career in STEM, but get discouraged because they had to start their
degree trajectory at the developmental course level. At the same time, the
ongoing need for a strong workforce in science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics (STEM) makes it important not to lose so many students who started
college with an interest in STEM. In Fall 2015, for the first time, the
developmental mathematics course at West Virginia University (WVU) will carry
credit-bearing weight, offering a special opportunity to study the impact of
this change on student success in the course and persistence in subsequent STEM
courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Building on current work being conducted at WVU
across STEM disciplines based on early studies of self-identity situated in
disciplines, this project will address the following questions: (1) In what ways
do students in developmental mathematics self-identify as STEM learners? (2) At
what rate do STEM-intending developmental mathematics students persist in
pursuit of a STEM degree? (3) Does a shift to a credit-bearing version of
developmental mathematics improve student success rates? (4) What are the
factors in developmental mathematics that contribute to (i) persistence as a
STEM major and (ii) self identification as STEM learners? (5) How will the
introduction of peer mentors affect the learning gains of developmental
students? Using survey and institutional data, the project team will track
students through their first two years of their degree programs to investigate
when and why developmental mathematics students switch out of STEM majors, as
well as to identify factors related to student persistence in STEM from this
remedial starting point.