* 1544421
* WORKSHOP: Doctoral Consortium at the IEEE ACII 2015 Conference
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2016
* Qiang Ji, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 07/31/2016
* USD 10,000.00

This is funding to support travel for up to 10 students enrolled in PhD programs
in U.S. institutions, to attend the 6th IEEE International Conference on
Affective Computing and Intelligent Interactions (ACII 2015), to be held
September 21-24 in Xi'an, China. Besides attending the main conference program,
the students will participate in a Doctoral Consortium where they will share
their research results with the community and receive feedback from senior
researchers in the field. The ACII conference, which is held approximately every
two years, is the premier international forum for interdisciplinary research on
the design of systems that can recognize, interpret, and simulate human emotions
and related affective phenomena. Its broad scope includes: multi-modal
recognition or synthesis of human affect; psychological, cognitive, and
neurological affect modeling; affective computing for social and behavioral
sciences; and affective interactions for social robotics and virtual agents. The
conference presents the latest research in these and related areas, and it plays
an important role in shaping many scientific, academic, and educational
programs. A theme of ACII 2015 will be to emphasize the biological underpinnings
of affective computing, including how emotion is represented in the brain, how
it prepares and shapes the body and even how certain genes can underlie
affective dispositions. More information about the conference is available
online at http://www.acii2015.org. By attending ACII 15 and taking part in the
Doctoral Consortium, the students will not only learn the state of the art in
affective computing research but will also have an opportunity to present their
own work to, and receive feedback from, an invited committee of faculty and
industry researchers along with other students working in related areas. Such an
experience will greatly benefit the students professionally, by giving them
valuable exposure to outside perspectives on their work and providing a setting
in which to identify development needs and fine-tune their career objectives.
Just as importantly, they will have a chance to meet established researchers and
other graduate students doing similar work, to exchange ideas and to make
contacts that will be invaluable to them as they progress in their scientific
careers. Interacting with young researchers is also beneficial to experienced
investigators, by providing fresh ideas and new perspectives. Thus, the Doctoral
Consortium is a great confidence builder for the students involved, and highly
stimulating to the senior researchers as well. To maximize the benefits of the
NSF support, the event organizers will make a particular effort to recruit
students from underrepresented groups (in particular, women and minorities) and
from smaller schools or schools with less established affective computing
research programs, as well as a demographically diverse set of mentors to advise
these students (in terms of region, type of employment, and stage in career). In
addition, no more than one student will be selected from any given educational
institution.

The specific goals of the doctoral consortium are: to provide a setting for
face-to-face interaction and feedback on student participants' current research
and constructive guidance on future directions; to promote networking among PhD
students working in related area; to develop a supportive community of scholars
and a spirit of collaborative research; to support a new generation of
researchers with information and advice on academic, research, industrial, and
non-traditional career paths; and to support technical and culture interactions
between American students and their counterparts from other countries. Each
accepted student will receive up to $1,000 and will be asked to volunteer to
help the ACII 2015 Chairs run the conference. Students who do not have a paper
accepted for presentation either at ACII 2015 or one of its associated workshops
will be asked to supply an extended abstract (up to 6 pages) describing their
original, unpublished doctoral work, either completed or in progress. Each
participant in the Doctoral Consortium will be assigned a mentor based upon
similarity of research interests and experience, who will be committed to
discussing the work with the student mentee in a one-on-one setting. There will
be a Doctoral Consortium poster session, in which all participants will present
their doctoral work or a recent paper that is part of their doctoral work. A
best paper award will be given to honor Fiorella de Rosis, who co-chaired the
first ACII Doctoral Consortium in Lisbon in 2007.