* 1544782
* CPS: Breakthrough: A Meta-Game Theoretic Approach to Cyber-Physical Co-Design of Secure and Resilient Control Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2021
* Quanyan Zhu, New York University
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 08/31/2021
* USD 281,543.00

The increasing reliance on computer and communication technologies exposes
control systems to cyber security threats. The physical systems can now be
attacked through cyberspace. Emerging sophisticated attacks can exploit zero-day
vulnerabilities, persist in the system for long periods of time, and advance
stealthily to achieve their attack goals. Protection and prevention against such
attacks are not always possible, and a paradigm shift to emphasize resilience of
a control system is the overarching objective for safeguarding control systems
to protect nation's critical infrastructures. The major challenge for designing
secure and resilient cyber-physical control system is the lack of scientific
foundations, and quantitative methods to provide a systematic guideline for
large-scale cyber-physical interactions. To this end, the project aims to
establish a meta-game system theory, and develop computational and design
methodologies for cyber-physical co-design problems.

Game-theoretic tools serve as an appropriate way to interconnect systems from
multiple domains into one single framework to address security and resilience
issues of highly integrated CPS. This project investigates a meta-game framework
as a new paradigm to compose heterogeneous system components to design their
interactions to achieve functional security and resiliency properties. Through
developing security-aware controllers and impact-aware proactive cyber defense
mechanism, this project creates a system co-design paradigm based on the meta-
game framework, which captures the system properties of robustness, security,
and resilience in one single framework, and provides fundamental principles to
characterize their tradeoffs. The analytical framework will lead to the
development of a cyber-physical mechanism design theory to provide a solid
foundation for achieving optimal cyber-physical integration for control systems.
The developed analytical and design tools will allow the prediction of
unexpected outcomes of system integrations, the mitigation of the impact of
cyber attacks on control systems, and the cost-effective operation and design of
resilient CPS.