* 1544904
* CPS: Breakthrough: Collaborative Research: Securing Smart Grid by Understanding
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Krishna Kant, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Ralph Wachter
* 08/31/2019
* USD 245,000.00

Smart grid includes two interdependent infrastructures: power transmission and
distribution network, and the supporting telecommunications network. Complex
interactions among these infrastructures lead to new pathways for attack and
failure propagation that are currently not well understood. This innovative
project takes a holistic multilevel approach to understand and characterize the
interdependencies between these two infrastructures, and devise mechanisms to
enhance their robustness.

Specifically, the project has four goals. The first goal is to understand the
standardized smart grid communications protocols in depth and examine mechanisms
to harden them. This is essential since the current protocols are notoriously
easy to attack. The second goal is to ensure robustness in state estimation
techniques since they form the basis for much of the analysis of smart grid. In
particular, the project shall exploit a steganography-based approach to detect
bad data and compromised devices. The third goal is to explore trust-based
attack detection strategies that combine the secure state estimation with power
flow models and software attestation to detect and isolate compromised
components. The final goal is to study reconfiguration strategies that combine
light-weight prediction models, stochastic decision processes, intentional
islanding, and game theory techniques to mitigate the spreading of failures and
the loss of load. A unique aspect of smart grid security that will be studied in
this project is the critical importance of timeliness, and thus a tradeoff
between effectiveness of the mechanisms and the overhead introduced. The project
is expected to provide practical techniques for making the smart grid more
robust against failures and attacks, and enable it to recover from large scale
failures with less loss of capacity. The project will also train students in the
multidisciplinary areas of power systems operation and design, networking
protocols, and cyber-physical security.