* 1544233
* PFE: Research Initiation - Using Digital Badging and Design Challenge Modules to Develop Professional Identity
* ENG,EEC
* 11/01/2015,10/31/2017
* Abhaya Datye, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Julie Martin
* 10/31/2017
* USD 149,998.00

Students entering engineering schools generally have a very limited
understanding of what engineers do in their careers. Students often do not know
the interesting work that lies ahead, hence they may drop out of engineering
when they encounter the difficult math and science courses in their early years
in college. This dropout rate disproportionately impacts those underrepresented
in engineering because they may not have family members who are engineers and
who can help them gain an appreciation for engineering careers. To address this
problem, the Department of Chemical and Biological Engineering (CBE) at the
University of New Mexico (UNM), which serves a very diverse population, is
introducing 'Design Challenge Modules' in two core classes. These design
challenges will originate from research projects in the department, from local
industry, from national laboratories, and from the community. Community
engagement is critically important for attracting diverse, native, and rural
populations into engineering. The department is also piloting the use of digital
badges - much like merit badges - which allow students to publically display
their credentials and connect what they are learning to the professional work of
engineers. The badges also enable faculty to monitor and assess student outcomes
and to engage in research on their teaching. The project is directed by a team
that includes the chair of the CBE department, one lecturer in CBE, and a
faculty member from the Learning Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
addresses the significant decrease in the fraction of minority and non-
traditional students at UNM in the graduating class, compared to the students in
the freshman engineering class. The team is testing the hypothesis that
compelling design challenges introduced early in the curriculum will help
increase the fraction of students matriculating into the chemical engineering
department. Research and societal challenges will be introduced into the
classroom because their value in terms of enhancing the motivation and learning
of students is unquestionable. It is well known that there is significant
attrition in engineering during the first two years, especially at urban
institutions that serve a diverse population. Design challenges in the freshmen
and sophomore classes could help enhance the motivation and learning of the
diverse student population and contribute to student success. Local industry
will participate in presenting the design challenges, encouraging
entrepreneurial thinking. Engagement in the communities will further support
improved recruitment and retention. The project will also test the use of a
digital badging system to monitor student accomplishments. Digital badges
support students to see the program as coherent and to connect what they are
learning in their classes to the work of professional engineers, supporting them
to develop professional identities as engineers. The project is guided by a
research framework that involves a mixed methods design that first establishes a
baseline for students' design process skills, understanding of design, and
intent to persist. Case studies of students' experiences provide deeper
understanding of how particular aspects of the program foster professional
engineering identity formation and intent to persist, particularly for students
traditionally underrepresented in engineering. Regression modeling is used to
predict students' intent to persist and the degree to which their solutions to
design challenges are viewed as innovative. The project contributes new
understanding of how to engage faculty to support diverse students to be
successful in engineering. It will lead to sustained change in the teaching of
core chemical engineering classes including the ability to prepare diverse
engineers ready to solve the challenges of tomorrow. The design challenge
modules and digital badges are transferrable to many intermediate to large
institutions.