* 1544413
* CPS: Synergy: Collaborative Research: Design and Control of High-performance Provably-safe Autonomy-enabled Dynamic Transportation Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2019
* Sertac Karaman, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Ralph Wachter
* 08/31/2019
* USD 600,763.00

During the last decade, we have witnessed a rapid penetration of autonomous
systems technology into aerial, road, underwater, and sea vehicles. The autonomy
assumed by these vehicles holds the potential to increase performance
significantly, for instance, by reducing delays and increasing capacity, while
enhancing safety, in a number of transportation systems. However, to exploit the
full potential of these autonomy-enabled transportation systems, we must rethink
transportation networks and control algorithms that coordinate autonomous
vehicles operating on such networks. This project focuses on the design and
operation of autonomy-enabled transportation networks that provide provable
guarantees on achieving high performance and maintaining safety at all times.
The foundational problems arising in this domain involve taking into account the
physics governing the vehicles in order to coordinate them using cyber means.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research effort aims to advance the science of cyber-
physical systems by following a unique and radical approach, drawing inspiration
and techniques from non-equilibrium statistical mechanics and self-organizing
systems, and blending this inspiration with the foundational tools of queueing
theory, control theory, and optimization. This approach may allow orders of
magnitude improvement in the servicing capabilities of various transportation
networks for moving goods or people. The applications include the automation of
warehouses, factory floors, sea ports, aircraft carrier decks, transportation
networks involving driverless cars, drone-enabled delivery networks, air traffic
management, and military logistics networks. The project also aims to start a
new wave of classes and tutorials that will create trained engineers and a
research community in the area of safe and efficient transportation networks
enabled by autonomous cyber-physical systems.