* 1544225
* MATH: EAGER Building a mathematical toolkit and motivation for success in the physical and quantitative sciences
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Kathryne McConnell, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Turley
* 08/31/2019
* USD 296,996.00

This project targets the mathematics preparation gap which often contributes to
the low success rate in introductory STEM courses. The Virginia Tech
Quantitative Tools Working Group (QTWG) project will bring together teams of
faculty and students who will work collaboratively to develop effective learning
activities to help students retain and apply critical math skills for their STEM
majors. The QTWG project will address the mathematics preparation gap by
synthesizing the work of three innovative STEM programs that share the goal of
improving success and retention in undergraduate STEM majors: 1) an NSF STEP
Summer Bridge Program targeting underrepresented physical and quantitative
science majors; 2) an Integrated Science Curriculum (ISC) where undergraduates
learn foundational science and mathematics through an interdisciplinary problem-
based curriculum, and 3) a Physics First-Year Experience (FYE) that helps
freshmen hone problem-solving skills. All three programs target students who
enter their majors with significant motivation and mathematics preparation, but
nonetheless demonstrate low success in foundational STEM courses, particularly
mathematics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The QTWG will: 1) build a quantitative tool
kit (QToolkit) filled with effective learning activities mapped to particular
mathematical skills, 2) identify and empirically validate pedagogical approaches
that promote retention and motivation in the physical and quantitative sciences,
and 3) develop strategies that equip STEM faculty to lead curricular reform. The
QTWG project will generate a rich data set regarding the effectiveness of
teaching mathematical skills through application. Investigators will catalog
which math skills are most problematic for physical and quantitative science
majors, map the learning of these skills across the three programs, and identify
the effectiveness of learning strategies addressing these skills. This work will
be grounded in the Concerns-Based Adoption Model (CBAM) theory-of-change and
employ a "faculty work as learning" framework to build buy-in by individual
faculty members. It holds the potential to identify activities that empower
faculty members and students to become agents of curricular change while
improving the mathematical skills of STEM undergraduates.