* 1544346
* MATH: EAGER: COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Implementing a Peer-Mentorship Model for Mathematics Graduate Student Instructors
* EHR,DUE
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2017
* Sean Yee, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Talitha Washington
* 07/31/2017
* USD 130,766.00

Undergraduate mathematics teachers of the future are the mathematics graduate
students of today. A significant number of these graduate students will have
careers which will involve a combination of teaching, advising, and research,
and/or will be working in business, government, or industry. In fact, evidence
suggests that a significant percentage of mathematics Ph.D. students will spend
a substantial portion of their professional careers teaching undergraduate
students at community colleges, 4-year colleges, and universities. In turn, many
teach foundational undergraduate mathematics courses while they are still
graduate students. Although these graduate student instructors (GSIs) are
positioned to have a significant impact on the quality of instruction and
student learning for these courses, they often lack the background and specific
training to teach effectively. Moreover, faculty members' teaching practices and
beliefs usually are related to the strategies, skills, practices, and knowledge
they learned and applied while they were GSIs. This project will affect GSIs'
current teaching practices as well as their practices and beliefs as potential
future faculty members. Specifically, investigators from Bowling Green State
University and the University of South Carolina will collaborate to create and
investigate a graduate student mentorship model that will: (1) allow experienced
GSIs to mentor protégé GSIs; (2) create an environment where GSIs have a support
structure to enhance their teaching and understanding of student learning; and
(3) help experienced and novice mathematics GSIs to increase their pedagogical
knowledge base, stimulate their appreciation of mathematics education, and
improve their teaching skills as future faculty.

A main goal of the project is to provide professional development (PD) for GSIs
that includes training experienced GSIs for mentoring protégé GSIs about
teaching and student learning. After participating in PD workshops, mentor GSIs
will observe, advise, and collaborate with protégé GSIs to improve foundational
mathematics course pedagogy by providing protégés with resources and specific
feedback to incorporate more student-centered teaching techniques. The GSI
mentor model will allow for a sustainable, pay-it-forward design, bridging
education and mathematics departments. Transformative knowledge on how to
educate GSIs about effective teaching strategies (e.g. student-centered
instruction) will be discovered, researched, analyzed, and disseminated. In
particular, investigations will be conducted and results will be disseminated
using the Carnegie Foundation methodology of Network Improvement Community
Research. Using this methodology, other educational institutions will be able to
pinpoint specific techniques for addressing their GSIs' needs without
necessarily replicating the entire design. This study will lead to guidelines to
develop the next generation of mathematicians proficient at, and appreciative
of, mathematics education, and better prepared to enter the workforce,
especially in positions where undergraduate teaching is an important component
of their responsibilities.