* 1544702
* CPS: Synergy: Cyber-Enabled Repetitive Motions in Rehabilitation
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2015,12/31/2020
* Dan Simon, Cleveland State University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 12/31/2020
* USD 799,233.00

The project will produce breakthroughs in the science of human-machine
interaction and will produce lasting impacts on exercise machine technologies.
The proposed Cyber-Enabled Exercise Machines (CEEMs) adapt to their users,
seeking to maximize the effectiveness of exercise while guaranteeing safety.
CEEMs measure and process biomechanical variables and generate adjustments to
its own resistance, and generate cues to be followed by the exerciser. CEEMs are
reconfigurable by software, which permits a wide range of exercises with the
same hardware. Two prototype machines will be field-tested with the student-
athlete population and used to validate project goals. The prototypes will be a
valuable instrument for dissemination and outreach, as well as for student
engagement. The outcomes of this research have repercussions beyond athletic
conditioning: the same foundations and methodologies can be followed to design
machines for rehabilitation, exercise countermeasure devices for astronauts, and
custom exercise devices for the elderly and persons with disabilities. Thus, the
project has the potential to improve health of society members at various
levels. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will contribute to the
foundations of cyber-physical system science in the following aspects:
biomechanical modeling and real-time musculoskeletal state estimation;
estimation theory and unscented H-infinity estimation; control theory and human-
machine interaction dynamics, and micro-evolutionary optimization for real-time
systems. The proposed Cyber-Enabled Exercise Machines (CEEMs) are highly
reconfigurable devices which adapt to the user in pursuit of an optimization
objective, namely maximal activation of target muscle groups. Machine adaptation
occurs through port impedance modulation, and optimal cues are generated for the
exerciser to follow. The goals of the project are threefold: i) development of
foundational cyber-physical science and technology in the &amp;#64257;eld of
human-machine systems; ii) development of new approaches to modeling, design,
control and optimization of advanced exercise machines, and iii) application of
the above results to develop two custom-built CEEMs: a rowing ergometer and a
2-degree-of-freedom resistance machine.