* 1544542
* SHF: PROJECT DARWIN_ Towards Principled Language Evolution
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2022
* Jan Vitek, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 06/30/2022
* USD 1,099,726.00

R is a large language ecosystem consisting of statistical and graphical
capabilities, a programming language, and all the other artifacts present in an
open source programming environment. R is used by millions of
scientific/engineering programmers in academia and is used heavily in business
and industry. R is hitting limits and needs major renovations if it is to keep
up with, and advance, the pace of science. This proposal proposes to modernize
several aspects of the R language and to integrate new infrastructure elements.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The modernization effort will focus on the code base of
the language implementation, the compiler and the memory subsystem. The new
features will center around the addition of type annotations to improve
correctness and performance of R programs as well as to assist with distributed
execution. The PI is well-connected to the R core developers, and there is a
clear path to releasing versions into production. The enhancements will help R
support the pace of science, as problems become more computationally complex and
use rapidly growing data sets. Scientific computations programmed in R will run
faster, be capable of processing much larger, distributed data sets, and the
implementation will be easier to maintain by modernizing the language. The
experience of reimplementing a live, full-scale language like R will be
interesting to the programming language research community, as well as providing
a more sustainable infrastructure for science/engineering programming.