* 1544826
* CPS: Synergy: Collaborative Research: Matching Parking Supply to Travel Demand towards Sustainability: a Cyber Physical Social System for Sensing Driven Parking
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2019
* Sean Qian, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 08/31/2019
* USD 279,998.00

Parking can take up a significant amount of the trip costs (time and money) in
urban travel. As such, it can considerably influence travelers' choices of
modes, locations, and time of travel. The advent of smart sensors, wireless
communications, social media and big data analytics offers a unique opportunity
to tap parking's influence on travel to make the transportation system more
efficient, cleaner, and more resilient. A cyber-physical social system for
parking is proposed to realize parking's potential in achieving the above goals.
This cyber-physical system consists of smart parking sensors, a parking and
traffic data repository, parking management systems, and dynamic traffic flow
control. If successful, the results of the investigation will create a new
paradigm for managing parking to reduce traffic congestion, emissions and fuel
consumption and to enhance system resilience. These results will be disseminated
broadly through publications, workshops and seminars. The research will provide
interdisciplinary training to both graduate and undergraduate students. The
results of this research also fills a void in our graduate transportation
curriculum in which parking management gets little coverage. The investigators
will organize an online short training course in Coursera and National Highway
Institute to bring results to a broader audience. The investigators will also
collaborate with Carnegie Museum of Natural History to develop an online digital
map and related educational programs, which will be presented in the museum
galleries during public events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technically, new theories,
algorithms and systems for efficient management of transportation infrastructure
through parking will be developed in this research, leveraging cutting-edge
sensing technology, communication technology, big data analytics and feedback
control. The research probes massive individualized and infrastructure based
traffic and parking data to gain a deeper understanding of travel and parking
behavior, and develops a novel reservoir-based network flow model that lays the
foundation for modeling the complex interactions between parking and traffic
flow in large-scale transportation networks. The theory will be investigated at
different levels of granularity to reveal how parking information and pricing
mechanisms affect network flow in a competitive market of private and public
parking. In addition, this research proposes closed-loop control mechanisms to
enhance mobility and sustainability of urban networks. Prices, access and
information of publicly owned on-street and off-street parking are dynamically
controlled to: a) change day-to-day behavior of all commuters through day-to-day
travel experience and/or online information systems; b) change travel behavior
of a fraction of adaptive travelers on the fly who are aware of time-of-day
parking information and comply to the recommendations; and c) influence the
market prices of privately owned parking areas through a competitive parking
market.