* 1544481
* MATH: EAGER: Developing a Learning Map for Introductory Statistics
* EHR,DUE
* 11/01/2016,09/30/2019
* Jonathan Templin, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Karen Keene
* 09/30/2019
* USD 299,832.00

The overall goal of this project will be to create and validate a "learning map"
(Stat-LM) for the content of undergraduate introductory statistics. This
learning map will be a graphical representation of statistics concepts with
connections among the concepts suggesting effective learning sequences. Use of
the learning map will improve undergraduate learning by providing diagnostic
information to instructors about students in their statistics courses, informing
professional development for undergraduate statistics instructors, and modeling
how critical prerequisites taught in high school connect to postsecondary
learning expectations. In the first phase of the project, researchers will
collaborate with statistics instructors from five institutions to create a
learning map representing the broadest possible content set for introductory
statistics material and the typical learning patterns of students in statistics
courses taught in high school, community college, and university settings. In
the second phase of the project, the research team will study the accuracy of
the learning map using data collected from the Comprehensive Assessment of
Outcomes in a First Statistics Course (CAOS), a confirmed valid and reliable
assessment of student learning in statistics. This analysis will provide
evidence of the learning map"s accuracy as a model of how students develop
knowledge of introductory statistics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
build on research conducted at the University of Kansas in the development and
application of learning maps as tools to support instruction and assessment by
addressing two specific aims. First, the Stat-LM will be developed by expert
statistics educators, educational psychologists, and statistics instructors from
five varied types of institutions to model the broadest possible set of topics
taught at the university level, thereby assuring its relevance for high school
and undergraduate courses. Expert reviewers will provide feedback on the nodes
and connections in the map in order to refine the content validity of the Stat-
LM as a model of student learning. Second, the analysis using quantitative data
collected from the CAOS will consist of an alignment study of the test items on
the CAOS to the Stat-LM, identifying the nodes in the Stat-LM that students must
have mastered to answer each item correctly. Along with data from the CAOS found
to be aligned to the map, the map specification will be analyzed with diagnostic
classification (also called Bayesian network methods; e.g., Rupp, Templin, &amp;
Henson, 2010). Based on results from these analyses, the researchers will
evaluate the Stat-LM with respect to the ordered connections between nodes and
the validity of nodes themselves as latent constructs. The Stat-LM will become a
"living document", subject to refinements throughout the proposed project and
thereafter. As the goal of this project is to produce a tool for aiding
statistics instruction, versions of the Stat-LM will be shared broadly for use
within varied instructional settings.