* 1544633
* CPS: Synergy: Collaborative Research: Fault Tolerant Brain Implantable Cyber-Physical System
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2019
* Michael Fiddy, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 09/30/2019
* USD 312,165.00

CPS: Synergy: Collaborative Research: Fault Tolerant Brain Implantable Cyber-
Physical System

Epilepsy is one of the most common neurological disorders, affecting between
0.4% and 1% of the world's population. While seizures can be controlled in
approximately two thirds of newly diagnosed patients through the use of one or
more antiepileptic drugs (AEDs), the remainder experience seizures even on
multiple medications. The primary impacts of the chronic condition of epilepsy
on a patient are a lower quality of life, loss of productivity, comorbidities,
and increased risk of death. Epilepsy is an intermittent brain disorder, and in
localization-related epilepsy, which is the most common form of epilepsy, one or
a few discrete brain areas (the seizure focus or seizure foci) are believed to
be responsible for seizure initiation. More recent approaches with implantable
electrical stimulation seizure control devices hold value as a therapeutic
option for the control of seizures. These devices, directly or indirectly,
target the seizure focus and seek to control its expression. In this project we
will build a multichannel brain implantable device based on emerging cyber
physical system (CPS) principles. This brain implantable CPS device will
incorporate key design features to make the device dependable, scalable,
composable, certifiable, and interoperable. The device will operate over the
life of an animal, or a patient, and continuously record brain activity and
stimulate the brain when seizure related activity is detected to abort an
impending seizure.

Episodic brain disorders such as epilepsy have a considerable impact on a
patient's productivity and quality of life and may be life-threatening when
seizures cannot be controlled with medications. The goal of this project is to
create a second generation brain-implantable sensing and stimulating device
(BISSD) based on emerging CPS principles and practice. The development of a
BISSD as a exemplifies several defining aspects that inform and illustrate core
CPS principles. First, to meet the important challenge of regulatory approval a
composable, scalable and certifiable framework that supports testing in multiple
species is proposed. Second, a BISSD must be wholly integrated with the patient
and fully cognizant at every instant of brain state, including dynamic changes
in both the normal and abnormal expression of brain physiology and therapeutic
intervention. Thus, this project seeks a tight conjunction of the cyber solution
that must monitor itself and monitor and stimulate the brain using implanted,
adaptable, distributed, and networked electrodes, and the physical system which
in this case is the intermittently failing human brain. Third, a BISSD must
function for an extensive period of time, up to the life of the patient, because
each surgery to place and retrieve a BISSD carries an attendant risk. This
requirement necessitates a dependable solution, which this project seeks to
reliably achieve through both an understanding of the brain's foreign body
response and a unique hierarchical fault-tolerant design. Fourth, an advanced
salient approaches to acquire, compress, and analyze sensor signals to achieve
real-time monitoring and control of seizures is employed. This project should
yield a powerful, scalable CPS framework for robust fault-tolerant implantable
medical devices with real-time processing that can grow with advances in
sensors, sensing modalities, time-series analysis, real-time computation,
control, materials, power and knowledge of underlying biology. The USA has a
competitive advantage in the control of seizures in medically refractory
epilepsy. In the modern era, epilepsy surgery evolved in the USA in the 1970s
and spread from here to other parts of the world. Similarly, the USA enjoys a
competitive advantage in BISSDs, and success in this effort will enable the USA
to build on and maintain this advantage. In addition to epilepsy, advances made
here can be expected to benefit the treatment of other neurological and
psychiatric brain disorders.