* 1544147
* Research Initiation: Engineering a Culture of Engagement
* ENG,EEC
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2018
* Brock LaMeres, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Julie Martin
* 12/31/2018
* USD 150,000.00

This project aims to change the value system of college students to view
engineering as a profession that serves the public good. It has been shown that
underrepresented minorities, especially women and first generation college
students gravitate toward professions that are viewed as serving their
communities and helping others. While engineering certainly does serve public
good, the common perception of the engineering profession is one that promotes
self-oriented values such as wealth and personal success. This perception has a
far reaching impact when trying to understand how students choose to become
engineers, limiting the number of incoming college students that see engineering
as a viable career. It also decreases the motivation of existing students to
persist to graduation once in a degree program. And ultimately, it limits the
number of underrepresented minorities that choose to stay in the engineering
profession once in the workforce. By changing the culture surrounding
engineering to one that promotes how engineering serves the public good, a
larger and more diverse engineering workforce can be formed. In this project the
research team focuses on a specific cultural phenomenon in which existing
engineering students have less concern over time about how important it is that
engineering serves the public good. This research explores the unique approach
of "adding value" to engineering through targeted interventions to reverse the
phenomenon of disengagement to create a culture that views engineering as a
profession that helps others.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall objective of this
project is to initiate boundary-spanning research on how to transform a culture
of disengagement into a culture of engagement that ultimately enhances the
professional formation of engineers. This research will produce original data to
understand why engineering students show less and less concern over time for how
engineering contributes to public welfare. This project is the first to initiate
a comprehensive research project specifically on Utility Value Theory with the
long-term goal of changing the value system surrounding engineering to one that
has prosocial, communal value. Creating a culture that considers engineering as
a profession that serves the public good will attract a diverse population to
engineering, fostering increased innovation for the next century. To accomplish
the primary project objective, this project has two aims: 1) facilitate the
professional development of an engineering faculty through collaborations with a
social psychological scientist in order to 2) change the value system of
engineering to include prosocial "engagement". The long term plan for this
research (5 years) is to design and test the effectiveness of a large scale
intervention guided by Utility Value Theory to contribute to a long lasting
culture of engagement within engineering. The focus of this research initiation
project (2 years) is to train an engineering faculty member in the process of
social science by focusing on specific research questions testing the scope and
process of the culture of disengagement within electrical engineering at Montana
State University. The broader impact of this research includes advancing the
understanding of how Utility Value Theory motivates the professional formation
of engineers while simultaneously promoting the training of an engineering
faculty. This research has the potential for great benefit to society by
producing engineering graduates that are concerned with the ways in which
engineering serves the public good. Students from this culture of engagement
will serve as role models that promote engineering as a profession that has
prosocial value. By changing the culture surrounding engineering, a more diverse
group of students will be attracted to engineering and retained in the
workforce, particularly women and 1st generation college students, which will
ultimately broaden the participation of underrepresented groups in engineering.