* 1544425
* Detailed Analysis of Brown Carbon Constituents in Biomass Burning Emissions
* GEO,AGS
* 12/01/2015,11/30/2020
* Hans Moosmuller, Nevada System of Higher Education, Desert Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 11/30/2020
* USD 471,584.00

This proposal focuses on the study of brown carbon and its contribution to light
absorption in the atmosphere. A significant portion of brown carbon emissions in
the atmosphere has been associated with biomass burning during wildfires, such
as forest and peat fires. In this project, fuels from a representative set of
five wild land fuels will be burned under laboratory conditions. The researchers
will use advanced techniques to determine the chemical composition and optical
properties of the brown carbon produced. This research will greatly advance our
knowledge of atmospheric aerosols and their impact on air quality and climate.

Biomass burning experiments will be carried out using fuels from five different
locations around the world: boreal forest and peat land, Siberia, Russia; extra
tropical forest, Oregon, USA; tropical forest and peat, Brazil; coastal swamp
peat, Florida, USA; and mixed conifer forest, Sierra Nevada mountains, USA.
Highly resolved, quantitative chemical speciation of both gas and particle
phases will contribute to the understanding of the volatility and reactivity of
brown carbon compounds in biomass-burning emissions. Both the water-soluble and
water-insoluble fractions of the organic aerosol will be analyzed with a variety
of techniques to determine their speciation and absorption spectrum. The
researchers will attempt to obtain closure on the light absorption by comparing
model calculations of the optical properties based on knowledge of the chemical
constituents and the measured optical properties of biomass burning smoke.