* 1544753
* CPS: Frontier: SONYC: A Cyber-Physical System for Monitoring, Analysis and Mitigation of Urban Noise Pollution
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2022
* Anish Arora, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* David Corman
* 07/31/2022
* USD 5,117,428.00

This Frontier award supports the SONYC project, a smart cities initiative
focused on developing a cyber-physical system (CPS) for the monitoring, analysis
and mitigation of urban noise pollution. Noise pollution is one of the topmost
quality of life issues for urban residents in the U.S. with proven effects on
health, education, the economy, and the environment. Yet, most cities lack the
resources for continuously monitoring noise and understanding the contribution
of individual sources, the tools to analyze patterns of noise pollution at city-
scale, and the means to empower city agencies to take effective, data-driven
action for noise mitigation. The SONYC project advances novel technological and
socio-technical solutions that help address these
needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SONYC includes a distributed network of both sensors
and people for large-scale noise monitoring. The sensors use low-cost, low-power
technology, and cutting-edge machine listening techniques, to produce calibrated
acoustic measurements and recognizing individual sound sources in real time.
Citizen science methods are used to help urban residents connect to city
agencies and each other, understand their noise footprint, and facilitate
reporting and self-regulation. Crucially, SONYC utilizes big data solutions to
analyze, retrieve and visualize information from sensors and citizens, creating
a comprehensive acoustic model of the city that can be used to identify
significant patterns of noise pollution. This data can in turn be used to drive
the strategic application of noise code enforcement by city agencies, in a way
that optimally reduces noise pollution. The entire system, integrating cyber,
physical and social infrastructure, forms a closed loop of continuous sensing,
analysis and actuation on the environment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SONYC is an
interdisciplinary collaboration between researchers at New York University and
Ohio State University. It provides multiple educational opportunities to
students at all levels, including an outreach initiative for K-12 STEM
education. The project uses New York City as its focal point, involving
partnerships with the city's Department of Environmental Protection, Department
of Health and Mental Hygiene, the business improvement district of Lower
Manhattan, and ARUP, one of the world's leaders in environmental acoustics.
SONYC is an innovative and high-impact application of cyber-physical systems to
the realm of smart cities, and potentially a catalyst for new CPS research at
the intersection of engineering, data science and the social sciences. It
provides a blueprint for the mitigation of noise pollution that can be applied
to cities in the US and abroad, potentially affecting the quality of life of
millions of people.