* 1545180
* RAPID:   Presidentialism, Democratic Collapse and the Potential Rise of a One-Party State.
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Vineeta Yadav, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Lee Walker
* 05/31/2016
* USD 43,888.00

General Summary

This study seeks to answer two questions: (1) what influences political elites
to support and oppose a transformation from a parliamentary democracy to a
presidential democracy and, (2) what influences political elites in a democracy
to support or oppose a transition to a non-democratic one-party state. Existing
theories explain elite preference for presidential systems as a result of
political insecurity of ruling party elites and, ideological and policy
radicalization among all political elites. Existing theories that seek to
explain why democracies collapse assign the beliefs of ruling party elites
regarding the security of their political power, structural factors such as
poverty and ethnic radicalization and, international factors such as regional
wars and foreign aid central roles in their theories. Political events in the
last 25 years show that parties have been important in changing regimes and in
undermining democracies. In this project, examines the questions of presidential
choice and democratic collapse by surveying political elites--candidates
aspiring to hold elected office in parliament in Turkey. Interviewing this set
of MP candidates offers a unique opportunity to evaluate the incentive
structures and decision-making process of parliamentary members who will decide
the question of Turkey's transformation from a parliamentary to a presidential
governance system. These elite-survey data on the beliefs, preferences and
calculations allows for the testing of existing and new theories on
parliamentarism/presidentialism and democratic collapse not possible previously
because of lack of elite-level data.

Technical Summary

In this project, the PI proposes to collect elite-level survey data that will
allow her to test existing and new theories related to two important questions:
(1) what influences political elites to support and oppose a transformation from
a parliamentary democracy to a presidential democracy and, (2) what influences
political elites in a democracy to support or oppose a transition to a non-
democratic one-party state. Extant research in the literatures on political
institutions and democratic collapse identify the insecurity of ruling party
elites regarding their grip on political powers, ideological and policy
radicalization among elites and structural factors such as poverty and ethnic
polarization as key determinants influencing elites to choose a presidential
over parliamentary system and, to support a transition to a non-democratic
regime. However, recent empirical trends towards legislating constitutional
changes to facilitate transitions to presidentialism and to non-democratic
regimes suggest that existing explanations under-theorize the role of political
parties in these phenomena. Recent empirical trends also challenge existing
theories that posit that disciplined parties ameliorate the incentives of
presidential regimes to reverse democracy. This project tests existing theories
of presidential choice and democratic collapse and new theories regarding the
role political parties play in these phenomena by collecting otherwise
unavailable elite-level data through a survey of parliamentary candidates in
Turkey. The ruling AKP Party's proposal to change Turkey's parliamentary system
to a presidential one is viewed as a means for the AKP to create a one-party
autocracy. Through this elite-survey project the PI seeks to understand the
incentive structure for both AKP-MP candidates and opposition party MP
candidates in the parliamentary/presidential transition question. This research
will help inform literature on the choice between parliamentary and presidential
and also literature on the extension of presidential term of office.