* 1545687
* EAGER: Low Cost Field Portable Computational 3D Optical Imaging Biophotonics Sensors for Automated Disease Identification
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2018
* Bahram Javidi, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 06/30/2018
* USD 160,000.00

Automated disease identification using low cost field portable sensors can have
a substantial public health impact. For example, although malaria is preventable
and curable, identification of malaria patients in under developed areas of Asia
and Africa is particularly challenging since most cases occur in rural areas
where access to healthcare is limited. In Asia alone, an estimated 36 million
cases and around 49,000 deaths occur annually; in Africa in 2013, according to
WHO, malaria caused an estimated 584,000 deaths (with an uncertainty range of
367,000 to 755,000), mostly among African children. In contrast to conventional
bio-molecular analysis for cell identification in laboratory, the proposed low-
cost, field portable sensor approach can be used in remote locations lacking
laboratory infrastructure. The success of the project can potentially lead to
preventing or controlling outbreaks of disease. Although high risk, the success
of the proposed automated disease identification system has the potential for
widespread applications in medicine, cell biology, and microscopy as well as
public health and consumer safety, including real time waste water analysis,
e-healthcare with mobile devices, environmental sensing, and food safety
monitoring. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work is a feasibility study to
explore a transformative biophotonics sensors without expensive optical
components, or devices to minimize cost and size while achieving high
performance data sensing capabilities for accurate automated disease
identification. This approach is a radical departure from the sensitive, complex
optical and photonic systems currently used in dedicated healthcare facilities
for disease diagnostics. In this feasibility study, optics and photonics devices
will be configured in a novel portable optical system with novel statistical
algorithms and computational methods for mobile devices. The sensor will use a
light source, such as a laser diode, to illuminate a target. The diffracted
light from the target will be incident on a phase plate, which will scatter the
light without significantly affecting its intensity; the result will be recorded
by an image sensor or camera prior to analysis, which will see an interference
pattern from the scattered and directly impinging light from source for
automated cell analysis and identification. The success of the program will form
the basis for a compact, field portable, and low cost solutions in identifying
and combating disease in under developed areas.