* 1545986
* Collaborative Research: Reconstructing the Origins of the Colorado River: An Integrative Study of the Miocene-Pliocene Bouse Formation
* GEO,EAR
* 02/15/2016,01/31/2020
* Laura Crossey, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Dena Smith
* 01/31/2020
* USD 216,331.00

Despite nearly a century of study, the conditions that controlled initiation of
the mighty Colorado River remain poorly understood and vigorously debated. This
project seeks to reconstruct the origins of the Colorado River through
multidisciplinary study of the Bouse Formation, a complex sedimentary deposit
that accumulated in the lower reaches of the valley during river initiation
between ~ 6.0 and 4.5 million years ago. The study benefits from collaborations
among university professors and students, state and federal agency scientists, a
county museum paleontologist, and a local high school teacher.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI's will use integrated datasets to determine if the
Bouse Formation formed in a brackish marine estuary or a large inland lake
isolated from the ocean, a key distinction for understanding the origins of the
river. This study also explores when and how waters of the Colorado River first
reached the sea. Hypotheses will be tested through study of stratigraphic
architecture, sedimentology, carbonate geochemistry (including C, O, Sr, and S
isotopes), and geochronology. Hypothesis tests emphasize cross-correlation of
radiogenic and stable isotope data with major and trace-element chemistry in a
precise stratigraphic and structural framework. The PI's will run two workshops:
one to engage a broad community of geoscientists, and one to plan a future
scientific drilling proposal.