* 1545992
* I-Corps: A Novel Structured Nanofibrous Nerve Guidance Conduit for Nerve Regeneration
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2016
* Xiaojun Yu, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 06/30/2016
* USD 50,000.00

There are over 900,000 peripheral nerve repair procedures performed annually in
the United States, injuries usually occur from traumatic injuries such as
vehicle accidents. Severe nerve injuries result in the formation of a
significant gap between the severed nerve stumps. When the gap is large, the
clinical ?gold standard? for the treatment is to bridge the nerve gaps using
one?s own nerve from a less important area. This technique is not ideal because
the availability of the donor nerve is limited and the patient is exposed to the
complications of a second surgical procedure. Many approaches have been examined
for enhancing peripheral nerve regeneration. However, none of them have
performed better than the 'gold standard' for repairing peripheral nerve
injuries. This I-Corps team has developed a novel structured nanofiber-
containing biodegradable nerve conduit, which can significantly enhance
peripheral nerve regeneration to the level comparable to the gold standard in
many aspects as indicated by preliminary animal studies. In this project, the
team will further seek the commercialization potential for this nerve conduit.
Nerve conduits may find tremendously important clinical uses and may be of
significant impact on improving the quality of lives of patients with nerve
injuries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed solution for repairing large nerve
gaps in this project is a spiral structured nerve guidance conduit, with
multiple channels, and aligned nanofibers to increase surface area for cellular
attachment, enhance cell migration, and improve neurite extension. This nerve
guidance conduit is developed using an FDA pre-approved biodegradable and
biocompatible polymer, polycaprolactone (PCL). As compared to other available
nerve conduits, the proposed nerve conduit uses PCL alone without adding any
biologics. This will be helpful to reduce the burden for regulatory approval and
allow faster and easier commercialization of the conduit. In addition, the novel
spiral structure can significantly increase surface areas for nerve
regeneration, and the novel ways for presenting nanofibers onto the surface of
complex structures can further augment surface areas and match the mechanical
and nutrient requirements of the peripheral nerve regeneration. Most
importantly, this nerve guidance conduit has shown promising results to treat
large injured nerve gap as proven by preliminary animal studies. The aim for
this project is to determine a clear pathway to commercialization and identify
all the stakeholders that play a role. The team will create a prototype to test
durability based on the requirements provided by the experts and also to further
characterize the highly porous structures of the nerve conduits. The team would
also like to interact with surgeons and industry experts to determine the pain
points that they are experiencing to determine if the conduit can meet their
requirements for clinical applications.