* 1545188
* NRT-DESE: Risk and uncertainty quantification in marine science
* EDU,DGE
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2021
* Julia Jones, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Vinod Lohani
* 09/30/2021
* USD 3,088,740.00

NRT-DESE: Risk and Uncertainty Quantification in Marine
Science&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ocean is the last great frontier on Earth, a
major driver of climate and productivity, and a critical resource for humans and
wildlife. Managing ocean resources requires scientists and managers to work
seamlessly to understand the top-down effects of human actions and the bottom-up
effects of climate-change on the ocean system. This National Science Foundation
Research Traineeship (NRT) project at Oregon State University (OSU) will prepare
a new generation of natural resource scientists and managers who will combine
mathematics, statistics, and computer science with environmental and social
sciences to study, protect, and manage ocean systems. This traineeship program
anticipates preparing sixty-one (61) MS and PhD students, including thirty (30)
funded trainees, to work in transdisciplinary research groups on user-inspired
problems using large and ever-expanding data resources. With powerful analytical
tools, they will be best equipped to track and study the top-down effects of
human actions and the bottom-up effects of climate change on the ocean system.
Besides fulfilling current educational gaps in marine science and management,
this OSU NRT program promotes: 1) a transformative and scalable new marine
science and policy graduate minor that teaches students to quantify and
communicate risk and uncertainty of data-based model forecasts and policy
scenarios; 2) the discovery of mechanisms that control the response of marine
systems to climate change and human pressures; 3) the development of evidence-
based practices for recruiting, training, and retaining diverse graduate
students and for placing them into a range of successful careers in Science,
Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (STEM). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through a
combination of technical coursework, communication workshops, national and
international internships, stakeholder engagement, peer mentoring, and
involvement in transdisciplinary research projects, OSU NRT trainees will learn
about the science of big data, risk and uncertainty quantification and
communication and sustainability. They will learn tools and techniques to assist
communities in managing resources through change and to recover quickly in the
event of a disaster. In line with the learning objectives, the training and
research will link new developments in mathematical and statistical
quantification of risk and uncertainty, complex and large datasets on marine
systems emerging from novel sensors, and outreach and engagement of stakeholders
who affect, and are affected by, ocean systems. In addition, students with
diverse expertise, developed through internships, will leverage each other's
strong disciplinary knowledge and skills as they collaborate to address complex
stakeholder-identified climate and policy problems. These collaborations will
have the ultimate goal of devising management solutions in the face of change
and uncertainty. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF Research Traineeship (NRT)
Program is designed to encourage the development and implementation of bold,
new, potentially transformative, and scalable models for STEM graduate education
training. The Traineeship Track is dedicated to effective training of STEM
graduate students in high priority interdisciplinary research areas, through the
comprehensive traineeship model that is innovative, evidence-based, and aligned
with changing workforce and research needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work is
supported, in part, by the Alliances for Graduate Education and the
Professoriate (AGEP) program. AGEP is committed to the national goal of
increasing the numbers of underrepresented minorities (URMs), entering and
completing STEM graduate education and postdoctoral training to levels
representative of the available pool. The AGEP program supports the development,
implementation, study, and dissemination of innovative models and standards of
graduate education and postdoctoral training that are designed to improve URM
participation, preparation, and success.