* 1545594
* Group Travel to the 12th International Symposium on Antarctic Earth Sciences (ISAES), Goa, India
* GEO,OPP
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2016
* Terry Wilson, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* thomas wilch
* 06/30/2016
* USD 36,993.00

The International Symposium on Antarctic Earth Sciences (ISAES) is held every
four years and is a premier conference for the presentation of the latest
scientific research in Antarctica. The 12th ISAES meeting will be held 13-17
July 2015 in Goa, India. In previous symposia, U.S. scientists made important
contributions to the success of the meetings. These funds will be used to
support the travel costs associated with the attendance of approximately 19 U.S.
Earth scientists, enabling them to present their scientific findings and benefit
from the scholarly exchange of ideas. The highest priority will be given to
graduate students and early career investigators who do not have other resources
to offset their travel costs. Requests for travel support will be evaluated by
the two project PIs along with a group of geoscientists from the Byrd Polar and
Climate Research Center and School of Earth Sciences at The Ohio State
University. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scientific program for ISAES 2015
emphasizes interdisciplinary research that places Antarctica in a global
context, and is of interest to all Earth scientists. The meeting provides
essential perspective for students and early-career researchers. The science
themes include: Antarctica, the Southern Ocean, and the Evolution of Climate and
the Global Cryosphere; Biodiversity and the Evolution of Life; Antarctic Surface
Processes, Landscapes, and Links with Cryosphere and Climate; Antarctica and
supercontinent evolution and Frontiers in Antarctic Earth Science, amongst many
other topics. Symposium presentations and publications provide a key record of
research activities in Antarctic Earth Sciences, and an invaluable resource for
planning future, international, collaborative research.