* 1545106
* CPS: TTP Option: Synergy: Learning and Adaption in Pediatric Robotics
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2019
* Homayoon Kazerooni, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 09/30/2019
* USD 1,200,000.00

Children affected by neurological conditions (e.g., Cerebral Palsy, Muscular
Atrophy, Spina Bifida and Severe head trauma) often develop significant
disabilities including impaired motor control. In many cases, walking becomes a
non-functional and exhausting skill that demands the use of the aids or the
substitution of function, such as wheelchair. This usually cause these children
not to acquire locomotion skills, and consequently to lose their independence.
However, it is well understood that bipedal locomotion, an essential human
characteristic, ensures the best physiological motor pattern acquisition. For
this reason, in children with neurological and neuromuscular diseases,
independent walking is a significant rehabilitation goal that must be pursued in
a specific temporal window due to the plasticity of central nervous system. In
other words, children with neurological conditions have a small window of time
to acquire locomotion skills through assisted walking rehearsals. The objective
of this research work is to create and experimentally validate a set of
technologies that form the framework for the development of adaptive, self-
balancing, and modular exoskeleton robotics systems for children with
neurological disorders. It is our belief that the exoskeleton (and its
associated infrastructure) resulting from this research will offer an effective
tool to promote locomotion skill acquisition, and in general health, during a
critical period in the early life of children with neurological conditions.

This research proposal develops a data-driven human-machine modeling specific
to physiological conditions. This creates regression models that predict the
user behavior without explicit modeling the complex human musculoskeletal
dynamics and motor control mechanism. Additionally this research project
formulates a safe adaptive control problem as a model predictive control (MPC)
problem. In this method, an optimal input sequence is computed by solving a
constrained finite-time optimal control problem where exoskeleton intrusion
(input from exoskeleton) is minimized to maximize the user's intent to promote
learning. This project further develops a novel approach for stabilizing and
preventing fall of the exoskeleton and the child as a whole. This method allows
a child wearing an exoskeleton to learn locomotion skills described above with
less likelihood of falls. This research project furthermore evaluates the
developed technologies in terms of efficiency and efficacy and creates a novel
fun game using exoskeleton for children to promote locomotion skills.