* 1545697
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award: The Effect Of Pastoral Adaptation On Urbanization Processes
* SBE,BCS
* 11/15/2015,04/30/2017
* Clark Larsen, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 04/30/2017
* USD 15,169.00

Mobility plays a significant role in human interaction, organization, and social
transformation. The interaction between mobile and settled populations as well
as the social tensions arising from these interactions is becoming an
increasingly critical aspect of contemporary human society. The migration crisis
currently taking place among populations in the Middle East and North Africa is
one such example of the profound effects that mobility (whether by climate,
political instability, or choice) has on modern society. How do mobile people
interactive with, integrate into, and transform communities? Anthropology has
long strived to illuminate the relationship between mobility/migration and
social transformation. Similarly, archaeology is aptly positioned to contribute
to these critical international discussions by providing long-term contexts in
which these interactions have played out in human history and by representing
the diversity of interactions and outcomes than can inform on the array of
contemporary human experiences.

This project will apply innovative and interdisciplinary methods to illuminate
the diverse means by which humans unite to develop and sustain complex social
and political systems such as cities and states, particularly focusing on the
agency of mobile populations in these contexts. Research will be conducted at
the Late Bronze/Early Iron Age (c. 1500-800BC) Qizqala cemetery site, located in
the Serur Valley of the Naxçývan Autonomous Republic, Azerbaijan. Urban
development is traditionally predicated on sedentary agriculture. Unlike
traditional models, the South Caucasus offers a perspective in which emerging
complex polities depended primarily on mobile pastoralist populations.
Researchers will investigate how mobile pastoralists in the Serur Valley
negotiated authority during urbanization. Using intra-tooth isotopic analyses
for mobility, the research will offer novel and detailed insights into short-
term mobility that reflects individual-level experiences in seasonal/recurrent,
highland/lowland, and long/short distance scales. Mortuary analysis will
complement isotopic analyses to examine the degree of control mobile people had
over economic, political, and sacred resources for construction of mortuary
space as reflected in style, location, and elaboration of burials. Collectively,
individual experiences with mobility in life, paired with evidence of power,
status, and agency from material contexts in burials, will provide sensitive
measures of shifting political, economic, and social relations that reflect the
dynamic roles of mobile populations in emerging urban spaces. Understanding how
mobile pastoralists interacted with administrative systems to negotiate space
and power in these emergent urban spaces will be essential to unraveling how
complex sociopolitical structures develop and are sustained. Furthermore,
research will be conducted with the Naxçývan Archaeological Project, the first
joint American-Azerbaijani team of researchers and students advancing
collaborative international and interdisciplinary research in this region.
Collaborating with Azerbaijani students will play a critical role in the project
and training students in bioarchaeological methods will both advance the
engagement of underrepresented groups in the sciences and promote future
collaborative research and publication endeavors with this region.