* 1545261
* NRT: Aeroecology as a Test-bed for Interdisciplinary STEM Training
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2022
* Jeffrey Kelly, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Francesmary Modugno
* 08/31/2022
* USD 3,057,337.00

NRT: Aeroecology as a Test-bed for Interdisciplinary STEM Training
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The United States has built tremendous infrastructure for
remotely measuring many aspects of the Earth's physical environment to provide
benefits to society, such as satellites, radars, telescopes, and cameras. The
White House Office of Science and Technology Policy has challenged the
scientific community to expand the uses of this Earth observation infrastructure
to generate new knowledge and provide additional societal benefits beyond those
that were initially envisioned. This National Research Traineeship (NRT) award
to the University of Oklahoma addresses this challenge by developing and testing
a new model for training master's and doctoral students to use existing Earth
observation data in new approaches to biodiversity conservation and ecosystem
management. The traineeship program will implement and evaluate an
interdisciplinary coursework program in Earth-observation for Science, Society,
and Sustainability (EOS3) and an interdisciplinary research immersion program.
This traineeship anticipates preparing one hundred and twenty (120) graduate
students, including thirty (30) funded trainees, across three universities in
the emerging discipline of aeroecology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Aeroecology
focuses on understanding the interactions of animals in the aerosphere (lower
atmosphere). Aeroecology is emerging from the interface of biology, meteorology,
geography, and computer science and has strong connections to social sciences
both through environmental science and concerns about human health and safety.
Engineering advances are transforming the aerosphere from a vast open space into
a resource that we use for communication (cell phone towers), energy production
(wind turbines), and transportation (aircraft and unmanned aerial systems).
These mounting incursions into the aerosphere drive a need to understand and
manage a new suite of human-biodiversity interactions and conflicts. This NRT
project will build on unique strengths of the training consortium in aeroecology
as a rapidly growing new use of Earth-observation data. The NRT will originate
at the University of Oklahoma, replicate first at the University of Delaware,
then at the University of Nebraska, Lincoln, and later radiate to additional
consortium institutions across the nation. This NRT model will include training
in communication, data analytics, team-based science skills, and
entrepreneurship. Externship opportunities with private, government, and non-
profit organizations will also help trainees gain professional skills in local,
national, and international settings. Each participating institution will foster
diversity through the implementation of best practices for inclusiveness in
recruiting, retaining, and mentoring of graduate students. Rigorous evaluation
of the impact of the NRT model on student learning, faculty development, and
institutional change will inform future efforts to broadly improve
interdisciplinary graduate education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF Research
Traineeship (NRT) Program is designed to encourage the development and
implementation of bold, new, potentially transformative, and scalable models for
STEM graduate education training. The Traineeship Track is dedicated to
effective training of STEM graduate students in high priority interdisciplinary
research areas, through the comprehensive traineeship model that is innovative,
evidence-based, and aligned with changing workforce and research needs.