* 1545651
* Student and Mentor-Student Travel Scholarship Program
* GEO,OCE
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2016
* Robyn Hannigan, University of Massachusetts Boston
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 07/31/2016
* USD 119,998.00

Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) programs provide undergraduate
students with rich and meaningful research experiences. As "apprentices" to
professional scientists, these students receive hands-on mentorship that enables
them to attain a high level of scientific sophistication within their field of
study. All of these program require students to present results of their
research at local on-campus venues, however, REU students benefit greatly from
attending specialized meetings where they can meet national and international
experts in their field. Moreover they directly benefit by working with their REU
mentor in preparing a meeting presentation and, under their mentor's guidance,
making connections at national-level conferences with other professionals. It is
this "at meeting" networking, facilitated by the REU Mentor, that is often the
key component to REU students meeting their future graduate advisor and/or
employer. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the proposed Student and Mentor-
Student Travel Scholarship Program is to provide travel support for students and
student-mentor teams who have completed research supported by the Diretorate of
Biological Sciences and the Division of Ocean Sciences to attend a national-
level meeting. This program builds on the results of a prior award that
supported student travel scholarships to scientific conferences for 240
students. Results from previous travel scholarships showed significant learning
gains for the students who received travel support. Moreover the travel
scholarship program supported a significant number of underrepresented minority
students and students from primarily undergraduate institutions. These
scholarships enabled the students to attend scientific meetings and present
their research, and improved their opportunities to meet future scientific
advisors or mentors. This award will continue the successful student
scholarships and includes a novel focus on supporting student-mentor teams with
the goal of further enhancing the networking capacity for students who attend
national meetings with their advisors.