* 1545935
* Liberating T-Cell Mediated Immunity to Pancreatic Cancer Using Theoretical Biophysics Analysis
* MPS,PHY
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2020
* Jeffrey A. Drebin, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 05/31/2020
* USD 1,670,000.00

This award is part of the NSF effort to promote significant advances in the
fundamental understanding of cancer biology made possible through
multidisciplinary research that involves experts in theoretical physics, applied
mathematics, and computer science.

Pancreatic cancer is a common and increasing cause of cancer death. While
innovative strategies involving the immune system have brought progress in the
treatment of many cancers, these strategies have to date been ineffective in
pancreatic cancer. These tumors release immunosuppressive molecules and act as a
physical barrier causing reduced immune cell infiltration and activation.
Recently it was shown that large doses of Vitamin D result in reduced
immunosuppression and increased immune cell infiltration in tumors, setting the
stage for an effective immune cell attack on pancreatic cancer. The heart of
this project is the use of theoretical modeling and statistical understanding of
immune cell repertoires to design successful immune system attack on the cancer.
In this project a team of theoretical physicists and cancer researchers will
work together to design quantitative strategies based on the immune system to
attack pancreatic cancer. Novel theoretical and experimental tools will be used
to characterize the immunological environment of pancreatic cancer tumors and
the detailed understanding of the immune cell response dynamics will be used to
develop innovative interventions. The project will focus on quantifying the
poorly understood immune environment of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma. T cell
receptor sequence repertoires, the cancer exome, and RNA expression will be
obtained from tumor tissue of patients treated with neoadjuvant chemotherapy
plus a high dose vitamin D. Whether the T cells infiltrating patient tumors
represent unique or oligoclonal cell populations will be determined. Parallel
studies will systematically assess cytokine expression and the expression of
checkpoint proteins, as well as the presence of immunoregulatory cell
populations. Exome sequencing analysis using theoretical physics and
mathematical approaches will be used to gain initial insight into potential neo-
antigens expressed by tumors. The quantitative models and analysis tools will be
used to develop integrated platform for attacking this cancer. This proposal is
cofunded by the Physics of Living Systems Program in the Physics Division and
the Systems and Synthetic Biology Program in the Molecular and Cellular
Biosciences Division.