* 1545949
* PIRE: GROWTH: Global Relay of Observatories Watching Transients Happen
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2020
* Thomas Prince, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Maija Kukla
* 09/30/2020
* USD 4,518,826.00

The Global Relay of Observatories Watching Transients Happen (GROWTH) program is
an international collaborative network of astronomers and telescopes dedicated
to the study of short-lived cosmic transients and near-earth asteroids. Cosmic
transients are energetic flashes of light that are millions to billions of times
the brightness of the sun, e.g. explosive deaths of massive stars, white dwarf
detonations, exotic neutron star mergers and tidal disruption by black holes.
Key follow-up observations of fast-fading or fast-moving events must occur at
night promptly after discovery but before the sun rises. A relay of telescopes
spanning multiple longitudes on earth will pass the baton amongst each other to
effectively extend the night-time darkness. GROWTH will enable detailed
monitoring of events that would otherwise vanish before the next night?s
observations could begin at any single location. The torrent of data thus
generated shall be used to improve both astronomical observing techniques and
big data management and analysis (such as machine learning algorithms, database
design and statistics). In addition, the intrinsically international context of
the GROWTH program shall foster the development of relationships and social
capital required to navigate effectively among diverse science cultures from
around the world. Therefore, participating students will have the quantitative,
computational and interpersonal skills to assume leadership roles in the
knowledge economy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;GROWTH will address several frontier
questions in time domain astronomy systematically. GROWTH aims to characterize
the electromagnetic emission from binary neutron star mergers, thereby
localizing the prime source of gravitational waves expected to be detected by
the Advanced Laser Interferometer Gravitational-wave Observatory (LIGO). Timely
spectroscopy may identify the long sought cosmic location of heavy element
production. GROWTH would track small near-earth asteroids of the type that may
pose hazards, to characterize their orbit, size, type and rotation properties.
GROWTH shall have a front-row seat to observe the end points of stellar
evolution by routinely obtaining data in the first 24 hours of a new-born
supernova and directly probing the chemistry and history of the progenitor star.
The GROWTH education program will train students and postdocs and encompass
undergraduate course development, international internships, annual workshops
and a research conference. GROWTH will thus help the US and international
community prepare for the era of the Large Synoptic Survey Telescope (starting
2022), NSF's highest priority ground-based astronomy project for the next
decade.