* 1545574
* Collaborative Research: A Neurodynamic Programming Approach for the Modeling, Analysis, and Control of Nanoscale Neuromorphic Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 04/01/2015,08/31/2017
* Silvia Ferrari, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/2017
* USD 93,739.00

The objective of this research is to develop new neurodynamic programming (NDP)
learning algorithm for controlling neuron-level activity (spiking) and synaptic-
level plasticity in CMOS/memristor devices, such that the subsequent system-
level response achieves desired sensorimotor behavioral goals. The approach is
to uses a radically new training paradigm that induces functional plasticity by
controlling the neural activity of selected input neurons via programming
voltages, rather than by directly manipulating the synaptic weights, as do
virtually all existing training algorithms.

Intellectual merit This research aims to develop a model of the closures
required to translate synaptic-level plasticity into functional-level plasticity
that results into high-level behavioral goals and problem solving abilities. The
same critical challenge has been identified in neuroscience research aimed at
reverse engineering the brain, and in the regulation of deep-brain stimulation
(DBS). Due to this knowledge gap, even when a measure of adequate or desired
behavior is available, it may not be easily utilized to stimulate a neural
network at the cell level in order to produce the appropriate macroscopic
behavior.

Broader impact The learning model developed in this research will be used toward
the development of nanoscale neuromorphic systems that mimic neuro-biological
architectures in the nervous system. Thanks to their abilities to recreate the
synaptic plasticity, device density, scalability, and fault-tolerance of
biological neuronal networks, these neuromorphic systems can enable a wide range
of technological advancements, such as intelligent robots with highly-
sophisticated sensorimotor skills, and neuroprosthetic devices capable of
adapting to changing conditions and environments.