* 1545309
* NRT-IGE: Innovating Graduate STEM Education Through Bio-Social Partnerships
* EHR,DGE
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2020
* Sudhir Kumar, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Denecke
* 08/31/2020
* USD 498,495.00

NRT-IGE: Innovating Graduate STEM Education Through Bio-Social Partnerships

Distinct barriers of communication exist between the social sciences and the
biological or life sciences in the academy. Scholars from each are trained to
produce knowledge from a discipline-specific perspective, and seldom have the
opportunity, as students, to engage in cross-disciplinary inquiry. This National
Science Foundation Research Traineeship (NRT) award in the Innovations in
Graduate Education (IGE) Track to Temple University brings together scientists
from the departments of Geography and Urban Studies (Social Sciences) and
Biology (Life Sciences) to pilot a model for cross-disciplinary learning and
communication that will use studios as a collaborative learning space and a
science museum as a venue for public communication. The project will contribute
to wider academic reflection about the production of body-centered knowledge and
the role of university partnerships to share this knowledge.

The goal of the project is to prepare graduate students in the social and life
sciences to communicate with each other and with the public by focusing on one
broad commonality - the drive to produce knowledge about the human body. The
body is a complex phenomenon that is simultaneously biological and social, and
thus represents a strategic thematic focus for interdisciplinary collaboration.
The model of interdisciplinary graduate education to be developed and tested
will use the design studio approach, which asks students to structure inquiry
around an ill-defined problem. Graduate student learning will be organized
around two sequential design studios and an interactive exhibit. This series is
sequential in that each stage demands a broader audience around which to focus
design problems. Students in the first studio will design for intra-classroom
communication; while in the second studio, they will design for outside
audiences and receive feedback from students in middle school, high school, and
undergraduate classrooms. Prototypes developed in the design studios will be
transformed into exhibits to be presented to public audiences at the Franklin
Institute, a science museum in Philadelphia, PA. Student learning will be
tracked and evaluated, as will the impacts of outreach activities on students
and families. As such, the project seeks to collect data on the effectiveness of
this model for interdisciplinary graduate education and university-museum
partnerships that could be more broadly scaled and adapted.

The NSF Research Traineeship (NRT) Program is designed to encourage the
development and implementation of bold, new, potentially transformative, and
scalable models for STEM graduate education training. The Innovations in
Graduate Education Track is dedicated solely to piloting, testing, and
evaluating novel, innovative, and potentially transformative approaches to
graduate education.