* 1545863
* I-Corps:  Bio-Inspired Flow Field Designs for Polymer Electrolyte Membrane (PEM) Fuel Cells
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2015,03/31/2016
* Umit Koylu, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* lydia mcclure
* 03/31/2016
* USD 50,000.00

Fuel cells are a promising technology to reduce dependence on fossil fuel and
reduce pollution while increasing energy efficiency. However, fuel cell
technology is not fully mature and still faces several technical challenges. By
mimicking the designs of natural flow fields found in leaves and lungs, which
have evolved to distribute nutrients efficiently, bio-inspired flow fields have
been designed and tested at Missouri S&T. By reducing the concentration losses
common to existing flow field designs, bio-inspired flow fields lead to improved
fuel cell performance. Such flow technologies have been demonstrated to
substantially increase the energy efficiency of fuel cells, which are already
more efficient compared to conventional energy conversion devices such as
internal combustion engines. This would result in lower energy consumption and
money savings. Furthermore, this would significantly reduce greenhouse gas
emissions and other pollutants such as oxides of nitrogen. The challenges
related to the practical aspects for commercialization of this technology will
be explored during the course of the I-Corps program. It is expected that the
team will be able to pursue a technology transfer after discovery of potential
customers is conducted.

Biological flow fields, which are found in leaves and lungs, have evolved to
effectively distribute nutrients while minimizing the amount of biological work
needed. Bio-inspired designs for fuel cell flow fields mimic the design of
natural flow fields. They are able to reduce the mass transport losses found in
conventional flow fields that occur during the distribution of reactants and
removal of products from fuel cells. This leads to a significant increase in the
peak power density of fuel cells. Laboratory prototype testing results confirm
simulation studies that bio-inspired flow fields are superior in reduction of
transport losses and water removal compared to existing conventional flow field
designs. By replacing the flow fields in commercially available fuel cell stacks
with bio-inspired flow field designs, fuel cell products are expected to
experience up to a 30% increase in peak power density. The NSF I-Corps team
would like to explore the pathways towards the commercialization of bio-inspired
flow field designs for poymer electrolyte membrane (PEM) fuel cells. The team
will work with commercial fuel cell developers to overcome challenges related to
the practical aspects for commercial adoption of the innovation and investigate
the willingness and suitability of fuel cell developers to adopt the bio-
inspired flow field designs. The team will do so by directly contacting
companies, explaining the innovation, and demonstrating the results using a
laboratory prototype. Bio-inspired flow fields represent a big step in fuel cell
technology. They could end up being the best solution to reactant distribution
in fuel cells and similar energy conversion devices. Fuel cells have a variety
of niches in stationary and transportation applications. Improving the
performance of fuel cells is critical to increasing the overall efficiency of
the energy sector, reducing the dependence on fossil fuels, and reducing
pollution. With the number of installed fuel cells growing each year, it is
expected that such an improvement in flow field design will lead to broader
adaptation of cleaner power applications.