* 1545281
* EAGER: Phylogeny of Mayflies (Ephemeroptera)
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2019
* T. Heath Ogden, Utah Valley University
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 07/31/2019
* USD 208,250.00

Mayflies represent more than 3000 species that occupy freshwater habitats on all
continents except Antarctica and are an integral part of aquatic ecosystems,
including serving as a major component of the diet of freshwater fish. Despite
the roles they play in aquatic systems, and their popularity as a lure for
fishing, many important biological aspects of this insect group remain
unanswered. It is not known how the different branches on the mayfly tree of
life fit together, and therefore the implications of their phylogenetic history
are unclear. For example, it is uncertain if the first mayflies had movable or
immobile gills running along their backs. Deciphering these patterns could
provide insights into the evolution of insect wings and whether they came from
ancient movable gill-like structures or not. This project will improve our
knowledge of this important insect group by creating a diverse collection of
species located around the world, from different aquatic habitats and
environments. The morphology and genomics of these insects will be studied in
greater detail than before, to understand their evolutionary history and
adaptations. Outcomes of this project will further research in stream ecology,
and water pollution, as mayflies are a key indicator of the health of aquatic
environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The lack of a robust mayfly phylogeny has
limited the ability of researchers to test hypotheses concerning evolutionary
adaptations. This project will enhance the understanding of mayfly phylogeny and
evolution using novel and transformative methods to elucidate relationships and
morphological during the history of the group. This project will reconstruct a
robust mayfly phylogeny, using next generation sequencing methods and
phylogenomic analyses, to better understand morphological and genetic trends
within mayflies and gain insights regarding evolutionary adaptations. This
project will provide excellent research opportunities for undergraduate students
to engage in meaningful scholarly and creative activities. This will be
accomplished by carrying out smaller research projects on a subset of mayfly
taxa (e.g., a family or superfamily), which will ultimately contribute to the
comprehensive phylogeny for the order. Students will be mentored in all phases
of phylogenetic research, from collecting, generating data, analyzing data, and
communicating results at scientific meetings, in publications, and in outreach
efforts to the community. Thus, the main outcomes of the project will be: 1)
increase in knowledge of mayfly evolution and phylogenetics; 2) opportunities
for undergraduate evolutionary research; 3) development of state-of-the-art
curriculum for the primarily undergraduate institution Utah Valley University;
4) partnerships with local public schools; 5) establishment of a strong
international collaborative network in mayfly research; including coordinating
efforts to contribute to efforts such as the online database Encyclopedia of
Life, which provides species-level information to serve the scientific
community, educators, and the general public; and 6) significant positive impact
on the institution and the researcher's career.