* 1545624
* RAPID: Effects of Enhanced Circulation on Vertical Mixing and Algal Blooms In Freshwater Reservoirs
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2018
* Tarek Aziz, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 05/31/2018
* USD 58,487.00

1545624&lt;br/&gt;Obenour&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Jordan Lake, like many similar
reservoirs around the world, is impaired due to excessive algal growth and
harmful algal blooms are becoming more prevalent. The lake provides drinking
water to 300,000 people, and it serves as a recreational attraction for many
more. The use of enhanced circulation has been proposed as a means of
suppressing the formation of harmful algal blooms in freshwater and coastal
waterbodies. This study represents a rare opportunity to directly investigate
how large-scale enhanced circulation affects mixing and algal dynamics (i.e.
growth) in a large waterbody.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At present, characterization
of artificial mixing and its effect on phytoplankton community structure has
been limited to whole-lake mixing (i.e. destratification), which may be
impractical for larger waterbodies. The proposed research represents the first
comprehensive characterization of how enhanced surface-layer circulation affects
vertical diffusion rates and HABs formation potential. The project takes
advantage of a uniquely large deployment of surface-layer circulators, to answer
scientific and engineering questions at multiple scales. Overall, the project
will help provide critical insight into the potential role of geoengineering as
a tool for the abatement of HABs. For this research project, the principle
investigators will perform a series of field activities to determine how these
circulators are affecting physical and biological conditions within the lake.
Activities will be conducted in different arms of the lake, representing
treatment (circulators present) and control (circulators absent) conditions.
Physical measurements will include vertical profiles of temperature micro-
structure to infer vertical diffusivity, near-surface current velocities to
determine extent of circulation, and wind velocities. Biological measurements
will include vertical profiles of chlorophyll (total algae) and phycocyanin
(indicating blue-green, cyanobacteria algae). Monitoring will be coordinated
with the North Carolina Department of Water Resources, who will be measuring a
series of conventional water quality parameters that will also be used in this
study. Using the data from these field activities, we will determine how the
synergistic impacts of wind speed and artificial circulation affect vertical
diffusion within the surface layer, which is expected to be a primary control on
algal dynamics. We will further test hypotheses related to how mixing (natural
and artificial) affects the abundance and vertical distribution of total
chlorophyll and cyanobacteria.