* 1545279
* NRT-IGE: Nanomedicine Academy of Minority Serving Institutions
* EDU,DGE
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2019
* Srinivas Sridhar, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Carol Stoel
* 09/30/2019
* USD 495,348.00

NRT-IGE: Nanomedicine Academy of Minority Serving
Institutions&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nanomedicine is an emerging paradigm that
seeks to develop engineered nanometer size particles to solve key problems in
modern medicine, such as early diagnosis of disease and targeted delivery of
therapeutics. This field is exciting to students and there is worldwide demand
for training in this area. This National Science Foundation Research Traineeship
(NRT) award in the Innovations in Graduate Education (IGE) track to Northeastern
University will translate cutting-edge advances in nanomedicine research into an
education model to pilot and test a scalable, interactive network that empowers
low-resource institutions to build capacity in nanomedicine training and develop
degree programs in this emerging field. This project will create a reciprocal
knowledge-sharing relationship among a large national pool of students across
five institutions. The successful implementation of this new model of higher
education is expected to broaden the participation of minorities in the
nanomedicine workforce thus reducing disparities in the health workforce,
establish new degree programs, and serve as a blueprint for the creation of
similar education programs in other disciplines. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal
of the project is to create a scalable network for knowledge delivery and
scientific collaboration that is designed to enable student learning from expert
instructors as well as from peers unrestricted by geographical location. The
partners include five research universities with a tradition of providing higher
education to underrepresented communities ? Northeastern University, University
of Puerto Rico Mayaguez, Tuskegee University, Morgan State University, and
Florida International University. The project will offer synchronous content
through live, web-based videoconferencing protocols, allowing students to
interact with instructors and peers at other universities in real-time. A
parallel enterprise-level online learning environment will be created to enable
team-based discussions and assignments. Courses to be offered include
Introduction to Nanomedicine, Nanomedicine Research Techniques, Nano/Biomedical
Commercialization, and a Nanomedicine Seminar Series. Faculty facilitators at
each institution will coordinate the physical and online classroom environments,
contribute to cross-institutional assignments, and provide supplementary
instruction. Students will receive degree credit at their home institution
through the establishment of course-equivalency at each partner institution. The
implementation of these learning tools, together with the assessment of student
learning, student demographics, and career development, is expected to generate
sufficient new knowledge to enable expansion of this new and unique higher
education model to a nationwide program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF Research
Traineeship (NRT) Program is designed to encourage the development and
implementation of bold, new, potentially transformative, and scalable models for
STEM graduate education training. The Innovations in Graduate Education Track is
dedicated solely to piloting, testing, and evaluating novel, innovative, and
potentially transformative approaches to graduate
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work is supported, in part, by the EHR Core
Research (ECR) program. The ECR program emphasizes fundamental STEM education
research that generates foundational knowledge in the field. Investments are
made in critical areas that are essential, broad and enduring: STEM learning and
STEM learning environments, broadening participation in STEM, and STEM workforce
development.