* 1545136
* SACNAS Scientific Symposia Sessions in Mathematics; Gaylord Resort &amp; Conference Center, MD - October 2015
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2017
* Shannon Talbott, Moravian University
* Standard Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 07/31/2017
* USD 13,148.00

The 2015 SACNAS National Conference will be held October 29-31 at the Gaylord
National Resort &amp; Convention Center, Maryland. This award will support
participants at two scientific symposia. The Society for the Advancement of
Chicanos and Native Americans in Science (SACNAS) is a society of scientists
dedicated to fostering the success of Hispanic/Chicano and Native American
scientists from college students to professionals to attain advanced degrees,
careers, and positions of leadership in science. One way SACNAS strives to
achieve their goals is through their annual National Conference, whose
programming includes scientific symposia sessions featuring talks by members of
the scientific research community. The purpose of these sessions is to present
research from diverse disciplines, share advanced research and discoveries,
interact with attendees, and mentor science students. As part of this special
program the PIs will organize scientific symposia in the mathematical sciences;
specifically, they will organize three sessions dealing with research in
abstract algebra at the undergraduate, graduate and postgraduate level. These
scientific symposia sessions address a variety of broader impacts. First, by
organizing these sessions during one of the nations largest conferences for
Hispanics and Native Americans, the PIs will reach students and professionals
from traditionally underrepresented groups in academia. These participants will
have the opportunity to see and contribute to current mathematical research
presented at the 2015 SACNAS National Conference. In addition, conference
participants will be able to hear from mathematicians who have mentored and
advised students in numerous mathematical research projects; hence giving
participants an opportunity to hear about possible research projects and meet
new mentors and/or advisers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The undergraduate session,
"Abstract Algebra research topics for undergraduates," will introduce algebra
research topics that are accessible to students with a post-calculus background.
Emphasis will be placed on providing a wide range of interesting problems so to
encourage undergraduates to continue their studies and motivate them to pursue
further research and work in mathematics. The graduate session, "On my way to
becoming an algebraist" will invite underrepresented graduate students to
present research talks, thus providing them with a venue to present their
scholarly work, network with other researchers, and gain the opportunity for
collaboration and furthering their current projects. The postgraduate session,
"Algebra: much more than arithmetic" will introduce cutting edge mathematical
research done by mathematicians from underrepresented groups as well as provide
a venue to meet and interact with researchers interested in mentoring
underrepresented students in mathematics. The design of the sessions include
four speakers per scientific symposia, allowing for 12 talks with topics in
abstract algebra at a wide range of mathematical levels. By providing
mathematical talks at a wide range of mathematical levels, the sessions aim to
increase interest among conference attendees. In addition, at least 75% of
presenters in each session will be from groups underrepresented in the
mathematical sciences. The conference website is
http://sacnas.org/events/national-conf