* 1545884
* PIRE: Research and Education in Active Coatings Technologies (REACT) for the Human Habitat
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2022
* Daeyeon Lee, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Raterron
* 09/30/2022
* USD 3,702,014.00

Part 1:&lt;br/&gt;This Partnership in Research and Education (PIRE) project
addresses critical research challenges for the development of Active Coating
Technologies (ACTs) through an international research and educational platform
with an aim to transform the human habitat and our ability to respond to
disasters. These ACTs will generate fundamental scientific understanding that
enables the design of novel materials and properties for the robust collection
and purification of water, elimination/reduction of disease transmission, and
efficient generation and storage of energy, and hence, will address societal
needs that have high relevance for the world and the U.S. To this aim, the
University of Pennsylvania has formed an international partnership with fourteen
collaborators from six institutions within the Grenoble Innovation for Advanced
New Technologies (GIANT) in Grenoble, France. The collaboration with Giant
provides the complementary expertise and resources critical for the research.
The domestic partners, namely, Alabama State University, Villanova University
and Bryn Mawr College further increase the research depth and diversity of
participants, who will take part in every aspect of the project including
research and education at GIANT. Through the planned research programs every
summer, the US team consisting of a post doc, an early career faculty, and
graduate and undergraduate students from these domestic institutions and UPenn,
will gain invaluable international research experiences at Grenoble. Other
important educational components include industrial internships at Salvoy, a
world leader in the area, as well as workshops to develop broader career skills,
training for the communication of technical information, and the opportunity to
innovate on a prototype "Relief Tent" that will showcase ACT research. The
research will address fundamental and up-to-now unsolved, materials-related
scientific problems that will be applicable to engineering better human habitats
and emergency response structures. The integrated research and educational
components of the project will contribute to preparing a globally-engaged
science and engineering workforce and a new cadre of US scientists poised to be
international scientific leaders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part 2:&lt;br/&gt;To
enable coatings that transform the human habitat, each ACT utilizes the
versatility afforded by polymers, nanoparticles and their mixtures to create
coatings with tailored chemistry, surface texture and function. ACT 1 (water
management) seeks to understand how the size, geometry, and surface energy of
hierarchically structured coatings influence wetting and water transport. GIANT
adds expertise in photoreactive nanomaterials that, when combined with Penn's
structured coatings, open new opportunities to manage water. US scientists can
investigate wetting of structured coatings using micro beam x-ray scattering
tools at GIANT. ACT 2 (suppression of disease transmission) will relate the
mechanics and texture of nanobilayer and layer-by-layer coatings to bacteria
adhesion and proliferation. GIANT's expertise in synthesis and visualization of
biomacromolecules is critical for understanding how bacteria interact with novel
surfaces. ACT 3 (energy conversion and storage) will design multilayered
coatings to efficiently collect and convert light using textured surfaces from
ACT 1 in combination with unique nanoparticles. These photovoltaic cells will be
coupled with solid polymer electrolytes designed with fast ion pathways for next
generation lithium ion batteries. GIANT's expertise in interrogating energy
materials in-situ and in-operando is particularly unique. Five unifying
principles and methods integrate the ACTs, including commonality of materials
and approaches, the unifying role of theory and simulation, a need for
mechanical characterization and robustness, novel methods for structure/property
studies at GIANT, and the translation of basic research into applications in
collaboration with industry.