* 1545780
* RESEARCH-PGR: Genomic Balance Analysis in Maize
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2022
* James Birchler, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Gerald Schoenknecht
* 06/30/2022
* USD 1,982,518.00

Genetic information in plants and animals is carried in the DNA of pairs of
chromosomes that are carried forward from generation to generation. Change in
the numbers, or doses, of individual chromosomes is known to occur, usually with
detrimental effects on the stature and health of the affected organism.
Surprisingly, there are no obvious differences if the entire set of chromosomes
change. This phenomenon has puzzled scientists for decades: what features of the
genome maintain balance when fully altered, but are imbalanced when only some
chromosomes are affected? This project will examine how and why this partial
change in the chromosomes has such an impact on plants. Maize is an ideal model
for this study due to its global crop importance and also because of the
powerful genetic resources available to test how the so-called genome balancing
act occurs. One hypothesis is that the relative expression of regulatory genes,
which are the factors that control the expression of other genes, has a
significant impact on development and vigor of plants. The research identifies
the underlying molecular mechanisms involved in maintaining genomic balance.
This knowledge is essential to understand how plant vigor is controlled and will
provide information about the traits needed for improving agriculture. Students
and educators of all levels are engaged in addressing this problem through
direct hands-on research, via social media outlets and outreach workshops.
Understanding how regulatory dosage effects operate will guide breeding programs
for crop improvement and will answer basic questions about how plant genomes
function.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is based on a synthesis emerging
from the idea of genomic balance known from classical genetics and more recent
molecular studies. The overall hypothesis is that the stoichiometry of assembly
of multisubunit gene regulatory complexes affects the function of the whole,
which will impact global gene expression and ultimately the phenotype. The
analysis of genomic balance issues will address: (1) how genomic imbalance
affects gene expression levels of mRNA, siRNA, and miRNA as the baseline for
understanding the circuitry involved; (2) how small RNAs are involved with
genomic balance in modulating mRNA levels and how genomic balance affects small
RNA levels; (3) how genomic imbalance impacts and/or operates through chromatin
modifications; and (4) how genomic imbalance works on the single gene level by
examining the effect of varying the dosage of single subunits on whole complex
formation and function. These aspects will be studied in a set of aneuploids
generated by translocation with the supernumerary B chromosome of maize that can
be used to vary selected chromosome arms in haploid and diploid plants. By
examining more complex changes in dosage with greater or lesser genomic
imbalance, how the interactions of regulatory processes alter various aspects of
gene expression will be tested. Single regulatory gene candidates responsible
for target gene modulations will be examined in a transgenic dosage series to
gain insight into the mechanism of genomic balance. Together, the information
from all of these fields will contribute to an understanding of genomic balance
and allow this information to be applied to issues of world food production.