* 1545675
* Seasonal Sensitivity of the Midlatitude Circulation to Future Climate Warming
* GEO,AGS
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2020
* Elizabeth Barnes, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 04/30/2020
* USD 599,693.00

The climate change induced by increases in greenhouse gas concentrations is
generally characterized as an increase in globally averaged temperature, but the
climate impacts experienced locally will be determined in part by the changes in
atmospheric circulation that are induced by global warming. In particular,
climate model simulations suggest that the westerly jet streams found at upper
levels in the middle latitudes will shift towards the poles, so that the mean
Northern Hemisphere jet stream will migrate northward, with a corresponding
southward shift for its the Southern Hemisphere counterpart. These shifts are
small but consequential, as patterns of rainfall and storminess in the middle
latitudes are determined in large part by the positions of the jet streams.

The poleward shift of jet streams as a consequence of greenhouse warming is a
robust feature of global warming simulations and has been a research topic since
at least 2005, but the seasonality and geography of the response has not yet
been fully explored. Preliminary work for this project shows that in the
Southern Hemisphere the largest shift is in the Fall (March to May), followed by
Summer (December to February), Winter (June to August), and Spring (September to
November). In the North Atlantic the order is, from largest to smallest, Fall
(September to November), Summer (June to August), Spring (March to May), and
Winter (December to February). The ordering is again different in the North
Pacific, with Fall leading by a large margin followed by Winter, Spring, and
Summer. By now several theories have been proposed to explain why the jets shift
poleward in an year-round, longitudinally averaged sense, but none of these
theories provides a clear intuition for the seasonality (i.e. why the shift is
largest in Fall) or the regional variations.

Research under this award consists of analysis of observational data from
reanalysis products and simulations of future climate from the Coupled Model
Intercomparison Project and the Large Ensemble archive of simulations using the
Community Earth System Model. This analysis is followed by numerical experiments
using models of varying levels of complexity, intended to isolate and study
possibly physical mechanisms leading seasonally and geographically varying jet
shifts. One issue to be considered is that the pattern of greenhouse warming
generally includes a deep tropospheric warming maximum in the tropics together
with surface trapped warming near the poles (referred to as polar
amplification). The jet shifts can be regarded as a combined response to the
tropical and polar influences, which are likely to have opposing effects and
very different seasonalities.

The work is of societal as well as scientific interest due to the strong impacts
of jet shifts on local climate, for instance a northward shift of jet streams
could cause drying in the region downwind of the present-day jet location
accompanied by excessive rain and snow to the north. In addition, the project
will support and train two students, thereby contributing to the future
workforce in this research area. The PI and her students will also organize a
special session at an annual geosciences meeting to publicize results of the
study and encourage further investigation of the topic.