* 1545900
* PIRE:  Translating cognitive and brain science in the laboratory and field to language learning environments
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2025
* Judith Kroll, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Anne Emig
* 03/31/2025
* USD 5,000,000.00

OISE-1545900: PIRE: Translating cognitive and brain science in the laboratory
and field to language learning environments&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI: Judith F.
Kroll, The Pennsylvania State University &lt;br/&gt;Co-PIs: Paola E. Dussias,
The Pennsylvania State University &lt;br/&gt;John Lipski, The Pennsylvania State
University &lt;br/&gt;Janet van Hell, The Pennsylvania State University
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this PIRE project, The Pennsylvania State
University partners with domestic and international collaborators in Europe,
Latin America, and Asia, to conduct research that exploits the excitement of
recent scientific discoveries that demonstrate that the use of two or more
languages changes minds and brains to be more open to learning, more cognitively
flexible, and more resistant to cognitive decline. The goal of the project is to
translate the science of language learning for education and to examine the
contexts and consequences of language learning in the classroom and in the field
for a population who are increasingly diverse and range from learners to highly
proficient bilinguals. The planned research will impact learners immersed in
their native or second language, examine bilinguals who are young and old, and
develop new models of learning and literacy. This PIRE will bring language
science from the laboratory to practice and will integrate field research with
laboratory-based experimentation to provide unique new data on minority and
endangered languages, populations with limited literacy, and the consequences of
living and learning in a multilingual environment. It will train a diverse
workforce of language scientists to be prepared to conduct both basic and
applied research and will develop new international collaborations that
translate basic science in culturally diverse
contexts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research on language learning and bilingualism
has been fueled by a set of scientific discoveries made possible by emerging
neuroscience technologies and the analysis of large scale corpora. These new
discoveries show that there is far greater experience-induced plasticity than
traditionally understood. Not only are infants and young children open to new
learning, but older children, young adults, and even older adults are open to
new experience that changes their brains and behavior. The broad PIRE network of
partnerships will enable investigations in contexts where the form of language
learning and language contact differ from the environments that have typically
informed research to date. The PIRE will train undergraduates, graduate
students, and postdoctoral fellows to conduct translational research across
three broad themes: (1) Language learning across the life span; (2) The role of
instructional approaches for successful learning outcomes; and (3) The impact of
diverse social environments for language learning. The planned research will
exploit a range of behavioral, neuroscience, and field methods to identify
readiness and need for intervention, to track learning in real time, and to
assess new learning outcomes.