* 1545888
* RAPID: Deploying Unmanned Aerial Vehicles for In-situ Studies of Collective Migration
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Andrew Berdahl, Santa Fe Institute
* Standard Grant
* Karen Mabry
* 08/31/2018
* USD 176,854.00

Throughout the natural world, animals make long distance migrations that involve
astounding feats of navigation. Collective behavior such as schooling, flocking,
and herding is ubiquitous in these migratory species. A growing body of research
predicts that by migrating in groups, these animals may be increasing their
ability to find their way. However, despite the strong connection between
collective navigation and migration, tests for such effects in nature are rare.
Migratory caribou, seeking safe passage across treacherous sea ice, are not only
of significant ecological and social importance, but also represent an excellent
system in which to explore collective navigation in nature. In this project, the
researchers will leverage recent advances in Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (drones)
and computer vision technology, to obtain movement trajectories of individual
caribou within a herd. Using these trajectories they will determine the role of
social interactions on the migratory dynamics of caribou, and investigate the
risks of climate change and increased shipping traffic on these animals and
their migration. RAPID funding will allow the team to join a government-led
caribou survey, in November 2015, which would provide crucial logistical support
and essential data. Through this collaboration, results will be disseminated
directly to policy makers, improving caribou conservation and the well-being of
the Aboriginal people relying on these animals for nutrition and traditional
lifestyle. The technology developed will be widely applicable to other systems
and provide a significant advance for the study of in situ animal behavior.
Outreach associated with the research will provide extracurricular STEM
education for underrepresented individuals in both Nunavut and New Mexico by
engaging their imagination through the application of cutting-edge technology to
important scientific questions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite the clear
ecological importance of animal movement, little is known about how animal
groups collectively make movement decisions in their natural habitats. The
purpose of this research is to prototype a holistic, state-of-the-art, open-
source, remote sensing system with the capacity to capture high-definition video
of animal groups in the wild and convert this footage into trajectory data, and
deploy this technology to study social migration dynamics in caribou. The
researchers will use the trajectory data to test the hypothesis that caribou
benefit from collective navigation during their migration and uncover the
specific mechanisms driving such effects. In addition to providing a tool useful
for other groups studying in situ animal behavior, this research will help
broaden the focus of research on navigation and migration, from the individual,
to a view that explicitly includes the social context. Trajectory data will be
posted on Dryad and the publicly accessible MoveBank website
(http://movebank.org/).