* 1545577
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award: Chronological Culture Change And Organization In The Middle Ohio Valley
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2015,03/31/2018
* Tristram Kidder, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 03/31/2018
* USD 25,195.00

Edward Henry, PhD Candidate at Washington University in St. Louis, will
investigate ancient geometric earthen monuments in Eastern North America. This
research will explore collective labor efforts within contexts of ritual action,
their role in social integration, and their reflection of ideological
participation. While the research focuses on the past it also has the potential
to inform on the present. Ritual and community focused labor are factors which
today still serve to establish and maintain social order. Scholars have noted
that participatory engagement in ritualistic labor events can help create and
solidify social bonds, reproduce ideologies, and reinforce sociopolitical and
economic agendas. Using archaeology to assess the construction of ceremonial
earthen monuments by ancient small-scale societies provides a context to explore
the material indicators for social complexity, how it emerges, and is organized.
A better technological and chronological understanding of how, and how quickly,
earthen monuments are built by Adena and Hopewell (500 BCE-600 CE) societies of
Eastern North America. These groups are seemingly mobile and do not have a
state-like leadership hierarchy. Nevertheless, these people organized to build
geometrically complex enclosure sites, large burial mounds, and maintain a
continental exchange network in exotic goods. Examining how, how quickly, these
practices of ritual landscape modification spread across the Ohio River Valley
provides one understanding of emergent social complexity where massive labor
feats were conducted outside a sociopolitical structure grounded in a rigid
hierarchy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mr. Henry will examine how ditch-and-embankment
geometric enclosures were built across the Bluegrass Region of Central Kentucky
in the Middle Ohio Valley. This region is considered the heartland of Adena and
Hopewell societies in ancient Eastern North America. Examining these ritual
sites in Kentucky provides a view south of the Ohio River, where chronological
understandings of enclosure construction needs refinement. A better historical
understanding of enclosure construction, use, and abandonment will help indicate
how quickly social changes associated with the emergence of Adena and Hopewell
(e.g., a hunting and horticultural economy, ceramic technology, new animalistic
iconography) spread. In addition, this work will show how particular ritual
practices were adopted across the region. By excavating multiple areas of eight
earthen enclosures across Central Kentucky, Henry will see how the landscape was
modified during each sites construction and determine if differences exist in
traditions of ritual labor. He will examine the construction profiles of
embankments and ditches with trenches and open large (ca. 4 x 4 meter)
excavation blocks inside enclosures to explore the activities carried out within
their boundaries. This robust dataset will be used to examine the organization
and spread of social complexity in ancient Eastern North America. The historical
component of this research will be relevant to the background of modern American
Indians. This research will provide specialized archaeological training to
students pursuing degrees in anthropology and archaeology.