* 1545026
* EAGER:   Exploratory Research on Seismic Liquefaction of Sand at Low and High Confining Pressures
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2017
* Ricardo Dobry, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 06/30/2017
* USD 89,635.00

Liquefaction of water-saturated sand soils due to earthquake shaking has caused
billions of dollars of damage in ports, bridges, highways, buried pipelines,
foundations of buildings, and earth dams. Liquefaction is a complex phenomenon
which is poorly understood, and practical liquefaction evaluation in engineering
projects is done using empirical charts calibrated by observed performance in
past earthquakes. While conservative, this procedure works well in most cases in
which the liquefiable sand layer is under a vertical effective confining
pressure of the order of 1 atmosphere. However, the charts cannot be directly
extrapolated to much higher pressures, like those existing under a tall earth
dam, where the pressure may reach 8 or 10 atmospheres. Laboratory testing has
shown that using the charts directly would be dangerously unconservative, and
that the liquefaction resistance predicted by the charts should be reduced by as
much as 60 percent at those high pressures. The exact value of the reduction has
significant economic implications and is currently a subject of controversy
among experts. Part of the problem is the empirical nature of the research being
conducted to settle the issue. In the last few years, the PIs have developed a
fresh and more rational approach, which shows great promise. This EArly-concept
Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) project will explore the application of
this more rational approach through a small series of innovative cyclic loading
and centrifuge laboratory tests on one loose sand, finding the exact law of
reduction of liquefaction resistance at high pressure for that loose sand, and
developing a template for further research for other loose and dense sands as
well as for the range of circumstances found in engineering practice.

Current seismic liquefaction triggering evaluation of saturated sand layers uses
empirical charts based on the Simplified Procedure and calibrated for an
effective vertical overburden pressure of about 1 atmosphere. In projects like
tall earth dams, the vertical pressure may reach 8-10 atmospheres. Cyclic
stress-controlled laboratory testing suggests that the Cyclic Resistance Ratio,
CRR, from the liquefaction charts must be decreased. The reduction is measured
by the factor K-sigma. Various researchers have proposed very different values
of K-sigma between 0.45 and 0.85 at a vertical pressure of 8 atmospheres. This
exploratory research adopts a different, cyclic strain approach based on the
field-measured shear wave velocity, to provide a more rational framework and
decrease the uncertainty in K-sigma. A preliminary experimental determination
will be conducted of the variation with pressure of the cyclic shear strain
needed to trigger liquefaction, as well as of CRR, for pressures between 1
atmosphere and 8 atmospheres, using a loose sand and a small number of strain-
controlled cyclic triaxial tests and centrifuge model tests.