* 1545751
* Future Technology to Preserve College Student Health and Foster Wellbeing (StudentHealth)
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2017
* Andrew Campbell, Northwestern University at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 06/30/2017
* USD 49,418.00

The challenges of the college years are often reflected in student health,
including poor health habits, which offer an opportunity for preventive
intervention. There are daunting technical, privacy, and practical challenges
associated with sensing, integrating, analyzing, and conveying data on physical
and mental health. Also, at an institutional level, universities that hope to
use technologies to improve student health will need to surmount the obstacle
that a lot of institutions have no integration that connects data or services on
students' physical health with that on their mental health. This workshop could
be the starting point of a coordinated effort to overcome such difficulties.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is a very timely workshop on engaging the university
student health community with computational sciences to provide for new
approaches to deal with the physical and behavioral aspects of university
student life. The PI and co-PI represent expertise in computing and preventative
medicine. The plan for the workshop is thoughtful and generally provides enough
time for discussion as well as presentation. The prospective invitee list is
comprehensive, and should result is a lively discussion. The conference web site
will provide access to the white papers and any additional materials, such as
presentation materials or reports from breakout groups.