* 1545632
* RAPID/Collaborative Research: Post-Disaster, Reinforced Concrete Building Performance Data Collection following the April 25, 2015 Nepal Earthquake
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2016
* Michael Olsen, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 06/30/2016
* USD 57,286.00

The magnitude 7.8 Ghorka, Nepal earthquake that occurred on April 25, 2015, and
the many aftershocks that followed significantly affected Nepal, causing
significant human loss as well as widespread structural damage and ground
failure. The building stock in the affected regions predominantly consists of
poorly engineered unreinforced masonry buildings. However, approximately 25 per
cent of the buildings consist of reinforced concrete (RC) frames infilled with
masonry walls. This structural system was widely used in the 1920s and 1930s in
California as well as in the Pacific Northwest; hence, understanding the damage
to this structural system from the Nepal earthquake has direct implications for
the seismic performance of a large number of buildings in metropolitan areas in
the United States. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This rapid response research will focus
on post-earthquake assessment of existing RC building frames with masonry infill
in Nepal. A team of three researchers and three graduate students will travel to
Nepal to collect perishable field data and perform detailed assessments of the
seismic performance of 25-30 buildings. The team will acquire, process, and
archive architectural and structural data, including building drawings, in
residential buildings and critical facilities such as schools and hospitals. The
data will be obtained through visual inspections and geo-referenced, three-
dimensional (3D), ground-based Lidar scans and Structure from Motion, i.e., 3D
reconstructions from two-dimensional photographs, thus providing detailed,
quantitative damage measurements. This collected data will be made publicly
available to enable future research to advance computational modeling and
structural analysis for understanding the seismic performance of RC frame with
masonry infill buildings. This collected data will provide new earthquake
reconnaissance case studies of RC frame with infill buildings and will be used
to evaluate current U.S. guidelines for assessment of existing structures.
Moreover, it will serve to inform local rebuilding and recovery efforts in Nepal
though close collaboration with local agencies in Nepal. The research team will
collaborate with researchers and practicing engineers from Italy, Nepal, and
Portugal. This project will also provide foreign research experiences for
graduate students and further strengthen ties among the engineering research
communities in the United States, Nepal, and European Union.