* 1545862
* Conference Grant: Student Travel Awards for IEEE RFID-TA 2015, Tokyo, 16-18 September 2015
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2015,12/31/2015
* Gregory Durgin, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Hao Ling
* 12/31/2015
* USD 6,750.00

Conference Grant: Student Travel Awards for IEEE RFID-TA 2015, Tokyo, 16-18
September 2015

The IEEE International Conference on Radio-Frequency Identification Technology
and Applications (IEEE RFID-TA) is a premier conference for multidisciplinary
research encompassing RFID, wireless sensor networks, energy-harvesting,
localization, and low-energy wireless communications. With the conference site
in Tokyo, Japan in 2015, it is expected to draw researchers from Japan, Korea,
mainland China, Hong Kong, Taiwan, and other Asian countries, many of whom do
not regularly attend the North American IEEE RFID conference. Approximately 150
attendees with 30 paper presentations are expected. The NSF funds will provide
partial travel support for graduate students or post-doctoral researchers who
are US citizens or permanent residents to attend IEEE RFID-TA 2015 and present
their work at the conference. The IEEE Counsel on RFID has already provided some
base funding for a travel grants program for student attendees. The NSF-
sponsored travel grants program will be used as a topping grant, to be awarded
competitively to US citizens or permanent residents that meet the existing
travel grants program requirements. The NSF grant will provide numerous benefits
to early-career US researchers, who may not otherwise be able to attend, by
providing them with international networking opportunity and brightening their
future prospects. Moreover, this conference has strong industry attendance, and
will allow early-career researchers the opportunity to explore collaborations
with industry.