* 1545287
* NRT: Accessibility, Rehabilitation, and Movement Science (ARMS): An Interdisciplinary Traineeship Program in Human-Centered Robotics
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2021
* Lena Ting, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Vinod Lohani
* 08/31/2021
* USD 2,908,825.00

NRT: Accessibility, Rehabilitation and Movement Science (ARMS): An
Interdisciplinary Traineeship Program in Health-Centered
Robotics&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The world's demographics are changing. People
continue to live longer and the U.S. population is becoming older and more
racially and ethnically diverse. There is also an increase in younger
individuals living with a life-long disability, such as veterans who sustain
catastrophic injuries, persons suffering from neurodegenerative diseases, and
children growing up with developmental disorders or delays. With this changing
population profile comes an increasing demand for advanced healthcare
technologies and a need to train a new generation of engineers able to develop
these new technologies. This National Science Foundation Research Traineeship
award to the Georgia Institute of Technology will address this demand by
training graduate master's and doctoral students in the interdisciplinary field
of healthcare robotics. The traineeship anticipates providing a unique and
comprehensive training opportunity for one hundred and fifty-five (155)
students, including thirty (30) funded trainees, by combining disciplines in
robotics, studies in health sciences, interactions with clinical partners,
hands-on rehabilitation research, and a culture of innovation and translational
research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Trainees will have unique exposure to a variety
of approaches developed in Robotics, Physiology, Neuroscience, Rehabilitation,
and Psychology. The traineeship will bridge the gap between healthcare and
robotics by addressing two major barriers: a) the lack of a formalized framework
to enable interdisciplinary collaborations between robotics engineers and health
professionals; b) the tendency for students in robotics to be unprepared to
address problems in healthcare, including a lack of appreciation for the
challenges encountered by clinicians, caregivers, and people with disabilities.
Through close interactions with various partners, the traineeship will expand
student horizons beyond a technology-first mentality to consider challenges in
developing robotic solutions that address the needs of clinicians, caregivers,
and people with disabilities. The goal is to develop an interdisciplinary
curriculum based upon the concept of participatory design, problem-based
learning, and an immersive research experience that blends techniques from
multiple disciplines to solve problems posed in healthcare. A second major goal
of the traineeship is to increase the participation of women, underrepresented
minorities, and students with disabilities in robotics and related engineering
fields. The project will develop a new M.S. degree program in healthcare
robotics and a new PhD concentration area in healthcare robotics as well as
curricular materials and best-practices to allow other institutions to develop
similar programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF Research Traineeship (NRT)
Program is designed to encourage the development and implementation of bold,
new, potentially transformative, and scalable models for STEM graduate education
training. The Traineeship Track is dedicated to effective training of STEM
graduate students in high priority interdisciplinary research areas, through the
comprehensive traineeship model that is innovative, evidence-based, and aligned
with changing workforce and research needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is
supported, in part, by the EHR Core Research (ECR) program, specifically the ECR
Research in Disabilities Education (RDE) area of special interest. ECR
emphasizes fundamental STEM education research that generates foundational
knowledge in the field. Investments are made in critical areas that are
essential, broad and enduring: STEM learning and STEM learning environments,
broadening participation in STEM, and STEM workforce development.