* 1545138
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Long Term Processes Of Cultural Interaction And Change
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2017
* Robert Cook, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2017
* USD 25,207.00

Interaction between groups of people fosters cultural change, including
transformations in settlement patterns, subsistence, and ideology. This is
particularly important in an increasingly globalized world, in which many people
grapple with lifestyle changes associated with socioeconomic transitions.
Archaeology provides unique time-depth into the study of how interaction can
alter the practices of individuals and groups of people. This discipline can
also highlight, in the broader context of socioeconomic change, the reasons that
some societies collapse and some persist. This project provides particular
insight into how peripheral groups negotiate contact with larger cultural
systems in the face of large-scale economic change. All aspects of this project
present applied learning opportunities for undergraduate students to engage with
the scientific process, anthropological thinking and Ohio prehistory. Students
gain archaeological field experience at a summer field school, as well as
instruction in laboratory techniques using excavated assemblages. Each student
is also encouraged to present their findings at an undergraduate research forum
as well as at regional conferences. This project is one of the few current
studies into the prehistory of Ohio by a state institute of higher education and
as such represents a unique link between academia and the general public.

This project investigates the emergence of sedentary village life and its
relationship to the spread of agriculture, a persistent anthropological
question. In the Middle Ohio Valley, Fort Ancient culture (c. AD 1000-1650)
developed in the context of the emergence and spread of Mississippian chiefdoms
and is notable for a lifestyle which included large circular villages and maize
agriculture. This way of life represents a novel development in the long
prehistory of this region; prior groups lived comparatively mobile lifestyles
and subsisted on native plants and animals. Investigations focus on the Turpin
site, located near Cincinnati, Ohio, which was occupied for over a millennium by
Fort Ancient agriculturalists and preceding Late Woodland (c. AD 500-1000)
foragers. This early transitional site provides a unique view of the emergence
of an agrarian, village-based lifestyle within the context of Mississippian
development, considering Mississippian artifacts and numerous non-local
individuals have been identified at Turpin. Detailed understanding of how Fort
Ancient agricultural systems began and persisted over centuries (as opposed to
the collapses experienced by many contemporary Mississippian chiefdoms) also
provides time-depth to current examinations into the sustainability of maize-
based agricultural practices. Methodologically, this project presents a
framework for understanding the structure and chronology of complex prehistoric
sites by utilizing geophysical survey, focused excavations and radiocarbon
dating. Additionally, examining prehistoric deer hunting patterns and how they
changed over time allows for understanding of whether Turpin was occupied
seasonally or year-round. Overall, this project employs multiple lines of
evidence to test archaeological hypotheses in a minimally destructive way,
ultimately shedding light on how interaction between groups of people
facilitates the emergence of new ways of life.