* 1545667
* Expanding Access to and Participation in the Multiple Institution Database for Investigating Engineering Longitudinal Development
* ENG,EEC
* 03/01/2016,09/30/2022
* Susan Lord, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 09/30/2022
* USD 3,494,793.00

This project seeks to expand the number of institutions participating in The
Multiple-Institution Database for Investigating Longitudinal Development
(MIDFIELD). MIDFIELD is a resource enabling the study of students that includes
longitudinal, whole population data for multiple institutions. Retention,
measured in various ways, has been the dominant mode of studying student success
in engineering education and in higher education in general. However, simply
studying who matriculates and who graduates does not tell the complete story of
a student's path through the engineering curriculum nor should it be used as a
measure of an institution. A national, longitudinal student unit-record database
would enable study of engineering programs and benchmark metrics consistently.
MIDFIELD has already been proven to facilitate data on student matriculation
habits disaggregated across various engineering disciplines, ethnicities and
genders. However is value as a predictive tool has also been somewhat limited
due to the small (eleven) number of institutions who have provided their student
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will enable the expansion of the
MIDFIELD database to include a total of 103 institutions. With input from
university data managers, engineering education administrators, specialists in
high volume data archiving and the community of researchers, this work will
result in a database containing over 1.05 million students. More specifically
the data will represent over 50% of the U.S. engineering undergraduate degrees
awarded and increase the diversity of institutions in the dataset. MIDFIELD will
now include public and private institutions, minority serving institutions, and
institutions from a broad range of research classifications. The sheer scope and
longitude of MIDFIELD will enable significant improvements in research in higher
education. It will enable the development of research capacity to examine
student characteristics (race/ethnicity/gender/social class) and curricular
pathways (including coursework) by institution and over time. Furthermore, this
project will utilize workshops as well as asynchronous training modules to
educate the broader research community, expanding the network of researchers
capable of conducting this research and the sharing of innovative research
methods in addition to the actual data. Finally, because the dataset contains
students records of all students matriculating over a period of time,
researchers can study students across all disciplines, not solely
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Due to the broad nature of the disciplines
represented by MIDFIELD, this project has cross-Directorate support from the
Directorates of Engineering, Math and Physical Sciences (MPS), and Education and
Human Resources (EHR) as well as the Office of Integrative Activities (OIA).
Within the MPS Directorate, this work is supported by Astronomy, and Physics;
within EHR, this work is supported by the EHR Core Research (ECR) program. The
ECR program emphasizes fundamental STEM education research that generates
foundational knowledge in the field. Investments are made in critical areas that
are essential, broad and enduring: STEM learning and STEM learning environments,
broadening participation in STEM, and STEM workforce development.