* 1545917
* PIRE: Building Extreme Weather Resiliency and Global Community Resiliency Through Improved Weather and Climate Prediction and Emergency Response Strategies
* O/D,OISE
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2022
* Christopher Thorncroft, SUNY at Albany
* Continuing Grant
* Anne Emig
* 08/31/2022
* USD 4,634,053.00

TITLE: PIRE: Building Extreme Weather Resiliency Through Improved Weather and
Climate Prediction and Emergency Response
Strategies&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Extreme weather
resiliency demands improved weather and climate prediction and response
strategies to strengthen the protection of life and property. Globally, flooding
impacts over 96 million people per year, most within developing countries, at a
mean cost of over $13.7 billion. In the United States, floods cause an average
of 89 fatalities and $8.2 billion in damages each year. In Taiwan, flooding has
led to nearly 1,000 fatalities and over $12.8 billion (NT) in damages since
2000. These numbers are expected to grow due to climate change, population
growth, and increased vulnerability and exposure to extreme weather events.
Through an internationally integrated and interdisciplinary approach, the US-
Taiwan PIRE will investigate and improve "end-to-end" weather and climate
prediction models, enhance the education of young US and Taiwanese scientists
and future leaders, and bolster international and cultural exchange among
students, scientists, and practitioners with the overarching goal of
strengthening emergency response solutions and society's resiliency to extreme
weather phenomena that threaten life and property.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The US-
Taiwan PIRE- led by the University at Albany, State University of New York (US),
National Central University (Taiwan), Howard University (US), National Taiwan
University (Taiwan) and Academia Sinica (Taiwan) - will strive to address the
following challenges: (1) better quantify trends in weather extremes on a
regional scale (particularly in East Asia and the northeastern United States)
through in-depth investigations of past extreme events and influences from
large-scale global circulation patterns and changes in local environmental
conditions; (2) examine new techniques for providing probabilistic numerical
weather guidance on a regional scale; and (3) investigate the efficacy of
decision-making by emergency managers informed with and without probabilistic
weather forecasts and community impact information during extreme weather
events. Further the US-Taiwan PIRE will prepare a cadre of US-Taiwanese
atmospheric and social scientists and practitioners with disciplinary and
interdisciplinary academic and research experiences geared around extreme
weather and resiliency. Specifically, the PIRE will: (1) train the next
generation of scientists and experts with crosscutting knowledge, skills, and
understanding of regional climate and weather prediction, risk decision-making,
and response during extreme weather events; (2) foster a culture of
interdisciplinary research, training, and education to advance a greater
understanding of resiliency and response solutions in addressing extreme
weather; (3) institutionalize the US-Taiwan PIRE's internationally integrated
academic, research, and experiential learning programs; and (4) advance the
globalization of US and Taiwanese undergraduate and graduate students by
building cross-cultural literacy into the PIRE's study abroad experience and
broadening the participation of underrepresented groups through inter-
institutional academic programming involving PIRE universities and practitioner
partners.