* 1545684
* PIRE: Crafting Optimal Learning in Science Environments
* O/D,OISE
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2023
* Joseph Krajcik, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Anne Emig
* 08/31/2023
* USD 3,933,662.00

The PIRE award aims to enhance secondary science teachers' skills in promoting
engaging activities in classrooms. Recently, both the United States and Finland
have developed new science standards that stress the value of instructional
activities that are interesting, challenging, and relevant to students? lives
and futures. Of particular interest are the classroom messages and instructional
tasks in classrooms that have discouraged women, underrepresented minorities,
and individuals with special needs from pursuing careers in STEM fields. This
project is a collaboration between researchers and teachers in the United States
and Finland that: 1) measures the academic, social, and emotional learning of
students in secondary science classes; 2) investigates the effect of the
implementation of a new form of science instruction modeled after the new Next
Generation Science Standards; and 3) creates an integrated exchange program
between the United States and Finland for students, teachers, teacher educators,
researchers, and policy leaders to foster the professional development of
science teachers and improvement of teacher education programs. The planned
educational exchange program will involve teams of U.S. teacher educators,
science teachers, and science teacher interns traveling to Finland in order to
exchange research findings and teaching expertise with their Finnish
counterparts. It is anticipated that these exchanges will expand participants?
networks providing them more sources of information to elevate the
professionalism of teachers and deepen their STEM knowledge.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To capitalize on science activities in secondary chemistry
and physics classrooms in the United States and Finland that have been shown
through prior research to enhance engagement and learning, the project will
create an instructional intervention which advances reforms in science
education, specifically project based learning, and compares it with
conventional science instructional techniques. Using both innovative single case
study design and smartphone technology this research will test when students
participate in the instructional intervention do they experience an increase in
science relevance both for themselves and society and science learning? Working
with teachers, four science units will be created and replicated over a three
year period (with additional new schools, teachers, and students in each
successive year). By the end of year three a larger field test will be conducted
in which the intervention will be implemented in 40 classrooms in twenty
treatment high schools affecting nearly 2,000 students representing diverse
backgrounds (with matched control populations). The conduct of this work, from
its design to implementation, will be jointly undertaken in Finnish schools with
similarly aged students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is cofunded by the
Division of Research on Learning, Directorate for Education and Human Resources.