* 1545896
* Collaborative Research: The Genetic, Epigenetic, and Immunological Foundation of Cancer Evolution
* MPS,PHY
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2020
* Ross Levine, Sloan Kettering Institute For Cancer Research
* Continuing Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 05/31/2020
* USD 255,003.00

This award is part of the NSF effort to promote significant advances in the
fundamental understanding of cancer biology made possible through
multidisciplinary research that involves experts in theoretical physics, applied
mathematics, and computer science.

The last two decades have seen the development of increasingly effective cancer
therapies that target different facets of transformed cells, including aberrant
proliferation/survival, immune evasion, hyper-activated signaling pathways and
dysregulated transcriptional programs. In a subset of cancers, including acute
myeloid leukemia (AML) and non-small cell lung cancer with specific mutations,
these therapies lead to dramatic clinical responses in a significant proportion
of patients. However, in the majority of AML and subset of lung cancer patients
who respond to anti-cancer therapies, therapeutic relapse subsequently ensues,
although often after a considerable interval, such that these responses do not
lead to long-term cures. In this project the PIs will use theoretical physics
and mathematical modeling approaches to investigate the process of response to
treatment, the basis for persistence of a subset of cells during clinical
response, and the mechanisms driving subsequent therapeutic relapse in these two
tumor types. This integrative approach will involve genomic, transcriptional,
and phenotypic assays of tumors at the various stages of therapeutic response
and resistance. As such, this project is expected to lead to a more fundamental
understanding of the evolution of drug resistance and inform the development of
novel therapeutic strategies aimed to prevent the emergence of clinical
resistance. Although the efforts in this project will focus on lung cancer and
AML, the results and approaches described herein will have broader relevance to
oncology and are aimed to uncover general principles and models, which are
relevant to the spectrum of human cancers.

The integrative approach in this project will lead to major advances in the
understanding of the genetic and epigenetic evolution of cancer. The studies
into the genetic and mechanistic basis for therapeutic relapse, and the detailed
genetic, epigenetic, and functional studies of EGFR mutant lung cancer and AML
patient samples before therapy, at the time of maximal clinical response, and at
disease relapse will allow the PIs to obtain detailed datasets from DNA
sequencing and gene expression profiling to probe the dynamics of the genetic
and epigenetic diversity at different phases of disease. In turn, this will
guide the development of quantitative models of the evolutionary processes that
can then be tested in the laboratory. The interplay between the modeling and
data will guide strategies for future data collection and in vitro experiments
to functionally test hypotheses that emanate from the modeling studies.