* 1545974
* SHF: Conference: Hardware and Algorithms for Learning On-a-chip; November 5, 2015; Austin, TX
* CSE,CCF
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2016
* Yu Cao, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 06/30/2016
* USD 15,000.00

Support for student participation in a workshop to establish a forum for
discussion of the current practices, as well as future research needs in three
interrelated subareas of brain related sciences is provided through this grant.
The three specific subareas that the workshop will discuss are: hardware
acceleration of on-chip learning; machine learning algorithms and neuro-inspired
information processing; and nano-electronic design for learning, with the focus
on performance and energy efficiency. The workshop will consist of three
sessions and will be followed by a panel discussion, and will end with a poster
session to present student work. The conference will not only provide a venue
for researchers to address problems but also a platform for graduate students
and others to learn about cutting-edge research by attending invited talks,
presentations, tutorials in the general area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The outcome
of this workshop include a webpage hosted by the Arizona State University to
disseminate the program and discussions, as well as a report that clearly
identifies major research challenges and needs in computational neurosciences,
machine learning, and hardware design. The papers and posters will be published
through the workshop proceedings. These results will illustrate new and exciting
inter-disciplinary research problems of interest to the related communities, and
articulate a vision of conducting further research in this area. The final
workshop report will also be submitted to NSF as an annual report and will be
released online for sharing with the research community in general.