* 1545691
* I-Corps:  Equipment and Service for Non-contact Adhesion Characterization of Single Micro-Particles
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2015,11/30/2015
* Cetin Cetinkaya, Clarkson University
* Standard Grant
* lydia mcclure
* 11/30/2015
* USD 11,110.00

Adhesion characteristics of surfaces allow one to know the stability of bonded
and coated surfaces, and to understand the wettability of various different
surfaces. For example, adhesion characteristics of toner particles are a
critical parameter for printing and copying industry. End-products based on
stickiness of particles and surfaces (i. e. adhesion properties of single micro-
particles) can be equipment and/or analytical services for key industries. Other
potential industries are food processing, semiconductors, pharmaceuticals,
cosmetics, paints and dyes, and air-conditioning systems. Currently, there are
only a few measurement options available for single micro-particle adhesion
characterization, none of which is non-contact. Over the years, several
statistical adhesion measurements techniques based on centrifuge, aerodynamic
and hydrodynamic forces, impact-spectrum, and ultrasonic vibration have been
introduced for multi-particle systems. At present, no known adhesion
characterization technique exists for single micro-particles. Accurate adhesion
characterization of micro-particles at the micro/nano scales is a key technical
challenge due to the small length-scale of associated objects and low force
levels involved. The proposed technology has an edge over the contact
techniques, as contact at micro-scale changes the properties of the bonds.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of the program is to explore and assess the
commercial potential of a critical adhesion measurement and characterization
technology based on NSF-supported research projects. The proposed technology is
for making non-contact adhesion characterization of single micro-particles under
various conditions, such as electric field, temperature, and humidity. This
method is based on ultrasonic excitation of the motion of single particles and
detecting its response using a laser vibrometer. The equipment eliminates
various complications of the current equipment by making non-contact, non-
invasive measurements in native environments. This method/technique will be
unique and repeatable.