* 1545931
* Phylogenetically informed curation of eukaryotic 18S rDNA
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2015,03/31/2017
* Matthew Brown, Mississippi State University
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 03/31/2017
* USD 16,652.00

The diversity of eukaryotic organisms extends far beyond the familiar plants,
animals, and fungi; the vast majority of eukaryotes are microbial. Eukaryotic
microbes are important in ecological processes, and directly influence the
biology and health of animals and plants as parasites, commensals, and
symbionts. However, the extent of their diversity is still largely unknown
because most eukaryotes have not yet been or cannot be cultured. The
investigators will coordinate an initiative that brings together taxonomists
with microbial ecologists and database experts to curate reference databases for
diverse microbial lineages by incorporating knowledge of phylogenetic,
morphological, and/or environmental contextual data. The curated reference
database created during this workshop will serve as a community resource and
enable a broad array of researchers to engage in studies of eukaryotic microbial
ecology. All of the workshop products - curation pipeline and curated reference
datasets - will be made publicly available upon project completion and will be
shared with existing databases to improve these resources. The investigators aim
to recruit a diverse pool of applicants by advertising broadly within the
scientific community, through the initiative website, relevant societies, and
specifically encourage applications from underrepresented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As most eukaryotic lineages are microbial, high-
throughput environmental sequencing has greatly expanded our knowledge of
eukaryotic diversity by revealing new lineages and their environmental
distribution. However, the value of these data for cataloging the extent and
distribution of eukaryotic biodiversity is critically dependent on the quality
of reference databases used to annotate these environmental sequences. Existing
databases struggle to keep pace with rapidly changing views on eukaryotic
taxonomy, the influx of new data, and computational challenges related to
assembling high quality alignments and trees that are necessary for accurate
characterization of lineage diversity. The EukRef initiative will address these
challenges by bringing together taxonomists with expertise in individual
lineages that span the eukaryotic tree of life along with microbial ecologists
that actively use environmental sequencing data. The investigators will
integrate the individual efforts of working group members into a database
spanning the eukaryotic tree of life consisting of curated sequences, flexible
taxonomy, and phylogenetic trees, including their underlying sequence
alignments. This reference database and associated taxonomic and contextual data
will be shared with existing databases GenBank, PR2, and SILVA to improve
eukaryotic annotations in general. The EukRef database will increase the power
of sequencing studies to uncover fundamental patterns in microbial ecology and
diversity.