* 1545458
* NRT-IGE: Training STEM Graduates to Communicate in the Digital Age, and Measuring Whether It Works.
* EDU,DGE
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2019
* Margaret Rubega, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Carol Stoel
* 08/31/2019
* USD 499,213.00

NRT-IGE: Training STEM Graduates to Communicate in the Digital Age and Measuring
Whether it Works. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The grand challenges in science and
engineering require broad professional training for graduate students so they
have the skills to successfully communicate technical concepts to diverse
audiences. Scientists need to be able to talk with policymakers if public
funding of science is to yield benefits to society, and they need to talk with
commercial partners to create opportunities for innovation. They need to talk
with journalists to keep the public informed. Accordingly, science communication
training is increasingly integrated into graduate science education, but there
are few methods for determining whether training actually works or whether some
training programs work better than others. This National Science Foundation
Research Traineeship (NRT) award in the Innovations in Graduate Education (IGE)
Track to the University of Connecticut will develop and test tools to measure
whether training in science communication works and to test which methods work
best. The innovative pilot will pair science graduate students with journalism
majors and include communication skills training in traditional, digital, and
social media. The project will bridge disciplines and create assessment tools
that can be used across the graduate education
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will develop and test new teaching
materials and new innovative tools to evaluate whether the model succeeds in
increasing communication effectiveness and activity among science, math, and
engineering students. During the pilot, young scientists will be paired with
journalists to engage in an interview-write-assess-repeat model. The project
will utilize publicly available social media data and evaluations provided by
undergraduate students to assess the participating graduate students'
effectiveness as communicators. These data will permit comparisons of students
before and after training and comparisons of traditional assessment methods with
those provided through social media analytics. Social media metrics may also
provide a cost- and labor-effective means to track trainees over the course of
their careers. The assessment tools developed and tested in this project will be
transferable across disciplines and universities, for the first time permitting
cost-benefit comparisons among programs using different training strategies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF Research Traineeship (NRT) Program is designed to
encourage the development and implementation of bold, new, potentially
transformative, and scalable models for STEM graduate education training. The
Innovations in Graduate Education Track is dedicated solely to piloting,
testing, and evaluating novel, innovative, and potentially transformative
approaches to graduate education.