* 1545627
* EAGER: Test for local adaptation of recombination rate
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Mohamed Noor, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 08/31/2019
* USD 157,748.00

Genetic recombination is fundamentally important to many genetic and
evolutionary processes, including segregation, repair of double-strand breaks in
DNA, removal of detrimental mutations, adaptation, and speciation. Prior
research has shown that rates of gene recombination vary among individuals and
populations, and are also modulated by temperature and other environmental
factors in many species. Despite being the subject of over a hundred years of
investigation, no study has tested the fundamental hypothesis of whether gene
recombination rates exhibit adaptation to local environments. This project will
examine variation in wild populations of the fruit fly, Drosophila
pseudoobscura, and identify genomic regions undergoing rapid selection-driven
evolution in recombination rates. This novel project is the first step in
identifying the kind of natural selection that creates adaptation and species
divergence in recombination rates. Additionally this project funds a partnership
with a minority-serving high school and includes curriculum development to teach
genetics in K-16 schools. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project builds on decades
of research on wild populations of Drosophila pseudoobscura to provide a
critical "first-look" at whether recombination rates have adapted to local
populations and potentially open the door to testing the nature of such
adaptation. The primary goal of the proposed research will be to contrast
variation within and between several natural populations of D. pseudoobscura in
nucleotide sequence vs. recombination rate when tested in a constant
environment. Significantly higher differentiation among populations in
recombination rate would suggest that this phenotype has adapted to local
environments, whereas lower differentiation in recombination rate would
demonstrate that there has been broad stabilizing selection in this trait across
the species range. The secondary goal of the research will be to test whether
rates exhibited in nature are sometimes initially maladaptive in particular
populations as a result of environmental modulation, and adaptation occurs
within populations to mitigate the maladaptive rates induced by plasticity to
the environment. Such "genetic compensation" has been inferred for other traits,
but never suggested or tested with respect to recombination, despite its
ubiquitous importance in inheritance, adaptation, and speciation.