* 1545759
* EAGER: Economic Incentives for Correct Outsourced Computation via Rational Proofs
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2017
* Rosario Gennaro, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* Nina Amla
* 06/30/2017
* USD 74,400.00

The problem of securely outsourcing data and computation has received widespread
attention due to the rise of cloud computing: a paradigm where businesses lease
computing resources from a service rather than maintain their own computing
infrastructure. These scenarios introduce new security problems: in particular
how do we trust the integrity of data and computation that are not under our own
control. This project deals with these problems by considering methods, adapted
from the world of economics, to incentivize parties to behave correctly during
the execution of a computation. This research could have a transformative effect
on the way computations are outsourced in many scenarios where a fully malicious
adversary does not need to be considered.

The proposed research serves two complementary functions: to address problems
which are crucial to securing our computing infrastructure, and to advance a
cross-disciplinary scientific approach. The project explores the notion of
Rational Proof, where the execution of a computational problem is rewarded with
a randomized function, maximized in expectation when the computation is
performed correctly. We show that current notions of Rational Proofs do not
satisfy basic compositional properties for the case in which many computations
are outsourced. For some protocols in the literature we show that a fast but
incorrect answer is more remunerable for the prover, by allowing him or her to
solve more problems and collect more rewards.