* 1545212
* NRT-IGE: Penn Pathfinders
* EHR,DGE
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2018
* Susan Margulies, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* John Weishampel
* 08/31/2018
* USD 489,849.00

NRT-IGE: Penn Pathfinders

The United States has led scientific advancement and education in biomedical
science and engineering for the past 50 years empowered by a stellar scientific
workforce. As non-traditional career paths continue to expand, the majority of
science and engineering PhD graduates increasingly choose careers outside
academia, such as teaching, entrepreneurship, policy, and research in industry
or government. However, most graduate programs train students for academic
careers, thereby failing to adequately acquaint students with alternative career
paths, or provide them with the basic tools and experiences to succeed in
multiple professional sectors. This National Science Foundation Research
Traineeship (NRT) award in the Innovations of Graduate Education (IGE) Track to
the University of Pennsylvania (Penn Pathfinders) will focus on a pilot training
program that will provide trainees in biomedical sciences and engineering with
career development opportunities and investigate its effectiveness in comparison
to two non-trainee cohorts. The pilot training program appropriately targets
preparing graduate students for a wider range of career pathways through
professional skills development and increased awareness of and preparation for
non-academic career pathways.

The objectives of this innovative testbed project are to foster career path
awareness via multiple platforms, to provide longitudinal professional path
mentoring, and to devise and enact individualized development plans for
acquiring workplace skills and career path-specific competencies. The pilot will
involve a carefully selected diverse cohort to be trained in making informed
decisions about career paths and in acquiring the essential competencies to be
successful in pursuing their career objectives. Data will be collected on
trainee demographic profiles and inclusion, program participation, program
quality, satisfaction, time-to-degree, and effectiveness of program content in
enhancing career development-ultimately via longitudinal career tracking. Using
comprehensive comparisons between trainees and non-trainees, this three-year
pilot program will be considered successful if significant differences are
identified between cohorts in improving the awareness of and satisfaction with
preparation for their preferred career path, with the ultimate goal of enhancing
the broad impact and engagement of scientists and engineers in society. The
critical elements that contribute significantly to improved career path
awareness and preparedness will be identified and these features will be
incorporated into larger-scale graduate student training programs at Penn and
other institutions. The study outcomes will be disseminated in both local and
global settings to inform and improve career advising of biomedical scientists
and engineers.

The NSF Research Traineeship (NRT) Program is designed to encourage the
development and implementation of bold, new, potentially transformative, and
scalable models for STEM graduate education training. The Innovations in
Graduate Education Track is dedicated solely to piloting, testing, and
evaluating novel, innovative, and potentially transformative approaches to
graduate education.