* 1545614
* 2015 NSF Maker Summit
* ENG,EEC
* 07/15/2015,12/31/2016
* Stacie Gregory, American Society For Engineering Education
* Standard Grant
* Carmina Londono
* 12/31/2016
* USD 119,447.00

The purpose of this project is to facilitate a Maker summit that will serve as a
catalyst to establish networks and communication channels amongst different
stakeholders in the Maker community. Makers are a quickly growing community of
innovators who embody characteristics such as ingenuity, creativity, and
propensity toward lifelong learning; all of which are important for the Engineer
of 2020. During the first-ever White House Maker Faire in June 2014, President
Barack Obama petitioned mayors, federal agencies, educational institutions,
companies, foundations, libraries and museums to support Makers. Encouraged by
the potential impact Makers can have on innovation in the United States, many of
those who were petitioned responded with tangible commitments to assist in the
advancement of the Maker Movement. This proposed Maker summit will bring
stakeholders together for the purpose of generating knowledge that all
participants can utilize to strengthen the role of Makers in advancing the
creation of innovative products. The proposed one-and-a-half day summit will
take place in the Washington, DC metro area in Fall
2015.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Maker Summit provides leaders of the Maker
Movement a unique opportunity to convene and share ideas and best practices. The
summit will draw approximately thirty participants from five different sectors:
informal learning in museum/library settings; making/hacking in community
spaces; university maker spaces; engineering and science researchers who engage
making; and education researchers who engage in making. Attendees from these
communities will be afforded opportunities to forge connections with each other
across different segments of the Maker Movement; envision the future of Making
for the engineering and education communities; and identify how Maker spaces can
be designed to foster inclusiveness and broaden participation. The summit will
include Makers from communities as diverse as major museums and educational
institutions to small nonprofit organizations and local libraries. These various
groups will connect and learn from each other, generating the potential to
enhance the STEM knowledge and of the U.S. citizenry. Opportunities to join
forces and collaborate will be afforded to all attendees, who will both share
and discover how to maximize the potential of the Maker movement in their
sectors and local areas. Furthermore, the best practices that will be
disseminated at the Summit (and beyond) - will benefit Makers on a global scale.