* 1545803
* PIRE: Neural Mechanisms of Reward and Decision
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2023
* Charles Abramson, University of Puerto Rico Medical Sciences Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Raterron
* 09/30/2023
* USD 3,925,001.00

A major goal in the field of neuroscience is to understand how the brain
evaluates its surroundings and implements a plan of action. Increasing our
knowledge about decision-making could ultimately lead to improved strategies for
solving problems in a more effective and adaptive fashion. This knowledge should
also provide deep insight into certain behavioral and developmental disorders in
which decision-making is compromised.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This PIRE project
brings together of a consortium of U.S. and international faculty and students
on four interdisciplinary subprojects that are unified by the goal of increasing
our understanding of brain mechanisms mediating reward and decision processes.
Each subproject will partner investigators and students from the University of
Puerto Rico (UPR) and/or Oklahoma State University with a team of international
researchers from Canada, Chile, Egypt, Italy, and/or Turkey. The Neural
Mechanisms of Reward and Decision project will catalyze advances in research and
education that could not occur without international collaboration. PIRE
workshops and exchanges will cultivate interdisciplinary cooperation and
identify common objectives among groups that investigate the role of dopamine in
reward and decisions across a broad spectrum of phylogenetic and mechanistic
levels. One subproject will study the impact of parasitic infection on
neuromodulatory systems that regulate host behavior in a snail-schistosome
system using transcriptomics and electrophysiological techniques. A second
subproject will examine how isolation stress during adolescence differentially
affects male and female dopamine circuitry and resultant learning, memory and
behavior in rats. A third subproject will study the role of dopamine on
plasticity of foraging behavior in different honeybee subspecies. The fourth
subproject will examine the biophysical consequences of repeated exposure to
stimulants on the activity of dopamine neurons. The PIRE project will make
continuous efforts to integrate across the four subprojects to achieve a broad
understanding of neural mechanisms of reward and decision
processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Student participants in the Neural Mechanisms of
Reward and Decision project will conduct research in the labs of international
partners as well as in U.S. labs; they will receive mentoring to develop their
critical thinking proficiency and enhance their communication skills and
professionalism. All mentors possess considerable experience with international
collaboration and cooperation which will be shared and disseminated for the
benefit of the entire program. This program also responds to the national need
to increase diversity in the scientific workforce. The University of Puerto Rico
has historically served as a rich source of talented students who pursue
graduate degrees in institutions on the island and elsewhere. This program will
enhance our ability to provide students with international research experiences
that promote their global engagement. A great beneficiary of broadened global
participation in the field of neuroscience will be the field itself.