* 1545851
* Micro-Credentials as Evidence of Preparation for Future Learning: An Ideation and Design Workshop
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2018
* Barry Fishman, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Ellen McCallie
* 08/31/2018
* USD 99,531.00

This project will convene a workshop focused on digital micro-credentials, also
known as digital badges, and the role they might play in the high-stakes process
of college admission. Digital micro-credentials represent one potential
mechanism for broadening access for underrepresented groups to higher education.
Digital micro-credentials enable students to present a broader view of
themselves as learners that connects different domains of their lives: academic,
social, and personal interest-driven. As such, digital micro-credentials enable
students to represent expertise and potential in ways that go beyond traditional
high school grade point averages and standardized test scores. The workshop
addresses questions such as: Can micro-credentials serve as valid and reliable
measures of learning? What "gap" in current assessment practices can be filled
by micro-credentials? What is required for micro-credentials to be useful as
evidence of preparation for future learning in the college admission
process?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project's principal investigators will employ
case studies, drawn from the Chicago City of Learning network
(chicagocityoflearning.org) and Mouse (mouse.org) in New York City, to better
understand the use of micro-credentials for learning in STEM-focused
extracurricular activities. During the workshop, participants with expertise in
student learning from a range of perspectives will design representations of the
knowledge or skills demonstrated by students. Participating admissions officers
and STEM faculty will critique the designs with respect to how well the designs
demonstrate evidence of preparation for future learning by students. The
workshop outcomes will include sample designs of micro-credentials that show
promise to both promote learning and support college admissions. The workshop
will also result in a white paper discussing the potential of micro-credentials
for college admission in STEM fields by youth from underrepresented groups.