* 1545814
* I-Corps:  AutoEEG-enhancing productivity by autoscanning EEG signals
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2015,08/31/2016
* Joseph Picone, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* lydia mcclure
* 08/31/2016
* USD 50,000.00

Electroencephalograms (EEGs) are the most pervasive neural diagnostic tool; they
require a highly trained neurologist to analyze them. Long-term EEG monitoring,
used to diagnose rare events such as epileptic seizures, is difficult or
impossible to scan manually without decision software support. Development of
portable standalone diagnostic tools, which can address emerging markets such as
contact sports, is highly difficult; and smaller or stand-alone medical
practices often lack expertise to conduct diagnostics on-site and accordingly
lose revenue. At present, innovation in commercial clinical decision support
tools is minimal, whereas the global market for rapidly diagnosing brain-related
injury and disease is growing. The proposed AutoEEGTM is a software tool that
enhances productivity by auto-scanning EEG signals and flagging sections of the
signal that need further review by a clinician. The proposed tool reduces the
amount of data needing manual review by two orders of magnitude, offering
substantial productivity gains in a clinical setting.

The proposed clinical decision support tool is based on proven, advanced, deep
learning technology. It reduces time to diagnosis, reduces error and is
sufficiently lightweight to run on portable standalone platforms. This
technology is able to identify EEG events in the signal and subsequently to
provide a report that summarizes its findings based on the event detected. The
transcribed EEG signals can be viewed from any portable computing device. It
also has the ability to learn from data, helping in future decision making,
providing real-time feedback to aid in diagnosis, and, for patients undergoing
long-term monitoring, creating an alert when abnormal signals are identified.
This market-leading product will (1) Enable clinical neurologists employing a
volume-based business mode to decrease the time spent analyzing an EEG and
thereby increase billing; (2) Allow pharmas to assess changes quantitatively in
neural activation during clinical trials; (3) Allow neurologists to order and
bill for substantially more long-term monitoring tests based on this proven
decision support tool; and (4) Add value to the commodity EEG headsets currently
entering the market by providing meaningful, real-time signal analysis. This
research project has two key components: (1) a detailed analysis of the market
to understand various opportunities such as licensing to equipment manufacturers
and off-line analysis for contract research organizations; and (2) usability
design and engineering to understand the analytics and user interface issues
that bring most value to potential users such as clinicians and primary care
physicians. The outcomes of this research will be used to harden the technology
and guide integration into existing EEG products.