* 1545668
* EAGER: State-Modulating Neurofeedback: A novel method for improving executive control functions in the aging population.
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2015,02/28/2018
* Lucia Vaina, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 02/28/2018
* USD 242,628.00

1545668(Vaina)

The PI will develop a novel real-time, magnetoencephalography based
neurofeedback method designed to rehabilitate deficits on executive functions
such as decision making, switching attention, search, and error correction.
Benefits of this work encompass scientific understanding, methodological
trailblazing, with significant impact on both dimensions and an opening of a
new, more optimistic, era in the neurorehabilitation of executive functions
which will improve the quality of life of impaired individuals. It is important
to emphasize that although this application focuses on training executive
functions in the aging population, principles derived via the proposed training,
will lead to neurorehabilitation of executive functions deficits in other
populations such as stroke, traumatic brain injuries, and in individuals
afflicted by psychiatric or developmental disorders. Undergraduate and graduate
students in science and engineering will benefit from hands-on involvement in
the project, providing them with an understanding of how engineering methods can
contribute to human neuroscience of cognitive rehabilitation.

This project has two related goals. First it aims to develop a novel and
transformative neuro-therapeutic intervention, State-modulating neurofeedback
(smNFB), which will provide rapid modulation of cortical activity targeting
training dynamic brain functions typical of Executive Functions (EF). The
expected outcome of the training is increased speed to switch spatial attention
in the trained task. Novel algorithms and simulations will be implemented to
assure that the smNFB method effectively provides real time neurofeedback (rt-
NFB) useful as a neurotherapeutic protocol. This method is innovative and, if
successful, will significantly contribute to the success of neurorehabilitation
targeting deficits in EF. The second goal is to monitor changes in cortical
activation and dynamic connectivity as a function of smNFB training. It is
expected that smNFB training will affect the strength of activation and the
timing of connectivity in the frontoparietal network involved in executive
control of attention. Functional connectivity between candidate cortical areas
will be assessed through an extension of the dynamic Granger Causality methods
developed in the PI laboratory, which measures how the magnitude of directed
functional connectivity between cortical areas evolves temporally during
training. Thus the second innovation of this project is that it provides a
multifaceted quantitative neuroscientific validation of the proposed smNFB
method and how it affects the spatiotemporal patterns of cortical processing. A
third innovation of this project is a unique way for assessing efficacy of the
neurofeedback cue within subject, which is highly relevant for efficacy testing
of all neurofeedback paradigms in patient populations whose performance and
response to rehabilitation are often very variable and inconsistent. The project
will provide open source software tools for the scientific community, following
gold-standard guidelines for sharing software (March 2014 Editorial of Nature
Methods). These tools will be integrated in the Brain Storm toolbox which is a
free and widely used MEG/EEG data analysis software package written in Matlab as
will be the algorithms developed under the proposed research.