* 1545913
* PIRE: Promoting Urban Sustainability in the Arctic
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2023
* Nikolay Shiklomanov, George Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Maija Kukla
* 03/31/2023
* USD 3,100,646.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Arctic PIRE: Promoting Urban Sustainability in the
Arctic&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As Arctic ice continues to melt, humans will enter
the high north in growing numbers to develop local resources and expand
transportation links. The result of this increased activity will be intensified
urban development in extreme conditions. The purpose of this project is to
promote greater urban sustainability in the Arctic so that the ultimate human
impact on the larger environment will be as small as possible. To achieve such a
broad international goal, this Partnership for International Research and
Education (PIRE) will bring together scientists from the U.S., Canada,
Denmark/Greenland, Norway and Russia. Developing strong cooperation among the
various Arctic countries, as well as other European and Asian countries with
growing interests in the north, is necessary to ensure that future development
in this polar region is managed effectively. With the U.S. chairing the Arctic
Council from May 2015 to May 2017, this PIRE will improve the ability of policy-
makers to promote sustainability by providing tools to measure progress,
identify areas of most urgent need, select verifiable best practices, examine
opportunity costs, and determine where external actors can have the greatest
impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, this project will develop an Arctic
Urban Sustainability Index, which will make it possible to assess the
consequences of human activities in the region across a number of important
dimensions. The Index will be used to measure sustainability outcomes and
progress toward achieving those outcomes in a wide variety of Arctic cities. Key
elements of the index will include thawing permafrost, a boom-bust economic
cycle, and an influx of migrant workers with the resulting increase in social
tensions. Our central hypothesis posits that: Measuring sustainability efforts
across the full range of scale and mechanisms and compiling the results in the
form of an index will trigger efforts to improve urban planning. The project
will be multi-disciplinary in nature, incorporating the analytical tools of
geography, climatology, architecture, design, sociology, and political science.
Importantly, the Index will not be limited to use in the Arctic. It could be
effective in measuring sustainability in other extreme climate conditions, such
as in the new cities rising in the Persian Gulf and in places like Phoenix,
Arizona.