* 1545403
* NRT-DESE: Data-Enabled Discovery and Design of Energy Materials
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2022
* Joseph Ross, Jr., Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Vinod Lohani
* 08/31/2022
* USD 3,096,836.00

NRT-DESE: Data-Enabled Discovery and Design of Energy Materials
(D3EM)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Accelerating the discovery of new materials that
enable transformative technologies is needed to transform the nation?s energy
landscape. This National Science Foundation Research Traineeship (NRT) award
will create and institutionalize a new training model at Texas A&amp;M
University that equips Master?s and doctoral students with the skills to advance
research at the interface of materials science, informatics, and engineering
design. The traineeship addresses the data-enabled science and engineering
research priority theme and tackles three main challenges: 1) the need to
accelerate materials discovery and development, particularly in energy-related
technologies; 2) the need to instill in scientists and engineers the capability
to transform data into knowledge, and use this knowledge to discover and design
advanced materials; and 3) the need to educate scientists and engineers who
internalize the interdisciplinary research process. The project anticipates
preparing eighty (80) master?s and doctoral students, including forty-one (41)
funded trainees, through an interdisciplinary curriculum in materials science,
design, and informatics enriched with energy and entrepreneurship-related
courses and activities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This traineeship will involve
faculty from two colleges and six departments with expertise in materials
science, engineering design, and informatics as well as in graduate education
and curriculum development. The program will closely align the desired technical
and professional skills, curriculum innovations, and learning outcomes. The
pedagogical model will include mediated, relational, situated and transformative
components. Collaboration will be embedded throughout the program, particularly
in the development of learning communities, internships, and the capstone
Materials Design Studio. This traineeship will equip graduate students with the
necessary knowledge and experience, interdisciplinary focus, and technical and
professional skills (including communication, collaboration, leadership) to
thrive in a range of career options including industry, academia, and national
research laboratories. It will also equip entrepreneurship-minded trainees with
the knowledge and experience necessary to pursue deployment and
commercialization of technologies generated from their research. The program
will contain strong education research and rigorous evaluation components, which
will enable refinement of effective and novel approaches and dissemination of
the training model to the wider graduate education community.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF Research Traineeship (NRT) Program is designed to
encourage the development and implementation of bold, new, potentially
transformative, and scalable models for STEM graduate education training. The
Traineeship Track is dedicated to effective training of STEM graduate students
in high priority interdisciplinary research areas, through the comprehensive
traineeship model that is innovative, evidence-based, and aligned with changing
workforce and research needs.