* 1545303
* Unique Challenges and Opportunities for Business Schools in Pursuing Federal Research Grants
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2017
* Todd Maurer, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* chu-hsiang chang
* 06/30/2017
* USD 49,775.00

Non-technical Description:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite having many strengths
and unique assets that create the strong potential for outstanding NSF-funded
research, many business schools also face unique challenges that impede the
pursuit and acquisition of research grants to support scholarship as is common
in other disciplines. Therefore, both NSF and many business schools may be
missing outstanding funded research projects because of these dynamics. To the
extent that business schools could become more oriented toward grant funding in
the future, the present workshop will be timely and helpful for both NSF and
business schools. More importantly, if research funds can be leveraged further
to bring stronger research to market, this is valuable to all constituents and
stakeholders that could benefit from greater insights into issues that affect
well-being of individuals, competitiveness of the workforce, innovativeness of
research, partnerships between academia and industry, and increased economic
competitiveness--all concerns of both business schools and NSF. Greater insight
into, awareness of and ultimately better alignment of high value research
resources at a national level could have transformative effects across the
United States business school research markets in which NSF could play an
increasingly key role as a sponsor and partner in the coming
decades.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
objective of the workshop is to conduct a needs assessment involving the unique
challenges and opportunities that business schools specifically face in applying
for and administering federal research grants. The workshop attendees will be
sampled from college leadership at research-oriented colleges of business in the
United States. These leaders will discuss such issues as the barriers that
prevent business faculty from pursuing research proposals and the challenges
colleges of business face in supporting the acquisition and administration of
grants; the unique strengths and assets that business schools possess that make
them very competitive for doing outstanding research and for obtaining funding
for that work; possible strategies and best practices to enhance and leverage
opportunities for pursuing grants, while minimizing the challenges; and ideas
for future business school-NSF coordination, communication and initiatives to
enhance funded research activity that would benefit all relevant stakeholders. A
white paper will document this workshop and will be disseminated. This will make
a unique contribution because the match between business school research
orientations and values important to NSF is potentially high: Business school
research combines science and knowledge from many disciplines, including
mathematics, economics, psychology, philosophy, sociology and others while
applying increasingly rigorous methods and standards in research. In addition,
this research is conducted within a profession that values practical relevance
to business and society. Thus, business school research reflects high value on
intellectual merit, the potential for multidisciplinary or interdisciplinary
research, as well as value on broader impacts or contributing to the achievement
of societally relevant outcomes. Further, human capital market dynamics may
result in top scholars from various disciplines being attracted to business
schools resulting very active and influential researchers doing business-related
research. Yet, despite potential for outstanding NSF-funded research, many
business schools wrestle with unique challenges in scholarship, such as an
emphasis on journal lists to evaluate research which may present difficulties
for pursuing interdisciplinary research as well as a culture that does not
promote the pursuit of research grants to support scholarship as is common in
other disciplines.