* 1545271
* A Belmont Forum Scoping Workshop on Food, Water & Energy for Sustainable Global Urbanization: Accelerating Transitions to Sustainable Consumption and Production
* GEO,ICER
* 06/15/2015,05/31/2018
* Jason Neff, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Maria Uhle
* 05/31/2018
* USD 75,694.00

This award provides support for an international workshop to explore options for
international collaborative research on critical issues of balancing food-water-
energy resources within the context of increased global urbanization. Achieving
sustainable societies will require an understanding of the interrelated nature
of global food, water and energy resource systems. Ideally, societies will
minimize trade-offs and maximize synergies between these resources in order to
accelerate transitions to Sustainable Consumption and Production (SCP) patterns.
This Food-Water-Energy Nexus approach can play a pivotal role in fostering
sustainable global development by helping to identify integrated solutions to
govern resource interdependencies. Development in and around urban areas is of
particular concern due to the ongoing rapid population increases in cities.
Therefore, the Nexus approach can offer a unique perspective on accelerating
transitions to sustainable societies across the urban-rural gradient.

The workshop will bring together researchers from natural and social science
disciplines, stakeholders and research funders to collectively determine what
international collaborative research is needed to link the Food-Water-Energy
Nexus approach with sustainable consumption patterns in the context of global
urbanization. The goals of this workshop are to: 1. Provide global and regional
perspectives from practitioners and stakeholders on challenges associated with
balancing resources within the Food-Water-Energy Nexus and the impact of
Urbanization on these tradeoffs; 2. Identify critical knowledge gaps in the
development of potential mechanisms to accelerate transitions to Sustainable
Consumption and Production (SCP) patterns; and 3. Assess the state of existing
investments and programs in these areas and determine areas ripe for
international collaboration; 4.Set out priority societal challenges to be
addressed and the associated research questions/topics, where international
collaboration will add substantial value and generate significant advances.