* 1545069
* CPS: Breakthrough:Towards Resiliency in Cyber-physical Systems for Robot-assisted Surgery
* CSE,CNS
* 02/15/2016,01/31/2019
* Ravishankar Iyer, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 01/31/2019
* USD 500,000.00

Since 2000, surgical robots have been used in over 1.75 million minimally
invasive procedures in the U.S. across various surgical specialties, including
gynecological, urological, general, cardiothoracic, and head and neck surgery.
Robotic surgical procedures promise decreased complication rates and morbidity,
due to the minimally invasive nature of the procedures. A detailed analysis
(also reported to the FDA) of the adverse events associated with the surgical
robot indicates that despite the increased number of robotic procedures and
their greater utilization, the rate of adverse events has remained relatively
steady over the last 14 years. Even though current surgical robots are designed
with safety mechanisms in mind, in practice several significant challenges exist
in enabling timely and accurate detection and mitigation of adverse incidents
during surgery. Toward this goal, the project will address (i) an in-depth
analysis of incident causes, which takes into account the interactions among the
system components, human operators, and patients; (ii) resiliency assessment of
the robotic systems in the presence of realistic safety hazards, reliability
failures, and malicious tampering; and (iii) continuous monitoring for detection
of safety, reliability, and security violations to ensure patient
safety.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this work lies in: (i)
systems-theoretic approach driven by real data on safety hazards and medical
equipment recalls, to identify causes leading to violation of safety constraints
at different layers of the cyber and physical system-control-structure; (ii)
creation of a unique safety hazard simulation engine to perform injections into
robot control software and emulate realistic safety hazard scenarios in a
virtual environment; (iii) an adaptive method for rapid detection of events that
lead to safety violations, based on continuous monitoring of human operator
actions, robot state, and patient status, in conjunction with a probabilistic
graph-model that captures dependencies between the causal factors leading to
safety hazards; and (iv) experimental validation using the real robot to assess
monitoring and protection mechanisms in the presence of realistic safety
hazards, reliability faults, and security exploits (recreated using safety
hazard simulation engine). The broader impact of the project is a methodology
for design and resiliency assessment of a larger class of control cyber-physical
systems, which involve humans in the on-line decision making loop. Application
of the methodology to robot-assisted surgery demonstrates the strength and
practicality of the approach and is likely to attract interest from areas of
academia and industry in which cyber-physical systems are either a subject of
study or the basis for delivering a service (e.g., transportation or electric
power grids). This project's educational outreach encompasses strategies for
broadening participation in multi-disciplinary projects spanning medicine and
engineering.