* 1545867
* Communicating STEM - Applying the Science of Science Communication to Natural History Media Products in Development/Production
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2016
* Lisa Samford, Jackson Wild
* Standard Grant
* Valentine Kass
* 08/31/2016
* USD 49,928.00

Communicating STEM -- Applying the Science of Science Communication to Natural
History Media Products in Development/Production.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal
of "Communicating STEM -- Applying the Science of Science Communication to
Natural History Media Products in Development/Production" is to bring standard
methodology for media product development/production into better alignment with
evidence-based best practices for science communication. Presentations in the
professional development science strand at the Jackson Hole Wildlife Film
Festival (JHWFF) conference will be curated to demonstrate how adhering to
research-based communication strategies has been proven to increase knowledge
retention in a lay audience and decrease instances of audience bias. The strand
will present emerging methods for assessing media impact beyond simply the
number of viewers, as well as in depth case studies examining evidence for
measurable benefits to adopting science communication strategies. By
establishing an international cohort of interdisciplinary professionals, and by
recruiting ongoing engagement through dissemination of project deliverables
through partner organizations and university programs, JHWFF will increase
opportunities for cross-industry collaboration and provide media producers, STEM
professionals and science communication experts with the resources and network
necessary for informed, effective public outreach through natural history and
science media products. This conference strand is funded by the Advancing
Informal STEM Learning program, which seeks to advance new approaches to, and
evidence-based understanding of, the design and development of STEM learning in
informal environments. This includes providing multiple pathways for broadening
access to and engagement in STEM learning experiences, advancing innovative
research on and assessment of STEM learning in informal environments, and
developing understandings of deeper learning by
participants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Jackson Hole Wildlife Film Festival (JHWFF)
is a premier international industry conference for natural history media
professionals. This project will establish a cross-industry, interdisciplinary
professional development science strand in the upcoming 2015 JHWFF conference.
The goal is to advance interdisciplinary collaborations between STEM
professionals, science communication experts, media producers, and
students/early career professionals. The strand will explore examples of
successful science/media collaborations, and increase discourse on best
practices for public engagement at the intersection of STEM research,
empirically-proven communication methods, and media content for diverse
audiences. The project is divided into two phases: Phase I involves the work at
the conference; Phase II will provide free online access to edited videos of
program sessions made broadly available through partner organizations and
institutions, and promoted via social networking, cohort groups, and online
blogs. The collaborating organizations (American Association for the Advancement
of Science, LifeOnTERRA, and Participant Media), complemented by a broad group
of expert advisors, will extend the capacity of the project, facilitate access
to stakeholders, and recruit broader participation in both phases of the
project. Dr. Louis Nadelson, Director of the Center for the School of the Future
at Utah State University, will conduct external evaluation.