* 1545220
* NRT: Integrative Bioinformatics for Investigating and Engineering Microbiomes (IBIEM)
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2021
* John Rawls, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Francesmary Modugno
* 08/31/2021
* USD 2,999,999.00

NRT: Integrative Bioinformatics for Investigating and Engineering Microbes
(IBIEM)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Microbes play a vital role in shaping almost every
ecosystem on the planet. Understanding the capabilities of microbes and their
microbial communities (microbiomes) is the foundation for a range of
transformative discoveries essential for sustaining life and the environment.
However, the numerous disciplines studying and working with microbes often
operate in silos resulting from the lack of a shared knowledge base and common
analytical processes, thus limiting the potential to develop novel applications.
This National Science Foundation Research Traineeship (NRT) award will bring
together biologists, engineers, computer scientists and biostatisticians at Duke
University and North Carolina Agricultural and Technology State University to
fill this gap. The traineeship anticipates preparing one hundred (100) doctoral
students, including forty-five (45) funded trainees across the two institutions,
to solve both current and the next generation of challenges in data-enabled
science and engineering microbiome research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Metagenomic
and metatranscriptomic (meta?omic) analyses in combination with advanced
bioinformatic tools present a powerful approach for obtaining key insights into
the complex microbial interactions underlying microbiome composition and
function. Academic institutions have often struggled to keep pace with the
growing and diverse meta?omics training demands of their students. This
traineeship will address these training gaps by creating a novel and replicable
education model where microbiologists, engineers, statisticians, and other
empirical scientists will be cross-trained with theorists, model builders, and
computational scientists. Trainees will learn to effectively work in
interdisciplinary teams, engage in exciting research in environmental
engineering and science, biomedical engineering, microbial genetics,
biostatistics, and bioinformatics, and share discoveries within their cohort.
Targeted interactions with practitioners will provide trainees with an
understanding of real world challenges, competencies in various communication
tools, collaborative skills utilized in the workforce, and an exposure to a wide
range of careers. By instilling breadth of knowledge and cross-disciplinary
awareness, the traineeship will foster creative integration and ultimately
acceleration of discovery while helping to provide the nation?s workforce with
students equipped with interdisciplinary skills to address global challenges
including restoring ecosystems, developing innovative metabolic engineering
pathways and engineering the next generation of therapies. Finally, through
immersion of trainees in an array of outreach activities, a community will be
developed with the motivation and skills to promote science and engineering to
the broader population with goals of broad and substantial engagement of
underrepresented groups in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF Research Traineeship (NRT) Program is
designed to encourage the development and implementation of bold, new,
potentially transformative, and scalable models for STEM graduate education
training. The Traineeship Track is dedicated to effective training of STEM
graduate students in high priority interdisciplinary research areas, through the
comprehensive traineeship model that is innovative, evidence-based, and aligned
with changing workforce and research needs.