* 1545994
* BIGDATA: Collaborative Research: F: IA: Statistical Learning for Big Data with Random Projections
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Wen Zhou, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Nandini Kannan
* 08/31/2018
* USD 100,577.00

Contemporary data-driven science and engineering problems require the
development of statistical methods that do not compromise statistical accuracy,
yet are computationally feasible. Data quality, particularly the heterogeneity
in data measurements, is a critical factor that affects statistical accuracy in
the analysis of large datasets. This project will explore and demonstrate the
impact and feasibility of improving computational and statistical performances
simultaneously for Big Data problems with massive datasets. The research will
advance the state of knowledge in predictive statistical learning with Big Data,
and be extremely valuable in applications related to financial risk management
or commercial operations employing recommender systems, biology, and image
analysis.

A key phenomenon motivating this project is the notion that some refined
ensemble methods combined with random projections can simultaneously enable the
fast analysis of massive data while enhancing statistical performance.
Specifically, the aims of the project are: (1) Develop new classification
methods based on random projections and the random forest. By defining
appropriate projections, the proposed method is shown to improve statistical
accuracy for massive datasets with a large number of irrelevant noisy
measurements. The theoretical properties of this method will be analyzed, and an
adaptive version of the algorithm developed to optimize the computational and
statistical efficiency gains; (2) Propose boosting algorithms with random
projections. The statistical properties, practical performance, and
implementation of the proposed random projected boosting algorithms will be
investigated; (3) Develop classification methods with heterogeneities. A
classification method that involves the weighted bootstrap and ensemble learning
to handle heterogeneity or covariate shifts in measurements in large datasets
will be developed. The random projection method will be applied to improve the
proposed method for high-dimensional datasets.