* 1545777
* Meeting-The Morphological Diversity of Intromittent Organs, Society of Integrative and Comparative Biology: January 5th, 2016; Portland, Oregon
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2016
* Diane Kelly, University of the South
* Standard Grant
* William E. Zamer
* 07/31/2016
* USD 33,532.00

The primary goal of this symposium will be to build a synthetic understanding of
the factors that interact to make intromittent organs some of the most
morphologically diverse structures in the animal kingdom. The symposium will
attract researchers studying functional morphology, ecological morphology,
behavior, and developmental biology in both vertebrate and invertebrate taxa.
The symposium will improve and broaden this field of study by encouraging new
collaborations between research groups that have not previously interacted and
identifying conceptual similarities among the reproductive structures of diverse
taxonomic groups. Further, a special conference-wide session about effectively
communicating the value of basic and seemingly esoteric research efforts to a
broader audience will also occur. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This symposium will
break down the walls that separate scientists studying different aspects of
intromittent organs, integrating researchers studying functional morphology,
ecological morphology, behavior, and developmental biology and who address these
questions in both vertebrate and invertebrate taxa. The speakers will also
highlight new studies and methods being used in the study of intromittent
organs, including molecular and genomic techniques, macro- and micro-CT, finite
element analysis, and 3D reconstruction of morphology. Thus, attendees will have
the opportunity to learn new methodology and share expertise, and these
interactions will lead to the creation of valuable and lasting collaborative
bridges. Moreover, the volume of conference papers produced for a special issue
of Integrative and Comparative Biology (ICB) will serve as a valuable resource
for future researchers and lecturers.&lt;br/&gt;