* 1545157
* Workshop: Inaugural Optics and Photonics Winter School and Workshop, College of Optical Sciences, Tucson AZ, January 5-20, 2016
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2015,02/29/2016
* Jim Schwiegerling, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 02/29/2016
* USD 15,000.00

Optics and Photonics Winter School and Workshop at the College of Optical
Sciences January 5-10, 2016&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Optics &amp; photonics are
important areas in which there is a growing national need for work-force
development. A challenge is that many undergraduate schools are focused on
traditional science and engineering curricula, to the extent that their students
may not be fully aware of the opportunities for pursuing a career in optics
&amp; photonics. This grant will provide partial support for an inaugural Optics
and Photonics Winter School and Workshop to be held at the College of Optical
Sciences in Tucson, AZ from January 5-10, 2016. The winter school and workshop
will be aimed at promoting, supporting, and strengthening optics &amp; photonics
education and research in the United States by engaging students and faculty at
the undergraduate level. The inaugural Optics and Photonics Winter School and
Workshop will be publically advertised. Participation will be by invitation
only, but application is open to all interested parties. We plan to actively
recruit approximately 10 faculty and 20 student participants for whom we can
reimburse airfare, meals and lodging. Undergraduate participants will be
recruited in part through nominations from invited faculty, but all
undergraduate applicants will be considered for invitation and financial
support, subject to the availability of funds. To cover these expenses we
request partial support from the NSF in the amount of $15k. The expected impact
of Optics and Photonics Winter School and Workshop falls in several areas. First
and foremost, the event will promote and enhance optics and photonics education
at the undergraduate level, thus encouraging more students to pursue a career in
this area and making transparent the advantages of a graduate level education in
an optics program. Secondly, the workshop provides PUI faculty and students with
the opportunity to network with colleagues at similar undergraduate institutes,
and with attendees from larger graduate schools and from the photonics industry.
For faculty from primarily undergraduate institutes in particular, the cross-
fertilization of optics pedagogy and approaches to successful research projects
in the undergraduate environment will be extremely useful, especially for those
who have fewer opportunities to network with the broader optical sciences
community. As a result, PUI faculty and students will become more effective
ambassadors for the field of optics in general, and better positioned to
encourage the pursuit of graduate level optics &amp; photonics education. This
ultimately results in a stronger and more highly skilled workforce in optics and
photonics to address the technological and scientific needs of our
society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of hosting the Optics and Photonics
Winter School will be to give undergraduate students an overview of key and
foundational areas of optics and photonics, and how they are intimately related
to specific fields of research, in hopes of encouraging more undergraduate
students to pursue a career in those fields. The workshop is aimed at faculty
members from primarily undergraduate institutes as well as undergraduates
attending the Winter School. The workshop will provide a forum for undergraduate
students and faculty members to share and/or learn of research and educational
activities in optical sciences taking place at undergraduate institutions.