* 1545597
* EAGER: Ancestral reconstruction of plasticity along environmental gradients: tracing the pathways to ecological specialization
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2021
* Sharon Strauss, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 07/31/2021
* USD 165,200.00

Ecological specialization is the engine generating biological diversity. But why
do species become specialists on a particular resource or set of conditions
rather than expand their niches to become more generalized, incorporating both
old and new resources? How does the degree to which species are specialized in
their ecological niche predict their geographic range and climatic tolerances?
Is the ability to tolerate a large range of environmental and resource
conditions (i.e., to be a generalist) a trait that is shared over evolutionary
time by species? This project uses cutting edge analytical techniques to map the
resilience of multiple plant species onto the pattern of their evolutionary
relationships. This will allow researchers to explore how species tolerance to
environmental change evolves across related species, whether tolerance to a
range of experimental environments predicts the degree to which species are
specialized in their current ecological niches, and whether current tolerance
can predict species' responses to future changes in the climate. This project
also advances education and diversity by training underrepresented groups of
students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project combines contemporary (ecological
experiments/observations) with historical (phylogenetic) approaches to
disentangle intrinsic and extrinsic forces driving ecological specialization.
Ancestral trait reconstruction of multivariate parameters describing norms of
reactions will be completed on multiple plant species. Fitness, in addition to
leaf physiology and other plant traits, will be measured in 18 Streptanthoid
species grown in environmental treatments that represent gradients in water
availability and leaf herbivory. Once completed this project will help us
understand how the evolution of plasticity and competitive response relates to
specialization. In addition, new methodological approaches should contribute to
the study of these questions in a variety of systems across the tree of life.
Graduate students from underrepresented groups will contribute directly to this
research.