* 1545270
* EAGER: Identification and Design of Optimal Communication Topologies in Collaborative Networks
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2015,01/31/2018
* Makan Fardad, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 01/31/2018
* USD 100,000.00

Large networks of distributed interacting agents are omnipresent in modern
society and technological applications. Examples are wide-ranging and include
sociopolitical networks, satellite and sensor constellations, vehicular
formations, and the emerging smart grid. As networks increase in their size and
complexity, it is imperative to develop the next generation of quantitative
infrastructure to understand their collective behavior and to enhance their
performance. The theory and techniques developed in this proposal are expected
to serve as a foundation for designing secure, resilient, and efficient networks
of the future. Application areas of the proposed work include information
dissemination in social networks, distributed decision-making in multi-agent
systems, and stability and efficiency improvement in distributed power
generation networks. By engaging graduate students in research, the project will
contribute to the workforce needs in cybersecurity and network
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The field of sparse signal recovery, also referred
to as compressive sensing, has witnessed overwhelming research activity across
different scientific communities over the past decade, accompanied by the
development of theoretical and computational tools. In signal recovery it is of
interest to expose sparse patterns hidden in under-sampled signals and large
datasets. Problems of network identification and design however, while just as
important, have not received as much attention. The focus of such problems is to
uncover pivotal sparse structures that are responsible for the efficient and
resilient functioning of large networks. The research objective of this proposal
is to develop an analytic and computational framework for the analysis and
design of collaborative networks. Models of dynamical networks are employed that
lend themselves to topological variations and augmentation. Measures of
uncertainty amplification are used to quantify nodes collective behavior across
time and space. Resource-aware constraints and perturbation methods are employed
in the context of convex optimization to identify pivotal communication and
interaction topologies that balance the use of resources with high collective
performance. As a concrete application, the proposed framework is used to find
optimal communication topologies in networks of synchronizing agents.