* 1545199
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award: Households And Political Transformation During State Formation
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2017
* Lacey Carpenter, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2017
* USD 25,175.00

Researchers Lacey Carpenter and Dr. Joyce Marcus of the University of Michigan
are investigating the relationship between ordinary households and a large-scale
political transformation known as state formation. The contemporary world has
diverse political systems, but most can also be defined as states,i.e., polities
with authority concentrated in the hands of full-time political officials who
hold specialized military, policy-making, or administrative positions. The
emergence of state-level societies is a global political phenomenon that
fundamentally changed the way leaders and subjects interact and the way
governments extract and distribute resources. Analysis of early states has
relevance to present day society because most of today's world is not only
characterized by states (or nation-states), but many of these states are
attempting to expand their territorial control over populations who resist
domination and incorporation. However, these large and complex polities cannot
support themselves or change without involvement from the households whose labor
and resources are the foundation of larger systems. Carpenter and Marcus's
investigation will be the first study of houses during the period of state
formation in the Oaxaca Valley, Mexico, and the first to assess what impact the
state had on household economy. Archaeology is uniquely situated to provide a
long-term perspective (1) on societies and time periods that lack written
records, (2) processes that occur over centuries, and (3) on the common people
that comprise most of the population. The project will employ a local crew from
the town of San Martín Tilcajete in Oaxaca, Mexico who will excavate houses. The
project offers new research opportunities for undergraduate and graduate
students who will acquire experience in an array of excavation and laboratory
methods. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research concerns the development through
time of the relationship between households and governing institutions. The
investigators will document how households were organized before, during, and
after state formation to assess the timing and extent of any changes or
continuities in daily life during this volatile era. Choices made at the
household level may have enabled leaders to better mobilize resources and
augment and further consolidate their authority. A suite of economic, social,
and ritual changes are associated with state formation: increased social
stratification, taxation, full-time military service, craft specialization,
full-time merchant classes, full-time priests, among others. Households may have
implemented new strategies in reaction to these institutional-level changes. A
study of households occupied over multiple centuries will allow investigators to
document the timing of economic, social, and ritual changes, and provide a more
complete understanding of state formation. The excavation of houses from the
Tilcajete polity, where a secondary state emerged in response to hostilities
with the pristine state centered at Monte Albán, and the creation of an
inventory of the contents of each house provide data that will be used to
improve our models of how household economies are tied to larger political
systems, particularly during times of profound political and economic
transformation.