* 1545618
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: The Social Dynamics Of Coalescence
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2018
* Sarah Striker, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2018
* USD 25,200.00

This project examines how relationships among individuals can contribute to or
undermine the ability of entire groups to act collectively. How and why groups
of people come together and achieve common goals is a key question in
contemporary social science. In this research, scholars often focus on two ways
that people relate with one another: 1) through direct, face-to-face
interactions (e.g. conversation, trade); and 2) by sharing an association with
the same abstract concept (e.g. identifying as an "American"). When members of a
group share both of these types of relations with one another, they are more
likely to mobilize to achieve shared goals. To date, scholarship on this topic
has focused mostly on how collective action arises in contemporary settings
among segments of a larger population that is already socially cohesive in some
respects (i.e., social movement within a nation). However, social cohesion
develops in many kinds of human societies, and among small or large groups of
people. Archaeology is particularly well-suited to make a contribution to this
literature because it can offer long term case studies including a variety of
human societies that are not represented in contemporary or historical examples.
This project focuses on long-term changes in relationships among people in a
smaller-scale prehistoric society to provide a new perspective on the
development of social cohesion. Such work is essential to understanding how and
why social cohesion does (or does not) develop, how and why it is sometimes
sustained, and the experiences of people who live through this type of dramatic
social change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research examines changing individual
and group relations during a period of coalescence, a process by which
previously separate people or groups come together to form a socially cohesive
and long-lasting community. Archaeological data from four Ancestral Wendat
(Iroquoian) villages that were successively occupied by the same community over
a period of 150 years (1400-1550 C.E.) in what is today Ontario, Canada, provide
a long term, intra-community perspective on how social cohesion develops and is
sustained. Previous scholarship in this region documents the process of
coalescence through changes in village plans from smaller, dispersed communities
housing several hundred people to the large, and spatially integrated Mantle
site, the culmination of coalescence. This project develops a new approach for
studying the development of social cohesion, utilizing a unique theoretical
framework to draw new insights from existing, well-established methods.
Indicators of the techniques used to produce pottery and pipes provide evidence
for direct, interpersonal interactions, while the design and decoration of
pottery, pipes, and ornaments reveal abstract, shared connections. Changing
individual and group relations among people will be identified within each
community by considering the spatial patterns of these characteristics.
Differences in these patterns in each sequential community will reveal changing
relations among people over the period of coalescence.