* 1545752
* Workshop: Predictive Theoretical and Computational Approaches for Additive Manufacturing; National Academy of Sciences, Washington D.C.; October 7-9, 2015
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2017
* Ana Ferreras, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Steve Schmid
* 06/30/2017
* USD 49,950.00

Additive manufacturing, such as 3D printing, enables the realization of complex
shapes that are otherwise impossible to manufacture. The urgent need for
maturity and robustness of this technology has rapidly initiated a great deal of
research in this area from the engineering community. There is a need for
experts to come together, to share the state-of-the-art in additive
manufacturing and discuss advances in the theoretical and predictive simulation
tools that can facilitate the development of new materials and products based on
additive manufacturing processes. Additive manufacturing methods have great
potential for promoting transformative research in many fields across the vast
spectrum of engineering, e.g., advanced manufacturing, biomedical applications,
materials design, meta-materials, and energy-absorbing device design. The U.S.
National Committee on Theoretical and Applied Mechanics will host a workshop in
Washington, DC, on October 7-9, 2015, to address the challenges and
opportunities in theoretical and computational methods to advance additive
manufacturing in a holistic, multifaceted, and interdisciplinary way. At this
meeting, experts from different sectors and industries will share their best
practices and ideas. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While workshops on additive
manufacturing have been held in the past, this workshop will focus on
theoretical and computational approaches. The accuracy and reliability of these
approaches lay the foundation for the predictive characteristics of any modeling
techniques spawned from them. This unique workshop will involve such areas as
simulation based engineering and science, integrated computational materials
engineering, mechanics, materials science, manufacturing processes, and other
specialized areas. The emphasis will be technical, but it will also address
policy, or other issues related to this topic. The goal of this workshop is to
develop an integrated framework or manufacturing methodology for additive
manufacturing considering the computational and theoretical approaches and
digital materials available. The current and future trends in theoretical,
mathematical, and computational approaches for additive manufacturing processes
will be thoroughly investigated and disseminated through the workshop. A
planning committee of six experts appointed by the National Academies will
prepare the agenda and identify the speakers. It is expected that 40
participants will attend the workshop in person and many others via webinar. The
meeting organizers will provide a life webcast of the meeting to the research
community and enable community input via web-based tools.