* 1545158
* ERA SynBio: Orthogonal Replication as the Platform for an Episome
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2020
* Chang Liu, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 07/31/2020
* USD 580,000.00

This project engages 6 research groups in the United States, France and the
United Kingdom. The goal is to achieve the stable maintenance and propagation of
synthetic, non-natural genetic material (nucleic acids) in living cells, without
integration into the genetic material of the host cell. The synthetic genetic
material will have chemical features distinct from natural genetic material and
will constitute a separate, independent element (called an episome) in the cell.
Such a cell will sustain its growth using the natural genetic material but can
make useful products when equipped with the appropriate synthetic (episomal)
system in parallel. This project will generate insights into the management of
chemical information in cells (including the manner in which natural systems may
have evolved) and will have immediate applications in metabolic engineering. The
students and young scientists working on this project will have broad and
diverse international and transdisciplinary training in molecular genetics,
biochemistry and bioengineering. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An orthogonal bacterial
episome will be developed, based on the linear plasmid system that can be stably
maintained through engineered links to cellular functions and antibiotic
resistance. The genetic information on the episome will be exclusively encoded
by synthetic nucleic acids, termed XNAs. These XNAs have been shown to be non-
toxic and unable to interact with the cellular genetic material. The
international collaborators bring the complementary expertise to furnish the
elements and functionalities that are necessary to build the orthogonal system.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is funded through a transnational funding
mechanism between the United States National Science Foundation and European
Funding Agencies that are part of the European Commission endorsed Research Area
Network in Synthetic Biology. The United States component of this project was
co-funded by programs in Systems and Synthetic Biology (Directorate for
Biological Sciences) and Biotechnology and Biochemical Bioengineering
(Directorate for Engineering).