* 1545453
* NRT-DESE:  P3 -- Predictive Phenomics of Plants
* EHR,DGE
* 09/01/2015,09/30/2021
* Patrick Schnable, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Vinod Lohani
* 09/30/2021
* USD 2,866,938.00

NRT- DESE: Predictive Phenomics of Plants (P3)

New methods to increase crop productivity are required to meet anticipated
demands for food, feed, fiber, and fuel. Using modern sensors and data analysis
techniques, it is now feasible to develop methods to predict plant growth and
productivity based on information about their genome and environment. However,
doing so requires expertise in plant sciences as well as computational sciences
and engineering. This National Science Foundation Research Traineeship (NRT)
award to Iowa State University will bring together students with diverse
backgrounds, including plant sciences, statistics, and engineering, and provide
them with data-enabled science and engineering training. The collaborative
spirit required for students to thrive in this unique intellectual environment
will be strengthened through the establishment of a community of practice to
support collective learning. This traineeship anticipates preparing forty-eight
(48) master's and doctoral students, including twenty-eight (28) funded doctoral
students, with the understanding and tools to design and construct crops with
desired traits that can thrive in a changing environment.

Understanding how particular genetic traits result in given plant
characteristics under specific environmental conditions is a core goal of modern
biology that will facilitate the efficient development of crops with
commercially useful characteristics. Plant characteristics are influenced by
genetics and a wide range of environmental factors, including, for example,
rainfall, temperature and soil types. Developing methods to effectively
integrate these diverse inputs that take advantage of existing biological,
statistical, and engineering knowledge will be a key area in this research and
training program that will bring together faculty from eight departments.
Trainees will engage in cutting-edge research and development areas involving
direct data collection and analysis from living plants, including sensor
development, high throughput robotic technology, and biological feature
extraction through image analysis. This traineeship will use the T-training
model to provide students with training across a broad range of disciplines
while developing a deep technical expertise in one area. This expertise, in
combination with soft skills development, will enable the trainees to work
across organizational and cultural boundaries as well as scientific disciplines.
To develop understanding of how to share knowledge with diverse groups, the
program will provide students with training beyond traditional coursework and
research through activities that will develop advanced communication and
entrepreneurship skills. Additionally, internship opportunities in industry,
national labs, and other settings will equip trainees to choose among the
diverse career paths available to scientists and engineers.

The NSF Research Traineeship (NRT) Program is designed to encourage the
development and implementation of bold, new, potentially transformative, and
scalable models for STEM graduate education training. The Traineeship Track is
dedicated to effective training of STEM graduate students in high priority
interdisciplinary research areas, through the comprehensive traineeship model
that is innovative, evidence-based, and aligned with changing workforce and
research needs.