* 1545050
* CPS: TTP Option: Synergy: Collaborative Research: Threat Assessment Tools for Management-Coupled Cyber- and Physical- Infrastructures
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2020
* Sajal Das, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 08/31/2020
* USD 194,799.00

Strategic decision-making for physical-world infrastructures is rapidly
transitioning toward a pervasively cyber-enabled paradigm, in which human
stakeholders and automation leverage the cyber-infrastructure at large
(including on-line data sources, cloud computing, and handheld devices). This
changing paradigm is leading to tight coupling of the cyber- infrastructure with
multiple physical- world infrastructures, including air transportation and
electric power systems. These management-coupled cyber- and physical-
infrastructures (MCCPIs) are subject to complex threats from natural and
sentient adversaries, which can enact complex propagative impacts across
networked physical-, cyber-, and human elements.

We propose here to develop a modeling framework and tool suite for threat
assessment for MCCPIs. The proposed modeling framework for MCCPIs has three
aspects: 1) a tractable moment-linear modeling paradigm for the hybrid,
stochastic, and multi-layer dynamics of MCCPIs; 2) models for sentient and
natural adversaries, that capture their measurement and actuation capabilities
in the cyber- and physical- worlds, intelligence, and trust-level; and 3) formal
definitions for information security and vulnerability. The attendant tool suite
will provide situational awareness of the propagative impacts of threats.
Specifically, three functionalities termed Target, Feature, and Defend will be
developed, which exploit topological characteristics of an MCCPI to evaluate and
mitigate threat impacts. We will then pursue analyses that tie special
infrastructure-network features to security/vulnerability. As a central case
study, the framework and tools will be used for threat assessment and risk
analysis of strategic air traffic management. Three canonical types of threats
will be addressed: environmental-to-physical threats, cyber-physical co-threats,
and human-in-the-loop threats. This case study will include development and
deployment of software decision aids for managing man-made disturbances to the
air traffic system.