* 1545897
* EAGER:  Plasmonic Transparent Electrodes for Organic Photovoltaics
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2016
* Miltiadis Hatalis, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 06/30/2016
* USD 80,000.00

Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Nontechnical:&lt;br/&gt;Photovoltaic devices have the
potential to provide an unlimited source of energy by converting solar light
into electricity. Photovoltaic devices made with organic materials offer
significant advantages compared to ones made with inorganic materials. These
advantages include low-cost, light-weight, flexibility, and compatibility with
reel-to-reel high-volume processing. However, widespread adoption of organic
photovoltaic devices is limited by their relatively low power conversion
efficiency, and the poor mechanical properties of the currently used indium-tin-
oxide transparent electrode, especially for flexible devices. The brittleness of
indium-tin-oxide thin films may render them incompatible with low cost, reel-to-
reel, high volume processing and manufacturing of flexible organic solar cells.
This EAGER project will investigate novel plasmonic nanostructured transparent
electrodes as replacement for the currently used indium-tin-oxide transparent
electrodes in organic solar cells. The new plasmonic transparent electrodes will
significantly enhance the photon absorption in the organic light-harvesting
layer(s) and thus improve the power conversion efficiency of the organic-based
solar cells. The concept of taking advantage of the dual nature of the proposed
plasmonic nanostructures is novel and transformative as it will enable the
replacement of indium-tin-oxide with a material not only more superior as a
transparent electrode but with an additional crucial function, which will boost
the device power conversion efficiency and lead to large-scale manufacturing of
low cost photovoltaic devices. This project will contribute to building US
competitiveness in the field of renewable energy sources.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical:&lt;br/&gt;This project will investigate novel
metallic nanostructures in which the decay length of surface plasmon resonances
is of the same order of magnitude as the thickness of the organic light-
harvesting layer(s). These novel transparent electrodes have been shown via
simulations to yield the highest reported enhancement in total photon absorption
of the organic active light-harvesting layer(s) in an organic photovoltaic
device. Two different types (single- and double-sided) of plasmonic
nanostructures will be investigated and, various geometries from each type will
be studied and compared to prior simulation results. An integrated experimental
set-up will be used to prevent any air/moisture exposure of the silver electrode
and of the organic materials during device processing and characterization. Two
different lithographic techniques imprint and stencil will be pursued in order
to realize the plasmonic nanostructured electrodes in organic photovoltaic
devices. This project will seek to measure experimentally the enhanced photon
absorption and demonstrate that it can be translated into an increased short-
circuit current density resulting in a significantly enhanced power conversion
efficiency. Unravelling the physics and the mechanism(s) that result in such an
enhancement, and identifying any bottlenecks that may interfere with them, will
advance our knowledge and understanding of the interactions between plasmonic
and organic nanostructures. This will enable the proposed plasmonic transparent
electrodes to be implemented in other thin film optoelectronic devices, such as
organic biosensors, thus opening the door for many other applications and
enabling technologies.&lt;br/&gt;The PI at Lehigh University has the track
record in recruiting minorities and will continue to provide opportunities for
underrepresented groups in the summer programs. The PI also plans to pursue NSF-
REU (Research Experience for Undergraduates) to foster undergraduate
participation with an emphasis on minority student recruitment.