* 1545177
* NRT-IGE:  A test bed for STEM graduate student communication training
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Jack Schultz, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Carol Stoel
* 08/31/2019
* USD 487,468.00

NRT-IGE: A test bed for STEM graduate student communication
training&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scientists are often criticized for not engaging
more with the general public, causing a widening gap between what scientists do
in the lab and what the lay public understands about science. Most scientists
are not trained with communication skills that would help them engage with the
general public. This National Science Foundation Research Traineeship (NRT)
award in the Innovations of Graduate Education (IGE) Track to the University of
Missouri-Columbia will seek to remedy this problem by investigating
communication training for graduate students and developing ways to assure its
effectiveness. This project brings together a highly interdisciplinary team from
biology, physics, strategic communication, journalism, theater, creative
writing, and visual design to develop and test the means of evaluating the
effectiveness of communication training in graduate programs. The novel pilot
will draw on communication research outside the sciences and use statistical
evaluation of training effectiveness from multiple points of view, including the
public's. The project will result in tools and procedures graduate training
programs could use to assure the quality of communications training, and
eventually provide better communication between scientists and
others.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Despite widespread agreement on the need for
better science communication and a proliferation of training programs, there is
little evidence about what approaches actually improve scientists' communication
skills. An interdisciplinary team will develop a controlled test bed for
communication training in science graduate programs. Longitudinal studies will
assess trainees' acquisition and retention over five learning modules. A
rigorous statistical design will relate trainees' self-evaluations and
instructors' evaluations to responses to survey instruments by hundreds of non-
science audience members. Statistical comparison of pre-, post-, and no-training
impacts on audiences will establish effectiveness. Trainees will come from the
life sciences and later from physical sciences to determine the program's
transferability among disciplines. These experiments will provide an innovative
model for training evaluation that can be adopted by other programs at
relatively low cost. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF Research Traineeship (NRT)
Program is designed to encourage the development and implementation of bold,
new, potentially transformative, and scalable models for STEM graduate education
training. The Innovations in Graduate Education Track is dedicated solely to
piloting, testing, and evaluating novel, innovative, and potentially
transformative approaches to graduate education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work
is supported, in part, by the EHR Core Research (ECR) program. The ECR program
emphasizes fundamental STEM education research that generates foundational
knowledge in the field. Investments are made in critical areas that are
essential, broad and enduring: STEM learning and STEM learning environments,
broadening participation in STEM, and STEM workforce development.