* 1545399
* NRT: Soft Materials for Life Sciences
* EHR,DGE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2021
* Gregory Tew, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Vinod Lohani
* 08/31/2021
* USD 3,174,551.00

NRT: Soft Materials for Life Sciences

This National Science Foundation Research Traineeship (NRT) award engages
faculty and students at the University of Massachusetts Amherst in a new
graduate education model that brings together life scientists, physical
scientists and engineers. To prepare highly skilled STEM students for the modern
economy of the 21st century, the project will provide training breadth across
multiple professional and technical skill areas while developing depth in the
trainee's area of specialization. The program will serve masters and doctoral
students in the disciplines of polymer science and engineering, immunology, food
science, and several engineering fields. The traineeship anticipates preparing
seventy-four (74) graduate students, including twenty-eight (28) funded
trainees, many of whom will direct their career aims beyond research or academia
to work in industry, government, and teaching-intensive professional jobs.
Trainees will develop dynamic interdisciplinary and professional skills to
catalyze innovation in materials research, such as new drug delivery methods and
personalized health monitoring devices.

The research theme of applying polymeric materials to technical challenges in
the life sciences will serve as the basis for meaningful interdisciplinary
collaboration. The research theme, from which collaborative research projects
will spring, will feature two primary concentrations: Engineering Immunological
Soft Materials (enabling immunologists to collaborate with polymer specialists)
and Materials for Sensor Monitoring (supporting collaborations between engineers
and polymer scientists). A goal of the training program is to build T-shaped
skills, in which the vertical bar on the "T" represents the depth of related
skills and expertise in a single field, and the horizontal bar is the ability to
collaborate across disciplines with experts in other areas and to apply
knowledge in areas of expertise other than one's own. The program will feature
an intensive "Year Two Experience" that combines an interdisciplinary course in
technical topics related to the research theme, professional development
workshops and training activities, and interdisciplinary lab modules. Students
who complete all requirements will earn a graduate certificate in Soft Materials
for Life Sciences. Connections to industry, facilitated by the Institute for
Applied Life Sciences, will benefit the trainees and strengthen the broader
science ecosystem. The project outcomes will be a demonstrated, well-evaluated
model for transformative graduate training that is effective in developing
T-shaped professionals. A science-of-science study conducted throughout the NRT
project will explore the dynamics and efficacy of interdisciplinary
collaboration by students in this program.

The NSF Research Traineeship (NRT) Program is designed to encourage the
development and implementation of bold, new, potentially transformative, and
scalable models for STEM graduate education training. The Traineeship Track is
dedicated to effective training of STEM graduate students in high priority
interdisciplinary research areas, through the comprehensive traineeship model
that is innovative, evidence-based, and aligned with changing workforce and
research needs.