* 1545211
* NRT-IGE: Workplace Inspired Approaches for Improving Graduate Student Professionalism
* EDU,DGE
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2019
* Bradley Brummel, University of Tulsa
* Standard Grant
* John Weishampel
* 08/31/2019
* USD 484,522.00

NRT-IGE: Workplace Inspired Approaches for Improving Graduate
Student&lt;br/&gt;Professionalism&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This National Science
Foundation Research Traineeship (NRT) award in the Innovations in Graduate
Education (IGE) Track to the University of Tulsa will test the effectiveness of
an innovative approach to enhance the professionalism and productivity of
engineering graduate students. Graduate school, as it currently exists, enables
students to acquire concrete technical skills with admirable efficiency. To
complete their preparation as professionals, however, graduate students also
need to develop non-technical skills, such as leadership, conflict management,
and adaptability. This pilot project will develop a novel professional
development system that provides graduate students a mental framework to
practice these non-technical skills and uses an online tool to facilitate and
track professional development. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary goal of this
test-bed project will be to develop and assess a novel program that enables the
intentional practice of non-technical skills. Intentional practice is a
deliberate process where a skill is broken down into parts and there is focus on
improving a particular part, frequently with immediate feedback from a coach.
This research will answer three central questions: What are the core
professional competencies that are essential for successful graduate students?
Can approaches developed and validated in workplace settings be adapted to
improve graduate student professionalism? Does increased professionalism improve
graduate student productivity, retention, and success? These questions will be
answered through a set of online assessment tracking tools that will capture
student self-assessments and peer and advisor assessments. Students will be
mentored on how to make intentional decisions about professional development
opportunities and how to develop the ability to be intentional about practicing
these professional skills. Qualitative assessments will be coupled to objective
measures of student performance, such as productivity and graduation rate, to
determine if the competency development approach is successful. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The NSF Research Traineeship (NRT) Program is designed to encourage
the development and implementation of bold, new, potentially transformative, and
scalable models for STEM graduate education training. The Innovations in
Graduate Education Track is dedicated solely to piloting, testing, and
evaluating novel, innovative, and potentially transformative approaches to
graduate education.