* 1545761
* Integrating functional, phylogenetic and genetic components of diversity for an improved understanding of forest structure, dynamics, and change
* BIO,DEB
* 01/15/2016,12/31/2018
* Stuart Davies, Smithsonian Institution
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 12/31/2018
* USD 296,240.00

The species composition and dynamics of forests worldwide are changing in
response to multiple factors including deforestation, invasive species, and
climate and atmospheric change. The diversity of trees in a forest controls the
functioning of the ecosystem, and therefore plays a critical role in regulating
forest responses to global change. This award will support two workshops - one
in the US and one in China - to allow scientists to share data and discuss
current understanding and future priorities for studying the change in tree
biodiversity over time. The workshops will involve approximately 100
participants, 75% of whom will be graduate students, post-doctoral researchers
or junior faculty. Formal international partnerships and informal scientific
links will be further developed by these workshops, as well as by international
scientific exchanges in which US fellows spend 1-3 months in partner
institutions within China. Results of the workshops will be disseminated broadly
through peer-reviewed publications, a blog, project website, and other social
media outlets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By combining the largest inventory of tree
diversity and dynamics in the world with expanded datasets on species-level
functional traits, phylogenies, seed production, seedling regeneration, soil
microbial diversity, and tree genetics these workshops will lead to an improved
understanding of the dimensions of tree diversity and their role in forest
function, and thereby improve predictions of compositional, structural, and
dynamic responses to global change. Two international collaborative workshops
will synthesize and integrate: (i) tree functional diversity with species
performance to better understand how functional traits control species'
performance among environments; (ii) tree functional and phylogenetic diversity
to investigate controls on forest ecosystem function; (iii) tree phylogenetic
and functional diversity to predict community responses to change from species'
performance across environments; (iv) metagenomic surveys of microbial diversity
with tree functional and phylogenetic diversity to assess below-ground controls
on forest diversity and function; and (v) genetic, functional and phylogenetic
diversity to understand the consequences of genetic diversity for species
performance. These combined activities will transform current understanding of
how forests work, how they are responding to current environmental change, and
their resilience in the face of future change.