* 1545553
* PIRE: U.S.-East Africa Research and Education Partnership: Cassava mosaic disease - A paradigm for the evolution of insect-transmitted plant virus pathosystems
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2024
* George Kennedy, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Raterron
* 09/30/2024
* USD 5,000,000.00

This PIRE project establishes a research and training partnership between
scientists and students in the United States and East Africa to study how plant
DNA viruses change over time. Plant DNA viruses have emerged as leading
pathogens that threaten crops worldwide. These studies will focus on Cassava
mosaic disease, which is endemic to Africa and severely limits the production of
cassava, a major food crop across the continent. Because Africa is one of the
fastest growing regions in the world, with a population projected to double to
2.4 billion people by 2050, producing sufficient quantities of high quality,
nutritious food is a challenge there. Agriculture is increasingly a global
enterprise and finding solutions to food security problems will depend on
research partnerships such as this one that explores the basic science of how
plant DNA viruses evolve and what limits their ability to adapt over time. Such
fundamental knowledge can then be used by others to develop rational, durable
strategies to control these important plant pathogens. The project, which relies
on the combined expertise and resources of U.S. and African participants,
provides an excellent framework for training U.S. students to develop their
scientific skills and to work in a global community to help ensure the future
security of the developing and developed world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Molecular
evolution of plant viruses occurs through mutation, recombination and
reassortment of viral genome components, resulting in a high degree of
variation. In complex pathogen-host systems, the evolutionary outcomes are
influenced by many ecological factors including agricultural practices, insect
vector populations, interactions between crops and reservoir plants, and
climate. Most of our knowledge of viral evolution is based on field-collected
samples, which only provide snapshots of viral diversity at specific times and
locations. To examine the full evolutionary potential of plant DNA viruses and
the bottlenecks that constrain their evolution, we propose a comprehensive
analysis of the drivers of viral genetic diversity, emergence, persistence and
spread under tightly controlled experimental conditions. We will focus on the
DNA viruses that cause Cassava mosaic disease using NexGen sequencing to compare
their diversity during vegetative and whitefly transmission, in mixed
infections, and in wild plants that serve as reservoir hosts. We will ask if
movement through the host plant and/or transmission by insect vectors serve as
bottlenecks that limit viral diversity. Our study of the evolutionary potential
and factors that contribute to Cassava mosaic disease is transformative in that
it will provide a comprehensive framework for examining viral evolution in
relationship to the host, the insect vector and the environment using a crop and
inoculation methods that accurately reflect real world conditions. Our
integrated approach will also serve as a model for examining viral evolution and
will inform the development of control strategies for other insect-transmitted
viruses that negatively impact plant, animal and human health. Postdoctoral
researchers, graduate students and undergraduates will be mentored by a strong
international research team, which includes experts on viral population
genetics, insect vector transmission and population dynamics, virus/vector/plant
interactions, and STEM education. The multidisciplinary nature of the research
will provide trainees experience in laboratory and field-based research as well
as bioinformatics. This will prepare them to become globally engaged,
independent scientists with a solid foundation in a range of research
methodologies and environments and first-hand experience in international and
multidisciplinary collaborations.