* 1545028
* CPS:Synergy: Safety-Aware Cyber-Molecular Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2021
* Eric Henderson, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Ralph Wachter
* 08/31/2021
* USD 839,930.00

Cyber-molecular systems are networks of nanoscale physical devices in which
computation controls the behavior and activities of the molecular devices. In
some cyber-molecular systems the programmable controller itself is implemented
by DNA gates and algorithms. Many of the planned future uses of cyber-molecular
systems are safety-critical, such as biosensors to detect pollutants in water or
disease markers in the body, and drug therapeutics to deliver a customized
medicine only to the locations in the body where the disease has been detected.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The problem is how to design cyber-molecular systems to be
safe for use in a dynamic and only partially understood physical environment.
This project addresses this problem by introducing a new model of chemical
reaction networks that can be implemented robustly. The class of computations
accepted by the model can be implemented in such a way that they will provably
perform correctly even when crucial physical parameters are perturbed by small
amounts. The project will leverage this advance to establish an end-to-end
safety-aware perspective for creating cyber-molecular systems. The approach
entails tightly integrated computational and physical risk analyses; advances in
reaction-network-based modeling and verification techniques; and model-driven
experimentation and evaluation on prototyped cyber-molecular systems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has the potential to make future cyber-
molecular systems safer. Results also will provide capabilities in risk analysis
and automated verification to meet the need for future certification of safety-
critical cyber-molecular systems, such as biosensors and drug therapeutics. More
broadly, the new model of biochemical reaction networks will advance
understanding of how to analyze very large sets of nanoscale cyber-physical
systems that operate in a probabilistic physical environment from a safety
perspective. This project will also focus on interdisciplinary training of a
diverse student population, and results will be integrated into undergraduate
and graduate courses.