* 1545433
* NRT-DESE:  Interdisciplinary Disease Ecology Across Scales: from Byte to Benchtop to Biosphere
* EHR,DGE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2021
* Duncan Krause, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Vinod Lohani
* 08/31/2021
* USD 2,997,528.00

NRT-DESE: Interdisciplinary Disease Ecology Across Scales: from Byte to Benchtop
to Biosphere

Infectious diseases are an ongoing threat to human health, animal health, and
social stability. This National Science Foundation Research Traineeship (NRT)
project prepares doctoral students at the University of Georgia with data-
enabled science and engineering training to solve complex, interdisciplinary
problems related to diseases and the environment. Effectively predicting where
new infectious agents will go next, how fast they will spread, and how severely
humans or other species may be impacted requires a basic knowledge of how hosts
and pathogens interact at different scales of biological organization (e.g.,
cell, organism, population), as well as the ability to identify how processes
taking place at one scale respond to or affect processes occurring at adjacent
scales. This traineeship anticipates preparing thirty (30) doctoral students,
including twenty (20) funded trainees, with mastery of both empirical and
computational dimensions of contemporary infectious disease problems.

Research activities associated with the program focus on three topical areas
critical to unraveling the complexity of host-pathogen interactions in nature:
co-infection and pathogen interactions; environmental change and disease
dynamics; and tipping points and early warning signals. Faculty from thirteen
academic units with empirical expertise spanning single cells to whole
ecosystems, and quantitative expertise in statistical modeling, mathematical
modeling, stochastic processes, adaptive dynamics, machine learning, and
geographic mapping will co-mentor student research. This traineeship will use
interdisciplinary case study-based teaching, instruction in advanced techniques
for computer modeling, and internships at non-academic and international
organizations to provide students with the conceptual background, computational
skills, and global perspective needed to tackle the most pressing infectious
disease problems of our time. In addition, a range of professional development
activities including a capstone experience, data clinics, internships, study
abroad, and communication training will provide students with the skills to
transfer basic knowledge to real world problems in both academic and non-
academic settings.

The NSF Research Traineeship (NRT) Program is designed to encourage the
development and implementation of bold, new, potentially transformative, and
scalable models for STEM graduate education training. The Traineeship Track is
dedicated to effective training of STEM graduate students in high priority
interdisciplinary research areas, through the comprehensive traineeship model
that is innovative, evidence-based, and aligned with changing workforce and
research needs.