* 1545341
* NRT-IGE: From Engagement to Action: 21st Century STEM Scholars and Land Grant Opportunities
* EHR,DGE
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2019
* Julie Coffield, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Carol Stoel
* 08/31/2019
* USD 495,754.00

NRT-IGE: From Engagement to Action: 21st Century STEM Scholars and Land Grant
Opportunities &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Twenty-first century scientists and
engineers must possess skills that enable them to reach beyond the laboratory,
across disciplines and into communities to identify issues and develop solutions
that increase both resilience and sustainability. This National Science
Foundation Research Traineeship (NRT) award in the Innovations in Graduate
Education (IGE) Track to the University of Georgia will pilot an approach
adapted from health sciences training to provide newly matriculating doctoral
students with targeted skills training. The results of this pilot study will
advance our understanding of the impact of early, immersive professional
development on the contributions that students can make to research during their
graduate studies, as well as longer term impact on career placement and success.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of this project are to: 1) determine key
considerations in transferring this pedagogical model from the health
professions, in which it was established, to broad STEM domains; 2) determine
the effect of providing skills training at the beginning of a student?s graduate
career; and 3) develop best practices for sustainably implementing the model,
should it prove to be effective in this context. Students participating in this
pilot will engage initially in an eight-week summer boot camp before their first
semester of graduate studies to help them develop targeted transferable
professional skills in collaboration, leadership, and community engagement. They
will progress to a first-semester Challenge Course in which they will work in
small, multidisciplinary teams on a real problem identified in partnership with
a Georgia community. Faculty mentors will use a modified challenge-based
learning format to guide students through this process so that the process is
internalized and carried forward meaningfully in the context of their own
research. As students progress through the program, they will further hone their
skills and apply their knowledge as they mentor more junior graduate students.
Data will be collected to examine the model impact, both on the participating
students as well as on the labs in which they work. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
NSF Research Traineeship (NRT) Program is designed to encourage the development
and implementation of bold, new, potentially transformative, and scalable models
for STEM graduate education training. The Innovations in Graduate Education
Track is dedicated solely to piloting, testing, and evaluating novel,
innovative, and potentially transformative approaches to graduate education.