* 1545116
* CPS: TTP Option: Synergy: Traffic Operating System for Smart Cities
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2021
* John Hedrick, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Ralph Wachter
* 06/30/2021
* USD 1,099,914.00

Each commuter in the United States lost on average $818 in 2015 due to
congestion. More than 66% of congestion happens on city streets. The situation
is steadily getting worse as the number of cars on roads increases and is
expected to double by 2050. Solving the mobility problem by building new roads
is not feasible. Instead, we need to use emerging technologies such as
intelligent transportation systems; connected vehicles and autonomous vehicles;
and new services, e.g. car sharing, ride on demand, last mile delivery services,
to improve transportation efficiency on city streets. To that end, we are
developing Traffic Operating System (TOS) that utilizes the existing
computation, communication and automotive technologies and facilitates the
deployment of new ones. TOS will increase the throughput of the urban
transportation network; reduce intersection accidents by preventing red-light
running and rear end collisions; and make traffic behavior more predictable,
reliable and efficient. Regions that invest in a TOS could see a return on their
investment in reduced transportation network and infrastructure costs, and in
enhanced business and economic growth. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
advance research in several areas of Technology for and Engineering of Cyber-
Physical System (CPS). We will develop new design, analysis, and verification
tools for TOS, which will embody the scientific principles of CPS, rely on
extensive use of heterogeneous sensors, large-scale data collection and
processing, and will actively control the dynamics of a transportation network.
We will field-test traffic estimation and prediction models using sensor
measurement and signal timing data from the cities of Pasadena, Sierra Madre and
Arcadia in Southern California. Field test of the combined vehicle-level and
traffic-flow-level control, using actual connected vehicles and vehicle-to-
infrastructure (V2I) communication with a signalized intersection, will be
conducted in the transition to practice (TTP) component of our project. The
synergistic combination of research activities will yield novel scientific,
technological and practical engineering implementation results in the design,
state estimation, forecasting and control of CPS that involve transportation
flows on networks. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators in this project plan
to develop, simulate and test, through targeted vehicle and roadway
infrastructure field test experiments, a traffic operating system that organizes
existing computation, communication and automotive technologies to: (1) minimize
congestion by increasing traffic throughput; (2) enhance safety by reducing
driver errors through the use of cooperative adaptive cruise control (CACC)
strategies that significantly increase arterial traffic throughput while
preserving safety; and (3) contain the cost of parking by minimizing the number
of idle vehicles and the number of vehicles searching for parking. These goals
are achieved through integration of traffic measurements with the traffic
management on vehicle, road link and network levels, making effective use of a
dynamic traffic model and simulation. The project will demonstrate how three
levels of traffic control are interconnected and we will develop new simulation
and control design techniques that receive each other's output as feedback
signals.