* 1545874
* PIRE: Taming Water in Ethiopia: An Interdisciplinary Approach to Improve Human Security in a Water-Dependent Emerging Region
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/2016,09/30/2023
* Emmanouil Anagnostou, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Raterron
* 09/30/2023
* USD 4,440,682.00

This project has the potential to significantly improve the efficacy of water
forecasting, a crucial need as water availability becomes increasingly
inconsistent due to growing urbanization, the impacts of climate variability and
other factors. The project studies the intersection of human, climate, water,
agriculture, and energy systems in the Blue Nile Basin (BNB) of Ethiopia. The
main objective of the project is to study and improve decision making under
uncertainty. The project interweaves social science, geosciences and engineering
research to create new models for water forecasting, then uses these models to
understand the political-institutional constraints that affect how communities
and decision-makers consider and use scientific information. Since decision-
makers globally are faced with the challenge of using data and models that are
never completely certain, an understanding of how political-institutional
constraints impact use of scientific data will have global ramifications.
Performing this research in Ethiopia is especially valuable since Ethiopia's
inter-annual variability in local precipitation is one of the highest globally
and Ethiopia's socio-political challenges in water management are mirrored in
many other developing countries. Therefore, improved water modeling methods
developed for the BNB have the potential to be valuable globally, and improved
understanding of the political and institutional impacts on water management in
the BNB can be applied to other environments with a potentially transformational
impact around the globe. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop hydro-
climatic forecasts from data-enhanced models and incorporate social science data
that will improve the predictability of sub-basin hydro-agricultural and water
management processes in the BNB. A three-stage longitudinal design captures the
changing links between new scientific information, political-institutional
dynamics, and water, agricultural and energy activities. The project uses a
comparative design method to harness and understand variation in both human and
natural systems, investigating iteratively how each aspect of the coupled system
influences human security in vulnerable hydro-climatic environments. The
research proposed provides a novel mechanism to test the traditional
understanding of "pure" science against a political-institutional model that
acknowledges the role of social factors in the use of scientific information.
The research will provide a better understanding of how people respond to
scientific uncertainty with implications well beyond Ethiopia and the Blue Nile
Basin. The project will integrate research, education and outreach, bringing
people and resources together across disciplinary, cultural and geographical
boundaries. Key likely benefits include: developing a practical roadmap for
developing and using water forecasting in low income communities; training a new
cadre of US students capable of interdisciplinary and international work on
water and human security, and providing e-learning and outreach that will carry
this training beyond the students participating in this project; and global
public outreach to share the results of this project with scientists as well as
many other stakeholders interested in understanding and managing water
resources. The research effort aligns with NSF's emerging focus on food, energy,
and water systems, and the results of this project are likely to benefit future
efforts to understand the food, energy, and water
nexus.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is co-funded by the Directorate for
Social, Behavioral and Economic Sciences' Office of Multidisciplinary
Activities.