* 1545837
* PIRE- Coastal Flood Risk Reduction Program: Integrated, multi-scale approaches for understanding how to reduce vulnerability to damaging events
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2023
* Jens Figlus, Texas A&M University
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Raterron
* 09/30/2023
* USD 3,722,982.00

Coastal floods continue to be the costliest and most disruptive natural hazard
worldwide. Flood risk and associated losses can only be understood and
eventually reduced through integrated investigation across multiple disciplines,
settings, and international&lt;br/&gt;boundaries. There is a critical need for a
program-level, trans-disciplinary inquiry in science and engineering that will
lay a foundation for decision making aimed at increasing the resiliency of
coastal communities. This Partnerships for International Research and Education
(PIRE) project takes a comprehensive, multiscale approach to understanding how
to reduce risk and vulnerability to damaging coastal floods. By drawing upon
knowledge from multiple disciplines and the experience and expertise of partner
institutions in Texas and the Netherlands, the PIRE team will pursue six
identified case study approaches to cover both surge-based and precipitation-
driven flood problems. Each case entails integrated assessment, research, and
education activities focused on physical flood risk and modeling, as well as
understanding socioeconomic characteristics, land use change, the built
environment, and mitigation techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Multiple case
studies in both countries integrating faculty from engineering, architecture,
economics, and planning will address several research questions, including: 1)
what are the underlying characteristics of physical flood risks; 2) why are
human communities and the built environment so vulnerable to flood impacts, and
how will this increase in the future; and 3) which mitigation techniques, both
structural and non-structural, are most effective in reducing the adverse
impacts of floods? Within each study region in the U.S. and the Netherlands, six
sub-case study focal points will be initiated covering both surge-based and
precipitation-driven flood problems. Each case will provide a target area for
interdisciplinary assessments of physical flood risk and modeling, socioeconomic
characteristics, land use change and built environment, and mitigation
techniques. The effectiveness of both structural and non-structural strategies
will be investigated, leading to a better understanding of when to pursue
avoidance and resistance strategies for mitigating adverse impacts from flood
events. The FRRP will crystalize an existing collaboration consisting of seven
participating institutions with 25 faculty supervising dozens of students. Key
U.S. partners include Jackson State University, Rice University, TAMU College
Station and Galveston, University of Houston, and TX Sea Grant. Dutch partners
will include Delft University of Technology and Deltares. U.S. researchers will
be able to leverage Dutch data, methods, and facilities associated with flood
management.