* 1545857
* PIRE: Advanced Artificial Muscles for International and Globally Competitive Research and Education in Soft Robotics
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2024
* Kwang Kim, University of Nevada Las Vegas
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Raterron
* 09/30/2024
* USD 3,911,664.00

This international project addresses a technologically important issue ?soft
robotics. Soft robotics is an important emerging field in robotics,
mechatronics, and automation. Soft robotic components and systems offer new
features and advances over conventional robotic devices. This project focuses on
the creation of advanced multifunctional artificial muscles (AM) based on new
polymer-metal composites which can be used in soft robotic applications.
Artificial muscles can be transformative for millions of people with
disabilities. The development of AM will benefit biomimetic soft robotics,
medical diagnostics and tools, and invasive surgical systems. The potential
market for reliable, cost-effective and easily scalable Ionic Polymer-Metal
Composites (IPMCs)-based AM technology is substantial. If successful and cost
effective, the impact on people?s lives and on economies could be very
significant. The international partners are from the Department of Mechanical
Engineering and Graduate School of Ocean Systems Engineering at the Korea
Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST) and the Hybrid Actuator
Group, Inorganic Functional Material Research Institute at the National
Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology (AIST) in Japan. The
international team has strong expertise in manufacture engineering and has the
necessary computational and experimental resources. The strength of soft
robotics research in Japan and very active industry efforts in Korea are
especially valuable. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Owing to their soft and flexible
structure and ability to emulate the motion of biological muscles, IPMCs are
considered excellent candidates for future AM technology in soft robotic
systems. The main challenges with IPMC materials include: relatively high
fabrication costs associated with the use of fluorinated ionic polymers, low
actuation force, and limited control accuracy. This project will bring together
experts from around the world to address these challenges toward developing
effective IPMC-based AMs for soft robotic applications.