* 1545623
* Impact of Changing Flood Frequency on Sediment Connectivity Between River Channels and their Riparian Margins
* GEO,EAR
* 02/15/2016,06/30/2021
* Carl Renshaw, Dartmouth College
* Continuing Grant
* Laura Lautz
* 06/30/2021
* USD 466,543.00

In healthy streams there is an extensive and on-going exchange of nutrients and
sediment between the stream and its floodplain. As a result, re-establishing
this exchange is often a primary focus of river restoration. Even in healthy
streams, expected changes in the frequency and magnitude of extreme
precipitation events, coupled with changes in land use, may alter the exchange
of nutrients and sediment between the stream and the floodplain, possibly
altering riparian ecology by changing the balance of nutrient exchanges between
a channel and its margins. If the floodplain sediments are contaminated,
alterations of stream-floodplain exchanges may results in the export of
contaminants previously sequestered on floodplains to downstream estuaries and
terminal lakes. The objective of this project is to better understand the
hydrologic controls on the exchange of sediment between streams and their
floodplains so that we can predict and prepare for possible impacts of climate
change on riparian ecosystems. In addition, we will build on an outreach project
developed as part of an NSF-sponsored linking graduate students with K-12
science classrooms. The graduate student supported by this project will work
with a local middle school teacher from an under-resource rural district to
develop an inquiry-based project designed to increase students' understanding
of, and interest in, hydrology and water resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using a
recently-developed methodology that combines measurements of the fallout
radionuclides 7Be and 210Pb and the stable isotopes of hydrogen (2H) in water to
quantify fine sediment connectivity during individual storm events, the
investigators propose to repeatedly assess fine-grained sediment sources and the
factors controlling the magnitude and direction of net channel bed-to-margin
sediment flux in a gravel-bedded tributary of the Connecticut River (USA). Given
sufficient discharge to mobilize suspended sediment, the investigators
hypothesize that there exists a critical discharge, below which the net transfer
of suspended sediment is from the bed to the margins, and above which, the net
transfer is from the margins to the bed or out of the watershed. The
investigators seek to determine the seasonality of this critical discharge and
the sensitivity of the net transfer of suspended sediment to departure from the
critical discharge. They expect that currently in natural systems net deposition
onto the floodplain during discharges less than the critical value is balanced
by net erosion from the floodplain during high discharge events. Thus, an
increase in the frequency of extreme precipitation events could result in an
overall net erosion of sediment, nutrients, and particle-bound contaminants from
the floodplain.