* 1545858
* PIRE: International Program for the Advancement of Neurotechnology (IPAN)
* O/D,OISE
* 11/01/2015,10/31/2024
* Kensall Wise, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Fahmida Chowdhury
* 10/31/2024
* USD 5,150,000.00

This project entitled "International Program for the Advancement of
Neurotechnology (IPAN)" is about understanding the complexity and mysteries of
the brain. It is cited by many as the biggest scientific challenge of this
century. In this International Program for the Advancement of Neurotechnology
(IPAN), the researchers are creating a holistic system for studying brain
activity by closely integrating hardware from leading neurotechnologists with
novel software from leading neuroscientists. Enabling this large-scale
collaboration should accelerate the rate of discovery in neuroscience. This in
turn will pave the way to improved treatments for neurological disorders and to
breakthroughs in artificial intelligence in the next decade. The PIRE team will
also provide advanced educational opportunities for undergraduates with the
express purpose of recruiting future U.S. STEM (science, technology, engineering
and mathematics) researchers. Graduate students and postdocs will also be
enrolled in a unique cross-training program between neuroscience and
neurotechnology laboratories. The resulting experience will prepare a new
generation of globally-connected multi-disciplinary engineers and scientists
while driving critical advances in neurotechnology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;IPAN is
an explicit partnership of leading neuroscientists and technologists to develop
and deliver a hardware and software system that fundamentally simplifies the
ability of a neuroscientist to (i) identify recorded neuron types, (ii)
reconstruct local neural circuits, and (iii) deliver biomimetic or synthetic
inputs in a cell-specific targeted manner. This project teams the University of
Michigan, New York University, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, and the
University of Puerto Rico with the University of Freiburg, the University of
Hamburg-Eppendorf, the Korea Institute of Science and Technology, Singapore?s
Institute for Microelectronics, and University College London. Complementary
strengths, world-class infrastructures, and strong student exchange programs are
an important part of this IPAN team, with major thrusts in Technology,
Neuroscience, and Education. The enabling technology to meet these three system
goals (i-iii) will be next-generation neural probes equipped with novel
optoelectronics, high-density recording interfaces, and low-noise multiplexed
digital outputs. The neuroscience thrust will help define the technology from
the onset and are developing novel software tools to accelerate the analysis of
large neurophysiological data sets. The team includes leading system
neuroscientists with unique capabilities specializing in memory, sensory, fear,
and development, and will work with technologists to validate both the
technology and the software tools in distinctive neuroscience applications.