* 1545471
* 2015 Association for Computational Linquistics (ACL) Student Research Workshop
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2017
* Emily Bender, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 06/30/2017
* USD 10,500.00

The Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL) is the primary international
organization for computational linguistics and natural language processing. It
also is one of the primary application areas for researchers in machine learning
and artificial intelligence. The proceedings of its annual meeting provide the
foundation of the field; it is the most cited and most respected publication in
computational linguistics. Thus, it is also the most important gathering of
researchers in computational linguistics and natural language processing. ACL
has a twenty-year history of including a Student Research Workshop, which helps
create a new generation of researchers with a more thorough understanding of
their field, with connections and collaborations across institutions, and with
innovative and exciting research programs. This contributes to America's pool of
researchers with the needed scientific and engineering knowledge and skills. The
workshop encourages a spirit of collaborative research and builds a supportive
environment for a new generation of computational linguists. To this end, the
grant will subsidize travel, registration and accommodation expenses for student
participants and organizers traveling from the US to the ACL in Beijing.

The student research workshop will be a part of the 2015 meeting of the ACL held
in Beijing, China from July 27 to July 29. The workshop will solicit submissions
in two categories: (1) thesis proposals for advanced students who have decided
on a thesis topic and wish to receive feedback and (2) research papers
describing completed work or work in progress with significant preliminary
results. Each accepted paper will be assigned an established research mentor who
will meet with the student during the conference to provide individual feedback.
Both paper types will be presented in the poster session of the main conference.
The Student Research Workshop enriches the intellectual life of the
participating students. Each student is mentored by an experienced researcher;
this not only shapes the student's specific project but helps build the
student's awareness of the field. The students gain exposure by presenting their
work earlier than they would otherwise (i.e., in a form not yet ready for the
main conference). This is particularly valuable for researchers from smaller
institutions and undergraduate students. The student organizers also benefit
from the organization of the workshop, gaining experience with the full process
from soliciting reviewers, to managing the review process, producing the
proceedings, and running the event. They also build connections with the senior
researchers who participate as mentors in the event. This grant will subsidize
the travel, conference registration and lodging for both student participants
and student organizers.