* 1545599
* EAGER: Mobile Solutions for Multifold Increase of Survival Rates Through High Quality Chest Compressions
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2018
* Ram Dantu, University of North Texas
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 07/31/2018
* USD 140,845.00

It is estimated that approximately 600,000 people each year in the United States
experience a cardiac arrest, and survival rates for arrests that occur in
community settings are less than 6%. On June 30, 2015, the Institute of Medicine
released a report on strategies for increasing survival rates after cardiac
arrest. The report calls for effective treatment, demanding an immediate
response from bystanders to recognize cardiac arrest, call 911, and initiate
cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR). Given that the time interval for Emergency
Medical Service (EMS) arrival is often 7 to 8 minutes or longer, based on
American Heart Association (AHA) research, survival falls 7% to 10% for each
minute without CPR. Chest compressions during CPR can generate a small but
critical amount of blood flow to vital organs such as the brain and heart until
circulation is restored by EMS personnel. While defining high-quality CPR, the
AHA puts priority on specific characteristics including the rate of
compressions, depth, and full release after each compression (recoil). To follow
AHA's guidelines and improve CPR technique, researchers at the University of
North Texas propose an effective smartphone application that can be used to
provide real-time evaluation and feedback during CPR. The developed science and
technology from this EAGER project can be used to evaluate and certify community
workers, provide resuscitation quality improvement (RQI), and offer assistance
to bystanders during a cardiac arrest. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Typical CPR
training for health care workers entails watching videos and listening to
lectures in a classroom setting every two years. Looking to the future, the
EAGER campaign has the potential to transform the way CPR training and
administration is handled. Based on the data yielded from the EAGER proposal,
healthcare workers would only need to spend 5-10 minutes each month to
effectively improve CPR administration and substantially increase the survival
rate of patients. In order to accomplish this, we propose to: i) change the CPR
training period to 5-10 minutes each month instead of one day every two years,
ii) effectively assist bystanders who have no prior training in CPR
administration, and iii) create a special glove that will house the mobile
phone, start the CPR application automatically, and communicate with 9-1-1
operators and physicians. Hence, the success of EAGER can transform the way we
administer and offer CPR training. With favorable outcomes of the proposed
research, variability of effective-CPR would dramatically be reduced, leading to
higher survival rates. This EAGER project advances interdisciplinary knowledge
(mechanics, fluid control, signal processing, and artificial intelligence) in
the hopes that cardiac arrest survival no longer depends on environmental
factors (e.g., inside or outside of hospital).