* 1545787
* Meeting: Beyond the Mean: Biological Impacts of Changes in Temperature Variation, SICB, Portland, Oregon, January 2016
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2016
* H. Arthur Woods, University of Montana
* Standard Grant
* Theodore Morgan
* 07/31/2016
* USD 15,475.00

Although much research has documented how changes in average environmental
temperatures affect organisms, much less work has evaluated how changes in
temperature variation (day to day or season to season), and in the frequency and
impacts of extreme weather events, affect organisms. Nevertheless, early studies
and theoretical work indicate that the impacts of changing patterns of
temperature variation can be enormous. Biologists are on the cusp of an
explosion of work in this area, and the symposium that this grant supports (at
the Portland 2016 meeting of the Society for Integrative and Comparative
Biology) will drive these ideas forward by bringing together established and
early-career biologists for a wide-ranging discussion of theory and data. The
results of this symposium will be published in the journal of Integrative and
Comparative Biology. The symposium will support a diversity of scientists along
with students and researchers at all levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The grant will
support a diversity of international and US scientists working across a variety
of levels (altogether 4 women, 4 postdocs, 5 international, and 2 from
underrepresented groups). This project will also function as an experiment to
explore a new model of running a symposium and of generating rapidly-published,
high-impact papers. Each participant will be asked ahead of time to address, in
their talk, one or more of four outstanding questions in the field. Then, at the
symposium, participants will give oral presentations to the group and will
subsequently work in two intensive workshops aimed at generating broadly
focused, high-impact papers reflecting the consensus (or lack thereof) about the
current state of the field and a description of productive next steps.
Discussions are underway with the publication journal (Integrative and
Comparative Biology) to streamline the publication process so that the papers
appear online and in print as soon as possible. During the meeting,
participation will be broadened in two ways. First, audience participation will
be encouraged both by scheduling long question &amp; answer periods (10 minutes)
after each talk and by gathering questions and comments from symposium and
audience participants via social media during talks to be used in the Q&amp;A
and in the workshops to frame discussions. Second, there will be a companion,
related poster session by students and researchers at all levels. These
scientists will be encouraged to participate in the workshops as well, and
potentially to co-author symposium papers.