* 1545885
* BRAIN EAGER: Danionella translucida: A New Fish Model for Systems Neuroscience
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2018
* Adam Douglass, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 07/31/2018
* USD 300,000.00

Neuroscientists face the difficult task of describing the coordinated activities
of many single neurons across the brain, and explaining how the cells' firing
patterns create behavior. Achieving this goal at the immense scale of the human
brain is the ultimate goal of the BRAIN Initiative. To accomplish this complex
goal, it first is necessary to establish appropriate experimental and analytical
techniques, as well as a better understanding of basic circuit principles, in
simpler systems. The current project expands the opportunities for gaining
insight by developing a new laboratory model organism. The candidate species is
the fish Danionella translucida. This species is very small (~1 cm body length
as an adult) and optically transparent, two characteristics that make the
species exquisitely well-suited to molecular and optical techniques for
recording from and manipulating large sets of neurons, and enabling researchers
to use the most powerful experimental methods to study how each neuron in an
adult vertebrate contributes to complex behaviors. The project will establish
this potentially revolutionary model species and demonstrate proof-of-principle
by mapping the neural circuits that underlie odor-mediated social alarm behavior
in adult Danionella. The societal benefits of this work include unprecedented
insight into the mechanisms of complex behaviors, some of which are affected in
human neurological diseases. Additionally, the integration of multiple levels of
analysis, from molecular biology to social behavior, render this project the
basis of a particularly powerful neuroscience teaching tool, to be implemented
through existing undergraduate and high school research programs that include
outreach to students from minority groups. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
draws on Danionella's close phylogenetic similarity to the zebrafish, Danio
rerio, to apply existing experimental tools to a new animal model. The first aim
is to establish breeding, transgenesis, and gene editing techniques that will
allow propagation of these fish in the lab, introduction of fluorescent
reporters and optogenetic actuators, and targeted manipulation of specific,
endogenous genes. The second aim is to apply multiphoton and light-sheet imaging
to adult Danionella, and evaluate the results against benchmarks established in
larval zebrafish. The third aim is to develop assays for a pheromone-mediated
social alarm behavior, and record pheromone-evoked activity from every neuron in
the brain. These experiments collectively demonstrate the experimental power of
this new model species and create tools that are essential for its adoption by
the research community. The insights will be disseminated through, among others,
existing and new websites supporting exchange among scientists.