* 1545091
* CPS: Synergy: Collaborative Research: Semi-Automated Emergency Response System
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2016,10/31/2016
* Ryan Gerdes, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* richard brown
* 10/31/2016
* USD 375,001.00

The objective of this research is to design a semi-automated, efficient, and
secure emergency response system to reduce the time it takes emergency vehicles
to reach their destinations, while increasing the safety of non-emergency
vehicles and emergency vehicles alike. Providing route and maneuver guidance to
emergency vehicles and non-emergency vehicles will make emergency travel safer
and enable police and other first responders to reach and transport those in
need, in less time. This should reduce the number of crashes involving emergency
vehicles and associated litigation costs while improving medical outcomes,
reducing property damage, and instilling greater public confidence in emergency
services. At the same time, non-emergency vehicles will also be offered
increased safety and, with the reduction of long delays attributed to emergency
vehicles, experience reduced incident-related travel time, which will increase
productivity and quality of life for drivers. Incorporating connected vehicles
into the emergency response system will also provide synergistic opportunities
for non-emergency vehicles, including live updates on accident sites, areas to
avoid, and information on emergency routes that can be incorporated into
navigation software so drivers can avoid potential delays. While the proposed
system will naturally advance the quality of transportation in smart cities, it
will also provide a platform for future techniques to build upon. For example,
the proposed system could be connected with emergency care facilities to balance
the load of emergency patients at hospitals, and act as a catalyst toward the
realization of a fully-automated emergency response system. New courses and
course modules will be developed to recruit and better prepare a future
workforce that is well versed in multi-disciplinary collaborations. Video demos
and a testbed will be used to showcase the research to the
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The key research component will be the design of an
emergency response system that (1) dynamically determines EV routes, (2)
coordinates actions by non-emergency vehicles using connected vehicle technology
to efficiently and effectively clear paths for emergency vehicles, (3) is able
to adapt to uncertain traffic and network conditions, and (4) is difficult to
abuse or compromise. The project will result in (1) algorithms that dynamically
select EV routes based on uncertain or limited traffic data, (2) emergency
protocols that exploit connected vehicle technology to facilitate emergency
vehicles maneuvers, (3) an automation module to assist with decision making and
maneuvers, and (4) an infrastructure and vehicle hardening framework that
prevents cyber abuse. Experiments will be performed on a testbed and a real test
track to validate the proposed research.