* 1545365
* Collaborative Research: NRT-IGE: Employing Model-Based Reasoning in Environmental Science (EMBeRS)
* EHR,DGE
* 09/15/2015,04/30/2018
* Antje Danielson, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* John Weishampel
* 04/30/2018
* USD 161,080.00

NRT-IGE: Employing Model-Based Reasoning in Environmental Science (EMBeRS)

Scientific synthesis across disciplines is at the heart of addressing important
challenges such as impacts of global change, trade-offs between water, food, and
energy production, and the need for sustainable cities. Studies of
interdisciplinary research teams indicate that team members struggle to achieve
knowledge synthesis across disciplines. Issues arise due to the inability of
team members to develop deep knowledge at the frontier of other disciplines and
to connect that knowledge with their own expertise to provide a collaborative
path forward. The ability to work collaboratively in a research team with others
who may hold very different perspectives is a critical aspect of preparing
today's students to meet future workforce demands. This National Science
Foundation Research Traineeship (NRT) award in the Innovations in Graduate
Education (IGE) track is a collaborative project led by the University of Texas
at El Paso involving graduate students and faculty from multiple institutions.
The project will test a new model for training graduate student teams in
environmental sciences to overcome knowledge integration and synthesis
challenges.

This model will draw on findings from cognitive, learning, and social sciences
to develop and test training for graduate students and faculty in model-based
reasoning approaches. Model-based reasoning theory posits that humans reason by
constructing an internal mental model of the situations, events, and processes
that they encounter, and that external representations can be used to facilitate
construction of these mental models. External representations include the use of
analogies, metaphor, visual models, diagrams and/or other representations for
abstraction and communication of complex concepts. In a team setting, these
external representations are called boundary negotiating objects. This project
will place doctoral students in multidisciplinary teams and facilitate a
structured, participatory process that includes a progression of standard,
individual and group model-based reasoning activities as well as instruction on
the purposeful co-creation of boundary negotiating objects. Students from
multiple institutions will learn together through two-week summer experiences;
students who are conducting research in conjunction with larger
interdisciplinary teams will be targeted. In addition, the project will train
faculty from multiple institution in the model. The project will examine the
implementation of ten faculty members. Survey, interview, and digital data will
be collected to examine how graduate students respond to being directly exposed
to theories behind the approach as well as the efficacy of the approach as
faculty employ it in their graduate classes. This design will allow comparison
of the outcomes from guiding students on what to do, versus teaching students
why and how to do it.

The NSF Research Traineeship (NRT) Program is designed to encourage the
development and implementation of bold, new, potentially transformative, and
scalable models for STEM graduate education training. The Innovations in
Graduate Education Track is dedicated solely to piloting, test, and evaluating
novel, innovative, and potentially transformative approaches to graduate
education.