* 1545275
* NRT-IGE:  Science Writing and Rhetorical Training: A New Model for Developing Graduate Science Writers
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Nedra Reynolds, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* John Weishampel
* 08/31/2019
* USD 499,977.00

NRT-IGE: Science Writing and Rhetorical Training: A New Model for Developing
Graduate Science Writers&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Graduate students are trained to
write for discipline-specific journals, but they typically receive little
instruction in communicating to public and non-specialist audiences. This lack
of practical training persists despite the importance of engaging members of the
public in scientific research to support policy decisions and science literacy.
This National Science Foundation Research Traineeship (NRT) award in the
Innovations in Graduate Education (IGE) Track to the University of Rhode Island
will address this gap and promote students? scientific learning through
communication and engagement. The model to be tested is a training program in
academic and non-academic science writing for both graduate students and science
faculty, which will include a series of courses, workshops, and internships, the
development of a Graduate Science Writing Center, and an emphasis on a variety
of writing projects. This project will contribute to the next generation of
scientists who can communicate with other scientists and the public and will
train a set of faculty who support students in that work.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary goal of this program is to work with graduate
students and faculty to implement a new cross-disciplinary model of science
communication training that integrates diverse types of science writing and
communication from the beginning of and throughout graduate students' scientific
training. A key to the training model offered is grounding in rhetoric, the
academic discipline devoted to the persuasive power of language that includes
studies of argument, public discourse, and civic engagement. The rhetorical
approach will have three distinct features: habitual writing, multiple genres,
and frequent review. Graduate students will write early and often to create a
habit of writing. They will practice writing across multiple genres for academic
and non-academic audiences. Graduate science writers will plan and draft their
writing and then enter a process of review and revision in one-on-one and small
group tutorials in classrooms, online peer review forums, and a Graduate Science
Writing Center. Workshops for cohorts of Graduate Science Writing Fellows,
Faculty Science Writing Fellows, and Faculty Science Writing Mentors will
provide a rhetorical foundation and serve as a basis for individual,
pedagogical, and curricular change. Faculty Fellows will be guided to adjust
syllabi and writing projects for their graduate courses to incorporate more
writing earlier in their courses and more opportunities for review and revision.
Assessment of short-term and long-term student learning outcomes, writing tool
adoption by faculty, programmatic outcomes, and project-level management will
determine which components will be carried into the future and can serve as a
model for similar programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF Research Traineeship
(NRT) Program is designed to encourage the development and implementation of
bold, new, potentially transformative, and scalable models for STEM graduate
education training. The Innovations in Graduate Education Track is dedicated
solely to piloting, testing, and evaluating novel, innovative, and potentially
transformative approaches to graduate education.