* 1545852
* PIRE: Synthesis of Optical Materials for Bioapplications: Research, Education, Recruitment and Outreach (SOMBRERO)
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/2015,08/31/2022
* Guillermo Aguilar, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Maija Kukla
* 08/31/2022
* USD 3,721,686.00

PIRE: Synthesis of Optical Materials for Bioapplications: Research, Education,
Recruitment and Outreach (SOMBRERO). PI: Guillermo Aguilar, University of
California, Riverside (UCR)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical Abstract:
&lt;br/&gt;This award grant provides funding for the development of an
international partnership for research and education between UCR - one of
America's few research-intensive Hispanic Serving Institutions (HSI) - and three
premier institutions in México: Centro de Investigación Científica y Educación
Superior de Ensenada (CICESE) in Ensenada; Universidad Nacional Autónoma de
México (UNAM) in Mexico City; and Instituto Nacional de Astrofísica, Óptica y
Electrónica (INAOE) in Puebla. SOMBRERO aims at further developing the concept
of a transparent cranial implant made of nanocrystalline yttria-stabilized-
zirconia (nc-YSZ) - the so called Windows to the Brain (WttB) platform - to
replace portions of the skull and thus allow non-invasive optical interrogation
of the brain facilitating the diagnosis and treatment of a wide variety of brain
pathologies and neurological disorders, such as traumatic brain injury and
stroke. Although a number of materials (e.g., titanium, alumina, acrylic, etc.)
have been evaluated for use in cranial reconstruction, none provide the
requisite combination of properties required for clinically-viable transparent
implants. Our preliminary efforts have already demonstrated that nc-YSZ offers
significant promise in this regard. Furthermore, the educational component of
this award aims at jointly training students from the US and México in line with
various current education policy initiatives in both countries, including: a)
the Brain Research through Advancing Innovative Neurotechnologies (BRAIN)
initiative, as well as the "100,000 strong in the Americas" initiative to
increase study in Latin America and the Caribbean, among others in México and
within the UC system. SOMBRERO's innovations will provide a new neurotechnology
platform that will eventually serve as a critical enabler for longitudinal
studies of the brain, as well as the development of a host of emerging laser-
based diagnostic and therapeutic techniques for neurological disorders.
Concurrently, SOMBRERO will provide research opportunities to a diverse cadre of
US students, preparing them to innovate as independent, globally engaged
engineers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical&lt;br/&gt;This study encompasses
international collaborative research between UCR and three premier institutions
in México: Centro de Investigación Científica y Educación Superior de Ensenada
(CICESE) in Ensenada; Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México (UNAM) in Mexico
City; and Instituto Nacional de Astrofísica, Óptica y Electrónica (INAOE) in
Puebla. So far, these collaborations have produced numerous advances in opto-
ceramics. Particularly noteworthy is the recent report of the first transparent
nanocrystalline yttria-stabilized-zirconia (nc-YSZ) cranial implants capable of
replacing portions of the skull to allow non-invasive optical interrogation of
the brain on an ongoing recurring basis, i.e. the Windows to the Brain (WttB)
platform, which is the primary integrative technology goal of the project. The
significance of SOMBRERO lies in the potential the WttB platform may eventually
afford for: a) advancing understanding of the brain, by facilitating the
clinical translation of emerging optogenetic neurotechnologies under development
in the BRAIN Initiative; and b) facilitating the diagnosis and treatment of a
wide variety of brain pathologies and neurological disorders, such as traumatic
brain injury and stroke. Although a number of materials (e.g., titanium,
alumina, acrylic, etc.) have been evaluated for use in cranial reconstruction,
none provide the requisite combination of properties required for clinically-
viable transparent implants. As such, this award proposes to take the next steps
towards clinical translation of the WttB concept by advancing both our
fundamental understanding and technological capabilities within this context.
SOMBRERO's innovations will provide a new neurotechnology platform that will
eventually serve as a critical enabler for longitudinal studies of the brain, as
well as the development of a host of emerging laser-based diagnostic and
therapeutic techniques for neurological disorders. The impact of SOMBRERO will
lie in the unique capabilities it will provide to the neuroscience community,
which will advance understanding and improve disease management, thus improving
quality of life and reducing healthcare costs. Furthermore, the advances made in
the science and technology of novel opto-ceramics will have potential to extend
to numerous other fields, including medical lasers, defense, energy, etc.
Finally, SOMBRERO will recruit UCR STEM students in multiple disciplines for
training in both countries, and build upon UCR's strong record of minority
undergraduate retention and graduate recruitment by leveraging well-established
programs and student organizations, such as the California Alliance for Minority
Participation (CAMP), UC Leadership Excellence through Advanced Degrees (UC
LEADS), and the Society for Hispanic Professional Engineers (SHPE).