* 1545933
* RAPID: Collaborative Research: Nepal Array Measuring Aftershock Seismicity Trailing Earthquake
* GEO,EAR
* 06/15/2015,05/31/2017
* Aaron Velasco, University of Texas at El Paso
* Standard Grant
* Luciana Astiz
* 05/31/2017
* USD 131,790.00

The collision of the India and Asia has created the Himalaya, the highest
mountains in the world, over the last 57 million years. Convergence between the
two tectonic plates continues today, at 4cm (1 Â½ inches) per year, deforming the
earth?s crust in the Himalaya, and creating great earthquakes. The recent
devastating earthquakes in Nepal (April 25, 2015 magnitude 7.8; and May 12, 2015
magnitude 7.3) are examples of this activity, though scientists believe that far
larger earthquakes have happened in the past, up to magnitude 8.8, and will
inevitably occur again sometime in the future. The biggest of these earthquakes
could kill as many as 1 million people in northern India and Nepal. These large
earthquakes rupture faults over very large areas, perhaps 100 to 500 km West-
East along the Himalaya. The biggest fault, on which the recent Nepal
earthquakes occurred, is called the Main Himalayan Thrust. Scientists do not
know why the magnitude 7.8 ?main shock? earthquake initiated exactly where it
did, 100 km (60 miles) northwest of Kathmandu; nor why the earthquake fault
stopped moving about 160 km (100 miles) to the east-south-east. Scientists
believe earthquakes start and stop at locations (called ?asperities?) where the
fault-plane changes geometry, perhaps where it becomes steeper or less steep. If
these asperities are a long way apart, the earthquake can be devastatingly
large; but if the asperities are close together, then the earthquakes are likely
to be smaller. Hence, in order to quantify seismic hazard in the Himalaya,
scientists need to first understand the geometry of the Main Himalayan Thrust.
During Project NAMASTE, US scientists will work alongside Nepali seismologists
and students to understand this fault geometry, while at the same time building
the Nepali scientific capacity.

In response to the April 25, 2015 M=7.8 earthquake on the Main Himalayan Thrust
in Nepal, scientists from UTEP and Stanford are urgently deploying ~20 broadband
and short-period seismometers in an areal array across eastern Nepal, spanning
the region of the largest aftershocks. Historically, aftershocks of large
Himalayan earthquakes occur on both the principal subduction-zone thrust (the
Main Himalayan Thrust), and also on splay thrust faults such as the Main Central
Thrust, Main Boundary Thrust and Main Frontal Thrust. Detailed location of the
aftershock seismicity will provide unprecedented sub-surface resolution of the
geometry of these faults that at present are known almost entirely from surface
mapping. Knowing which faults are active at the present day ? a subject of
ongoing controversy ? will lead to better kinematic descriptions of the India-
Asia collision. Knowing the down-dip ?ramp-and-flat? geometry of the Main
Himalayan Thrust, and particularly whether and where along-strike lateral ramps
exist, will lead to better understanding of the historical record of great
Himalayan earthquakes, and potential future rupture zone dimensions. The
20-station University of Texas at El Paso/Stanford University array will
complement an Oregon State/University of California Riverside array of similar
size and areal dimension to together acquire a comprehensive image of the entire
aftershock zone that extends somewhat in all directions beyond the initial
rupture area. Both arrays will remain in place for about six months. This
dataset will be submitted as rapidly as possible to the IRIS Data Management
Center for analysis by all interested seismologists.