* 1545596
* EAGER: GETBIO-PGR Gateway for Education, Training, Broader Impacts and Outreach in Plant Genome Research
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2016,02/28/2018
* Ann Stapleton, University of South Dakota Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Kimberly Gallagher
* 02/28/2018
* USD 299,959.00

Most research projects that are engaged in characterizing the whole set of genes
crop plants possess are complex in nature and carry out a diverse set of
activities in addition to research. These include education and training of
students, postdoctoral associates, and other professionals in different settings
that range from classrooms and labs to workshops. In addition, many of these
programs are also engaged in outreach activities with the community to raise
awareness of the role that plant science plays in the quality of everyday life.
One of the challenges faced by these scientists is recruitment of the research
team, and communication with academic groups and the community at large. This
project proposes to develop a web portal that will enable scientists to carry
out these activities effectively and efficiently. In addition, this project will
also assemble a large collection of highly specialized analytical software in a
manner that will allow scientist to search and select the appropriate tool for
very specific analytical tasks. The project also plans to request feedback from
the community to target development of appropriate
resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary objective of this project
is to create an integrated Gateway for Education, Training, Broader Impacts and
Outreach in Plant Genome Research (GETBIO-PGR). This resource will provide an
infrastructure to access, create, share and exchange information about plant
genome research projects and broader impact activities. It will also provide a
resource to enable users to discover the most relevant bioinformatics analytic
tools. More specifically, GETBIO-PGR will enable investigators to create
individual, integrated web pages that will serve the multiple needs of their
research program including recruitment of students and postdocs, availability of
internships, and scheduling of workshops. The web pages will also be used to
communicate research results, and describe resources that are available to the
community. These may include availability of sequence information, clones, seeds
of genetic stocks, and research software. This project will also create a
bioinformatics analytic Tool Discovery System (Bio-TDS) and integrate it into
GETBIO-PGR. An ontology annotation system will be added to the Bio-TDS to enable
robust searching capabilities. Finally, the PIs will introduce the research and
educational communities to GETBIO-PGR through education, presentations, and
workshops while gathering usability feedback.