* 1545721
* RI: Student Travel Support for the 2015 International Conference on Case-Based Reasoning; September 28-30, 2015; Frankfurt, Germany
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2017
* David Wilson, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* James Donlon
* 07/31/2017
* USD 10,000.00

This proposal provides international and domestic travel support for U.S. based
student participants to attend the 23rd International Conference on Case-Based
Reasoning (ICCBR 2015), which will take place from the 28th to 30th of September
2015 in Frankfurt am Main, Germany. ICCBR is the premier, annual meeting of the
Case-Based Reasoning (CBR) community and the primary international conference on
this topic, bringing together researchers across artificial intelligence,
machine learning, cognitive science, and domain application areas. The CBR
community welcomes interdisciplinary participation and experts from industry and
other related academic areas. ICCBR has a rich history of encouraging strong
student participation in the conference program. Today's students are tomorrow's
international leaders in the research community. As part of this, the ICCBR
organizers aim to facilitate and encourage student participation by providing
support for students to attend the conference. In addition to the main technical
program, the conference features opportunities for student participation and
mentoring, including themed workshops, an application domain challenge
competition, and the 7th in a successful doctoral consortium series. A strong
representation of U.S. based researchers, and students in particular, is useful
in maintaining U.S. scientific and technical competitiveness in the field and
also contributes to the career development of the students.

ICCBR is the premier conference in the field of Case-Based Reasoning and has
contributed significantly to scientific and industry advances across the broader
areas of artificial intelligence, cognitive science, and cognate disciplines
since 1993. ICCBR provides a dynamic and comprehensive program for research,
education, publication, and interaction; it is a leading international forum for
CBR researchers, students, and practitioners to exchange and discover leading-
edge ideas, results, tools, techniques, and experiences. The intellectual merit
of the proposal is to (1) expand the technical content, scope and depth of this
forum by supporting and encouraging greater student attendance and
participation; (2) foster technical advances in the field through the greater
training and collaboration opportunities afforded by direct student
participation in the conference. This project will provide partial support for
students from U.S. institutions to attend and present research work at ICCBR
2015. ICCBR student travel support will encourage the research interests and
involvement of students in the field, particularly those who are at early stages
of their research or without current funding sources that might otherwise limit
their participation. ICCBR 2015 students will have the opportunity to
participate in the following interactive activities as partially supported by
this project: main technical program, focus-area workshops, the computer cooking
contest, face-to-face meetings with both peers and leading researchers, as well
as a doctoral consortium. These opportunities will have a long lasting impact on
the future career of the participants. The primary broader impact is to help
train the future generation of leaders and workforce in the field; in turn, this
will plant the seeds for future innovation and help to shape the field itself.