* 1545130
* CPS: Synergy: Cyber Physical Regional Freight Transportation System Start
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2015,12/31/2019
* Petros Ioannou, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* David Corman
* 12/31/2019
* USD 800,000.00

The objective of this project is to develop optimization and control techniques
and integrate them with real-time simulation models to achieve load balancing in
complex networks. The application case is the regional freight system. Freight
moves on rail and road networks which are also shared by passengers. These
networks today work independently, even though they are highly interdependent,
and the result is inefficiencies in the form of congestion, pollution, and
excess fuel consumption. These inefficiencies are observed for example by the
peaks of demand across time and space. Inefficiencies exist in part due to lack
of information and appropriate tools, and in part due to lack of policies and
institutional structures that would promote more integrated operations. The
problem is made even more complex due to the large quantities of real time data
that will be available to inform the decision-making.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research develops the theoretical foundations of a new approach referred to as
COSMO to balance loads across complex dynamical networks with temporal and
spacial characteristics. In contrast to current practices where simple
mathematical models are used to predict the states of the network the method
employs computational simulation models that are far more accurate in estimating
the states of the network by taking into account dynamics and complex
interactions. The project develops the optimization and load balancing control
segments of the cyber physical system and integrate them with real time network
simulation models using freight transportation as the driving application area.
The research also examines how identified barriers and policy issues/incentives
can be incorporated as mathematical constraints and/or control variables in the
optimized dynamic freight load balancing system. Data supporting the analysis
may include freight characterization, traffic, weather, and other large data
volumes. The project will utilize real time data from the port of Los Angeles
/Long Beach area to validate the approach. The port of Los Angeles/Long Beach is
the port of entry for much of the freight that enters the West Coast, and
provides rich sets of data that will stimulate the model especially in regional
transportation involving interaction between road/rail/port networks. This
fundamental technology in this important transportation domain with direct
applications to other large scale freight centers, can be applied to other
application domains including networking and smart grid. Besides the broader
impact derived from more efficient allocation of transportation resources, the
project also provide educational outreach and produce course modules.