* 1545300
* NRT-IGE: Flipping a Foundational Interdisciplinary Graduate Curriculum While Strengthening Connections Outside Academia
* EHR,DGE
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2019
* Robert Sterner, University of Minnesota Duluth
* Standard Grant
* Carol Stoel
* 08/31/2019
* USD 369,579.00

NRT-IGE: Flipping a Foundational Interdisciplinary Graduate Curriculum While
Strengthening Connections Outside Academia

Traditional approaches to training first-year graduate students in
interdisciplinary fields typically use instructional methods that do not reflect
the individualized needs of the students. The course structure additionally
teaches laboratory and field methods separately, divorcing context from theory
and skills. This National Science Foundation Research Traineeship (NRT) award in
the Innovations of Graduate Education (IGE) Track to the University of Minnesota
Duluth will pilot and test a re-design of the first-year graduate studies in
limnology. Limnology is an interdisciplinary field that draws graduate students
with backgrounds in chemistry, physics, biology, geology, and other disciplines.
Thus, an integrated approach that builds from basic concepts toward each of
these specialties separately and together is needed. The multi-faceted model
will include a flipped-classroom active-learning environment, cohort building,
and research experience that involves community partners. This project will make
online materials freely available so they can be adapted and utilized by other
reform efforts targeting first-year graduate instruction, particularly in
interdisciplinary programs.

A team of professional scientists and educational faculty members with the Large
Lakes Observatory will collaborate to establish measurable learning targets
involving both scientific knowledge and broader professional skills. Based upon
these learning targets, a variety of formative and summative assessment measures
will be created and used to help guide the implementation of this project's
graduate course material. Students will access course materials and resources
outside of class hours, including videotaped lectures, interactive website
content, and other online materials. Projects of different durations and scopes
will be designed for students to work on inside the classroom as a means to
apply information learned from the online course materials. A final capstone
project will be created by involving one or more community partners in the field
of water resources or water quality, including private companies, government
laboratories, and non-profit organizations. These community partners will
propose a real-world challenge that students will work on as a team to design
solutions and develop deliverables. This new educational model will serve to
integrate and improve delivery of basic concepts, build teamwork and
communication skills among the students, and further connect the academic
community to local partners.

The NSF Research Traineeship (NRT) Program is designed to encourage the
development and implementation of bold, new, potentially transformative, and
scalable models for STEM graduate education training. The Innovations in
Graduate Education Track is dedicated solely to piloting, testing, and
evaluating novel, innovative, and potentially transformative approaches to
graduate education.