* 1545587
* AF: Small: New Perspectives on Special Methods for Graph Algorithms
* CSE,CCF
* 02/01/2015,08/31/2016
* Lorenzo Orecchia, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 08/31/2016
* USD 90,696.00

Classical algorithms for many important graph primitives were designed at a time
when the conventional notion of efficiency was polynomial running time. However,
many of today's applications involve graphs consisting of millions, or even
billions, of nodes. On these massive inputs, practical algorithms must run in
time that is as close to linear as possible in the size of the input.

The spectral approach to designing graph algorithms views the instance graph as
a matrix and makes use of the algebraic properties of the corresponding linear
operator. Recently, research in this area has led to the design of faster
spectral algorithms for many essential graph problems, such as electrical flow,
maximum flow and graph partitioning in undirected graphs. The goal of this
project is to develop a novel algorithmic approach by combining spectral methods
and the idea of regularization from optimization. Regularization is a mechanism
for modifying a given optimization problem to make it more amenable to known
algorithms without changing its salient characteristics. Surprisingly, many of
the recent breakthroughs in the design of fast spectral algorithms can be viewed
as applying different types of regularization. This research aims to exploit
this interpretation to design algorithms that are faster, simpler to analyze and
easier to implement. Another aim of this research is to integrate different
perspectives on regularization from Machine Learning, Statistics and Convex
Optimization, to create new bridges between these fields and the design of
algorithms.

Due to the practical importance of the graph problems under consideration, the
work will also focus on empirically evaluating the algorithms designed. These
evaluations will be disseminated to the relevant audiences to maximize the
impact of the award. Moreover, because this project aims to develop new
fundamental techniques in the design of algorithms, a particular effort will be
devoted to incorporating material from this research into the PI's teaching
activity and to preparing educational material for the public.