* 1545807
* MEETING: Phys-Fest: Advancing the Field of Plant Physiological Ecology; Konza Prairie, June 6-10, 2016
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2016
* Jesse Nippert, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 08/31/2016
* USD 31,074.00

This project is a scientific conference (Phys-Fest) focused on plant
physiological ecology at the Konza Prairie Biological Station, in Kansas.
Participants will collaborate in data collection as an organized group, each
with their own field research equipment to address the question: What is the
physiological variability within plant species of the tallgrass prairie? This
question has scientific value, as physiological ecologists are aware that
statistical variability in physiological processes often exceeds the mean
response. Without replicated scientific equipment and trained scientists,
measuring the physiological variability within an ecosystem is impossible. The
meeting format will also promote networking and interactions among participants
through a series of scientific presentations and meeting with established
leaders in the field. Participants at Phys-Fest will create a plant eco-
physiology video teaching library for free distribution online. Participants
(and others within the field) will be encouraged to create short video lectures
on their research specialty. As this video library grows over time, the
educational outreach potential will be high. The final objective of Phys-Fest
includes strategic planning for activities that promote long-term coalescence of
the field. These activities include mentorship of students and postdoctoral
associates at the conference, planning for future symposia addressing key
questions in ecological physiology, and planning for a second Phys-Fest meeting.
At least half of the invitees to the conference will be students and post-docs,
allowing them to be exposed to important training and networking opportunities
as they become established in the field.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This conference
will focus on plant eco-physiology (Phys-Fest) and deviate from the typical
conference format of short presentations and posters. Here, participants will
collaborate in data collection to characterize the spatial and diurnal
variability in leaf-level carbon and water traits of the tallgrass prairie
ecosystem. This question has important scientific value as leaf-level plant
physiology data is variable - yet no one quantifies this variability because
adequately characterizing such variability in an entire ecosystem is beyond the
capacity of an individual investigator and the equipment and instrumentation in
an individual's laboratory. Conference participants will characterize the
inherent physiological variability in a tallgrass prairie ecosystem (1)
spatially across resource gradients on site; (2) diurnally within functional
group/species; (3) serve to assess linkages between response variables and
environmental variability in both space and time. These data will provide multi-
metric, high temporal and spatial coverage for key physiological plant traits in
mesic grassland and will provide baseline assessments of variability for future
measurements in other ecosystems. The organization of Phys-Fest is specifically
designed to promote networking and professional development for student and
post-doctoral participants. Nightly sessions with established scientists in this
research field will be held to mentor junior scientists and initiate discussion
addressing research frontiers within plant eco-physiology. Finally, attendees
will develop short video presentations on subject material within their
specialty for classroom teaching. This video library will be hosted on a YouTube
channel and will be an invaluable teaching resource.