* 1545756
* PIRE: Halting Environmental Antimicrobial Resistance Dissemination (HEARD)
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/2015,12/31/2023
* Pedro Alvarez, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Fahmida Chowdhury
* 12/31/2023
* USD 3,637,800.00

Antimicrobial resistance (AMR), which occurs when disease-causing organisms no
longer respond to the drugs commonly used to treat them, is a worldwide public
health crisis and as such has been proclaimed to be one of the greatest threats
to human wellbeing of the 21st Century. Halting AMR is a complex task because
natural background levels of AMR vary worldwide, there are many ways that humans
impact AMR, and because natural and human impacts interact in different ways
around the world to influence how multi-antimicrobial resistant "super-bugs"
arise and are transmitted. Although substantial effort has focused on lessening
hospital-derived resistance, the spread of AMR has continued to accelerate, thus
creating new attention to diminishing the spread and/or transmission of AMR in
the wastewater environment. Wastewater treatment plants are a logical focus
because they serve as collection points for resistant organisms and
antimicrobial compounds from a wide variety of sources (i.e., hospitals,
industries, households) and they are potential breeding grounds for
environmental dissemination of AMR. Antimicrobial drugs and other chemical
stressors (e.g., heavy metals, biocides) regularly enter wastewater treatment
plants and may select for resistant organisms, while also stimulating them to
produce and share the DNA elements responsible for resistance. This PIRE
project, Halting Environmental Antimicrobial Resistance Dissemination [HEARD],
will 1) quantify how wastewater treatment processes affect different aspects of
AMR (e.g., the antimicrobial drugs, AMR organisms, and the DNA elements
underlying AMR) across a global transect of wastewater treatment plants, 2)
determine how the characteristics of wastewater treatment plants and the
receiving environment (e.g., river, lake, or pipe network) interact to affect
the spread of AMR, and 3) develop and test novel approaches to stop the spread
of AMR originating from wastewater treatment plants. The international team
assembled for this PIRE project includes researchers from four U.S. institutions
and six other countries (China, India, Philippines, Portugal, Sweden and
Switzerland). The international dimensions of this project are essential because
1) the propagation of AMR is of global concern, 2) the use and disposal of
antimicrobials and wastewater management practices differ significantly from one
society to another, and 3) international research collaboration prepares U.S.
students to be part of a globally engaged U.S. science and engineering
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Three overarching hypotheses drive HEARD:
Hypothesis 1: wastewater treatment plant influents can be monitored to gauge the
impacts of local antimicrobial use and disposal practices on the prevalence of
resistant organisms and resistance elements. Hypothesis 2: A broad gradient of
antimicrobial resistance elements and resistant bacteria are present in
wastewater effluents across the globe. Hypothesis 3: wastewater treatment
processes and receiving environments can be chosen or modified to mitigate the
spread of antimicrobial resistance. To address these hypotheses and answer these
questions we have developed a comprehensive research plan organized around three
research thrusts: Thrust 1: Global Reconnaissance of Antimicrobial Drugs,
Antibiotic Resistant Bacteria, and Resistance Element Fate During Wastewater
Treatment; Thrust 2: The Relative Roles of Wastewater Treatment Plants and
Receiving Environments in Resistance Dissemination; and Thrust 3: Advancing
Wastewater Treatment Technologies for Antimicrobial Drug, Antibiotic Resistant
Bacteria, and Resistance Element Removal. HEARD brings together four U.S.
universities and ten international academic institutions. The project's initial
focus will be to globally track and quantify the concentrations of a select
group of target resistance elements (e.g., NDM-1, intI1, blaTEM, vanA, and sul1)
within wastewater treatment plant influents and effluents in the U.S., Asia, and
Europe. In parallel, the project members will utilize metagenomics to detect
nontarget resistance elements and bacteria. The metagenomic information will
then direct and refine future targeted sampling efforts across the global
transect of field sites. To develop solutions to the threat of wastewater
mediated resistance dissemination the team will examine both at field and
laboratory scale how changes in wastewater treatment plant operational variables
(e.g., F/M ratio, solids retention time, and aerobic/anaerobic conditions)
affect both resistant bacteria and resistance elements. The project's
international partners synergistically provide the U.S.-based PIRE students with
intracultural context, international research experience with access to world-
class collaborators and facilities, and unique expertise in antimicrobial
resistance and the global threat of resistance
dissemination.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is co-funded by the Division of
Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental, and Transport Systems of NSF's
Directorate for Engineering.