* 1545288
* Long Term Ecological Research (LTER) National Communications Office (LNCO)
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2022
* Frank Davis, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Kendra McLauchlan
* 09/30/2022
* USD 4,197,470.00

The needs for science communication to diverse stakeholders are changing rapidly
in an era of dramatic global change, shifting human demographic trends, and the
widespread digital nature of communication and networking. This award supports a
new and nimble Communications Office that will bring, to the Long Term
Ecological Research (LTER) network, innovative capabilities to interact, share
information, synthesize data, and collaborate in all areas of research,
communication, and education both within and outside of the network. New
programs and activities will encourage and promote diversity in education and
training to enhance communication and outreach to the public; to local,
regional, and federal agencies; and to non-governmental and non-profit agencies.
The support services provided to the scientific community and to society will
take full advantage of recent technological innovations that are informed by
emerging socio-cultural insights to develop new strategies for effective
communication and for enabling more creative collaborative
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project goals for communication and outreach are
to cultivate relationships and synthetic team science within the LTER community,
broaden engagements between the LTER community and other researchers and
stakeholders outside the network, and disseminate LTER scientific discoveries
and policy- and management-relevant knowledge to targeted audiences. The
Communications Office will develop an effective and engaging web presence
featuring online research fora, multi-media research highlights, and access to
tools and services that build awareness and participation in the LTER Network.
Partnerships with the Strategic Environmental Communications and Media Program
at the Bren School of Environmental Science and Management and with a new,
state-of-the-art facility in environmental communications and media (Outreach,
Communication, and Training for Ocean Science) will leverage sophisticated
science communication and education resources. The Office will identify and
deploy resources to maximize opportunities for synthesis across the LTER
network. Synthesis working groups and distributed graduate seminars will be
supported, with topics identified by the LTER and other research communities.
Additional networking will be supported through the triennial All Scientists'
Meeting, annual meetings held in conjunction with other professional meetings,
and promotion and enabling of virtual LTER network interactions and team
science. The Communications Office will support LTER education and training
using a combination of in-person and virtual training in science communication
and environmental media, training in facilitating collaboration skills, and
graduate/early-career training in open synthesis science. Through support and
coordination of the LTER Education Committee, the Communications Office will
serve as an information hub on topics such as best practices, evaluation metrics
and tools for student tracking. It will help identify and cultivate new partners
for LTER education and training efforts, and will encourage and promote
diversity through collaboration with multiple societies and organizations that
promote participation by under-served groups. All activities will be evaluated
using contemporary formative and summative assessments, facilitating an adaptive
approach to advancing communication, synthesis, and education across the LTER
network.