* 1545907
* PIRE: Integrated Computational Materials Engineering for Active Materials and Interfaces in Chemical Fuel Production
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2021
* Sharon Hammes-Schiffer, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Anne Emig
* 09/30/2021
* USD 4,273,825.00

A major challenge before renewable energy technologies can be implemented at
global scales is to find a way to store the energy produced by intermittent
sources such as the wind and the sun. Existing technologies fail to meet the
energy storage demand and novel solutions are needed. An attractive technology
that can potentially meet the growing demand is solid oxide electrolysis, where
electrical energy produced by renewables is converted into chemical energy and
stored for later use. Solid oxide electrolysis cells (SOECs) are complex,
integrated material systems that use electrical energy as input to catalyze
chemical reactions that produce chemical fuels. However, at present SOECs last
for only a few hundreds of hours primarily because of degradation and failure at
interfaces and in the bulk. In this project, an international partnership,
comprising the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, University of
California at Berkeley, and Northwestern University in the U.S. and Kyushu
University in Japan, has been formed to demonstrate an integrated approach to
enabling SOEC technology. This PIRE award uniquely combines the world-class
experimental resources and expertise at KU with the complimentary experimental
expertise at UCB and NU, and the world-class computational facilities and
expertise at Illinois to solve the energy storage grand challenge. This project
will have a lasting institutional impact, including long-term synergistic
collaborations between U.S. and Japan; extensive research and training for
students and early career investigators in cutting-edge interdisciplinary topics
in an international collaborative context, and outreach to K-12 teachers,
science museums and summer camps. The integrated PIRE project will advance
research in a number of disciplinary areas, including materials, physics,
chemistry, engineering and computational science, and create a global citizenry
to power the future. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop an
integrated computational and experimental approach to design efficient,
reliable, low temperature, extended lifetime SOECs. The novel aspects of the
proposal are: 1) Computational and experimental design of novel proton and
oxygen-ion conducting electrolytes. This effort will involve the design and
development of proton conducting oxides with sufficient stability, operating
temperature of 600?aC or lower, higher energy efficiencies at acceptable current
density and high proton conductivity. 2) Computational and experimental design
of novel electrodes focusing on chemistry and microstructure. This effort will
involve the design and development of high-activity electrodes based on
microstructure optimization and materials activity. In addition, a detailed
understanding of new electrodes such as the Ruddlesden-Popper structures and
ordered perovskites will be developed. 3) Computational models and experimental
validation of degradation modes in SOECs. This will involve the development of a
comprehensive understanding of degradation modes at electrolyte/electrode
interfaces focusing on relationships between temperature and applied potential
to cation segregation, bubble formation, delamination and fracture. The
computational effort is strongly tied with the experimental effort and all
computational predictions will be validated with experiments. Undergraduate,
graduate and postdoctoral researchers will be engaged in a rich US-Japan
exchange program and their PIRE research and education experience will prepare
them for challenging positions in the global workplace. Outreach activities will
focus on K-12 engagement, teacher training, disseminating knowledge via science
museums, and summer camps.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is cofunded by the
Division of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure, Directorate for Computer and
Information Science and Engineering.