* 1545345
* NRT IGE:  Pedagogical Readiness Oversight for Future Educators in STEM Subjects (PROFESS)
* EDU,DGE
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2019
* John Bethea, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* John Weishampel
* 08/31/2019
* USD 498,750.00

NRT-IGE: Pedagogical Readiness Oversight for Future Educators in STEM Subjects
(PROFESS)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Faculty careers are desirable to many graduate
students in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM), yet few
STEM graduate trainees are provided with formal opportunities for career
development related to academic or other career outcomes. However, it has been
demonstrated that engaging in teaching in conjunction with research can promote
graduate students? skills relevant to research, without increasing the time to
graduation. This National Science Foundation Research Traineeship (NRT) award in
Innovations in Graduate Education (IGE) to Drexel University is a pilot to
address the need to develop mechanisms to train STEM graduate students to
effectively teach undergraduate students. This project will develop and test a
new model of graduate education that will enable students to train in
educational methods as part of their graduate career and earn an additional
advanced degree in STEM education. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project will
support the professional development of STEM graduate students as educators
through four targeted goals to (1) train graduate students in evidence-based
pedagogical approaches, (2) provide a mechanism for STEM graduate students to
earn an MS in Undergraduate STEM Education in addition to their chosen technical
PhD, (3) maintain student interest in diverse careers in the professoriate, and
(4) support faculty development. The program will leverage the national UTeach
program model, currently being replicated at the undergraduate level at Drexel
University through the DragonsTeach program. The new courses, including a
capstone internship, mentoring activities, and the new degree program will be
developed as a cross-university collaboration among STEM education and content
faculty and will emphasize the importance of deep content knowledge and
research-based pedagogy. To evaluate this pilot, data will be collected on
student outcomes and perceptions, faculty perceptions, as well as the value and
costs of the pedagogical training as part of a graduate program to determine
whether this model is sustainable and transferrable to other
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF Research Traineeship (NRT) Program is
designed to encourage the development and implementation of bold, new,
potentially transformative, and scalable models for STEM graduate education
training. The Innovations in Graduate Education Track is dedicated solely to
piloting, testing, and evaluating novel, innovative, and potentially
transformative approaches to graduate education.