* 1545481
* NRT-DESE LUCID: A project-focused cross-disciplinary graduate training program for data-enabled research in human and machine learning and teaching
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2021
* Martha Alibali, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Francesmary Modugno
* 08/31/2021
* USD 3,058,515.00

NRT DESE: Learning, understanding, cognition, intelligence, and data science
(LUCID)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In modern life there are many situations requiring
people to interact with computers, either so that they may learn from the
machine or so that the machine may learn from them. The applications in
education, industry, health, robotics, and national security hint at the
enormous societal and economic benefits arising from research into the
technologies that promote learning in both people and computers. Yet the
potential has been difficult to realize because such research requires
scientists with expertise in quite different fields of study. While computer
scientists receive training in complex computational ideas and methods, they
know little about how people learn and behave. This National Science Foundation
Research Traineeship (NRT) award to the University of Wisconsin-Madison will
prepare trainees with data-enabled science and engineering training to
simultaneously understand computational theory and methods, the mechanisms that
support human learning and behavior, and the ways these mechanisms behave in
complex real-world situations. The traineeship anticipates equipping forty (40)
doctoral students with the skills and expertise necessary to advance our
understanding of human and machine learning and teaching, through a new training
program that focuses on learning, understanding, cognition, intelligence, and
data science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will train doctoral students
from computer science, engineering, cognitive psychology, and education
sciences, with the goal of promoting a common knowledge base that allows these
scientists to work productively across traditional boundaries on both basic
research questions and practical, real-world problems. The traineeship will
include several graduate training innovations: (1) a project-focused "prof-and-
peer" mentoring system where scientists work in cross-disciplinary teams to
address a shared research problem, (2) close involvement of partners in
industry, government, and non-profit sectors to develop research problems with
real-world application, (3) an information outreach effort that trains
scientists to communicate with the public, industry, and policy-makers through
traditional and new media outlets, (4) a flexible development plan that allows
each trainee to garner the cross-disciplinary expertise needed to advance a
particular research focus, and (5) new mechanisms for recruiting and retaining
under-represented groups in STEM research. This training will prepare US
scientists to compete globally at the highest levels for positions in science,
industry, and government, in a growth sector of the 21st century knowledge
economy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF Research Traineeship (NRT) Program is
designed to encourage the development and implementation of bold, new,
potentially transformative, and scalable models for STEM graduate education
training. The Traineeship Track is dedicated to effective training of STEM
graduate students in high priority interdisciplinary research areas, through the
comprehensive traineeship model that is innovative, evidence-based, and aligned
with changing workforce and research needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is
supported, in part, by the EHR Core Research (ECR) program, specifically the ECR
Research in Disabilities Education (RDE) area of special interest. ECR
emphasizes fundamental STEM education research that generates foundational
knowledge in the field. Investments are made in critical areas that are
essential, broad and enduring: STEM learning and STEM learning environments,
broadening participation in STEM, and STEM workforce development.