* 1545038
* CPS/Synergy/Collaborative Research: Cybernizing Mechanical Structures through Integrated Sensor-Structure Fabrication
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2019
* Yu Ding, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 12/31/2019
* USD 200,000.00

The timely and accurate in-service identification of faults in mechanical
structures, such as airplanes, can play a vitally important role in avoiding
catastrophes. One major challenge, however, is that the sensing system relies on
high frequency signals, the coordination of which is difficult to achieve
throughout a large structure. To tackle this fundamental issue, the research
team will take advantage of 3D printing technology to fabricate integrated
sensor-structure components. Specifically, the team plans to innovate a novel
printing scheme that can embed piezoelectric transducers (namely,
sensor/actuator coupled elements) into layered composites. As the transducers
are densely distributed throughout the entire structure, they function like a
nerve system embedded into the structure. Such a sensor nerve system, when
combined with new control and command systems and advanced data and signal
processing capability, can fully unleash the latest computing power to pinpoint
the fault location.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The new framework of utilizing emerging
additive manufacturing technology to produce a structural system with
integrated, densely distributed active sensing elements will potentially lead to
paradigm-shifting progress in structural self-diagnosis. This advancement may
allow the acquisition of high-quality, active interrogation data throughout the
entire structure, which can then be used to facilitate highly accurate and
robust decision-making. It will lead to intellectual contributions including: 1)
development of a new sensing modality with mechanical-electrical dual-field
adaptivity, that yields rich and high-quality data throughout the structure; 2)
design of an additive manufacturing scheme that inserts piezoelectric micro
transducer arrays throughout the structure to enable active interrogation; and
3) formulation of new data analytics and inverse analysis that can accurately
identify the fault location/severity and guide the fine-tuning of the sensor
system.