* 1545637
* Early Career: Technical support for the University of Rochester LA-ICP-MS and Experimental Geochemistry Laboratories
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2019
* Dustin Trail, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 07/31/2019
* USD 190,563.00

1545637&lt;br/&gt;Trail&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Division of Earth Sciences
Instrumentation and Facilities Program grant supports a laboratory technician
over a two year period. The technician will be responsible for daily operations
of an extant laser ablation microprobe equipped inductively coupled plasma mass
spectrometer (LA-ICP-MS), testing and developing glass and mineral standards for
geochemistry research, and assisting external users with the operation of piston
cylinders used to synthesize phases in the experimental petrology lab at the
University of Rochester. This support is congruent with NSFs mission of
promoting the progress of science and advancing the national health, prosperity
and welfare given the importance of training the next generation scientific
workforce in modern experimental and materials analysis techniques which this
new position will foster.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technician will directly
support PI, student and regional collaborator research in experimental petrology
and geochemistry including studies of Earth?s earliest evidence of crustal
differentiation based on chemical analysis of ancient zircons, fundamental
studies of isotope fractionation between mineral phases in experimental run
products in support of environmental proxy development, studies of trace element
distributions and valence state determinations in accessory phases from ash
deposits to assess the redox state of the parent magmas, and trace element
investigations in support of studies in tectonics, metamorphic petrology and as
indicators of artifact provenance for studies in archeology, to name a few.