* 1545546
* EAGER: Laser 4D light field thermoreflectance (TR) imaging for non-intrusive high accuracy temperature measurement of 3D targets with high spatial and high temporal resolutions
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2018
* Sy-Bor Wen, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Jose Lage
* 07/31/2018
* USD 184,094.00

The principal investigator will develop a technique to determine the temperature
distribution on a three-dimensional (3D) surface or object. The technique is
similar to 3D photography, with the added and much more complicated challenge in
mapping out the temperature. A camera with an array of micro-sized lenses will
be aimed at the object. Because at different angles these lenses project the
images, the effect of three dimensions is achieved. At the same time the
intensities of the light reflected from various points of the surface is related
to temperatures, the temperature on the 3D surface can be determined. The PI
will also involve high school teachers, especially those from schools with high
minority population, in addition to supervising graduate and undergraduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed study will create a microlens array
(MLA) for thermal imaging, numerical algorithms to extract thermal information,
and determination of transient 3D temperature profiles of LED packages during
operating conditions and in transient state. The author will apply an approach
known as 4D light field imaging, which enables imaging of 3D surfaces by the
array of lenses, each having a different perspective on the object, to project
images of the target (i.e., plenoptic images) onto a CCD sensor. The 3D image of
the surfaces can then be reconstructed from the multiple perspectives, using an
algorithm previously developed by the PI. Based on the temperature-dependent
reflectivity and the reflected light intensity of the surfaces (i.e., their
thermoreflectance), temperature changes can be identified. The proposed
technique can achieve high accuracy (~ 10 mK), high spatial resolutions (~ half
of light wavelength; i.e. diffraction-limited), and nano-second temporal
resolutions. The technique can therefore be used for steady, quasi-steady, and
transient state thermal imaging, enabling a wide range of applications including
extreme conditions, light emitting diodes (LEDs) and laser diodes (LDs).