* 1545362
* NRT-DESE: UrbComp: Data Science for Modeling, Understanding, and Advancing Urban Populations
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2021
* Mark Embree, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Francesmary Modugno
* 08/31/2021
* USD 2,999,328.00

NRT-DESE: UrbComp: Data Science for Modeling, Understanding, and Advancing Urban
Populations&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By the year 2030, six out of every ten people
in the world are projected to live in a city. To support the continuing influx
of citizens, cities must be prepared to handle large-scale issues concerning
urban populations, such as public health, sustainable use of limited energy
resources, emergency preparedness, and societal stability. "Big data" methods
hold great promise in addressing such issues because a great amount of
operational data is being gathered as our cities become more wired and
networked. This NSF Research Traineeship (NRT) award to Virginia Tech will
emphasize data-enabled science and engineering education and collaboration
across a range of fields to prepare doctoral students to become
interdisciplinary data scientists who can help realize the promises of
unprecedented urbanization. The traineeship anticipates training up to sixty
(60) doctoral students, including eighteen (18) funded students, which will
contribute to the United States? workforce and thus support our national
competitiveness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Trainees will pursue a PhD in one of eight
home departments: computer science, mathematics, statistics, electrical and
computer engineering, population health sciences, urban affairs and planning,
civil and environmental engineering, and sociology. Specific educational
innovations will include: i) a ?tapestry? curriculum to support early weaving of
interdisciplinary issues, ii) emphasis on ethical and societal issues for
responsible data science, iii) community building through interdisciplinary
project teams and data analytics competitions, and iv) effective communication
skills to facilitate interactions with a broad range of urban city
professionals, i.e., the end consumers of data science. Trainees will learn how
to model cities, develop large-scale statistical models, and use data mining and
visualization technologies to pose and answer questions. Trainees will use
Virginia Tech?s Urban Living Laboratory to enable collaborations with regional
industries, local city governments (Arlington, VA), and local health departments
(Virginia Department of Health) via internships, practicums, data challenges,
and hackathons. The project will actively recruit a diverse cadre of students to
tackle this timely challenge of urban computational modeling. The training model
will be evaluated using a mixed method (quantitative and qualitative) approach
and target five focus areas (students, community, research, program, scalability
and sustainability).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF Research Traineeship (NRT)
Program is designed to encourage the development and implementation of bold,
new, potentially transformative, and scalable models for STEM graduate education
training. The Traineeship Track is dedicated to effective training of STEM
graduate students in high priority interdisciplinary research areas, through the
comprehensive traineeship model that is innovative, evidence-based, and aligned
with changing workforce and research needs.