* 1545908
* A Task Force on Conceptualizing Elementary Mathematical Writing: Implications for Mathematics Education Stakeholders
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2017
* Tutita Casa, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Ferdinand Rivera
* 08/31/2017
* USD 99,977.00

The Discovery Research K-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the
learning and teaching of science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM)
by preK-12 students and teachers through research and development of innovative
resources, models and tools. Projects in the DRK-12 program build on fundamental
research in STEM education and prior research and development efforts that
provide theoretical and empirical justification for proposed
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Communicating about mathematical ideas by talking
and writing is central to the teaching and learning of mathematics as it can
help students learn concepts at a deeper level. More specifically, according to
the Common Core State Standards (CCSS), students should develop their ability to
construct viable arguments and critique the reasoning of others in mathematics
and write across content areas. However, there is limited guidance about how to
teach students to write mathematically, how to evaluate students' mathematical
writing, and the kinds of mathematical writing tasks to include in curriculum
resources. This may mean that students do not experience the benefits from
writing about their mathematical ideas. This conference will bring together
education stakeholders to propose the types of and purposes for mathematical
writing in the elementary grades. The Elementary Mathematical Writing Task Force
(EMWTF) will be made up of educators who bring unique perspectives about
elementary mathematical writing. It will include practitioners and academics
from the fields of mathematics education, mathematics, and writing education and
who are knowledgeable about students who have special needs, are English
language learners, and have been identified as gifted. With the ultimate goal of
reaching consensus about and priorities for the types of and purposes for
elementary mathematical writing, the task force will review student work,
writing prompts, curriculum standards, and other items. They will also suggest
recommendations for future work in this area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Discourse has
been and continues to be central to the teaching and learning of mathematics.
Most recently, the CCSS calls for students to construct viable arguments and
critique the reasoning of others in mathematics. This mathematical practice also
alludes to writing that is emphasized on standards-aligned assessments. While
the English language arts guidelines also call for writing across disciplines,
questions remain about the types of and purposes for writing mathematically
appropriate for the the elementary level. Therefore, a critical need exists to
address these questions in order to guide teachers, researchers, assessment
developers, and curriculum authors in work that impacts students. The EMWTF will
identify, describe, and recommend productive types of and purposes for
mathematical writing by elementary students. They will come to a consensus about
the types of and purposes for mathematical writing that leverage students'
learning as they review and analyze representations of writing, curriculum
standards, student work samples, and assessment and curriculum resource prompts.
Convening the EMWTF will open a comprehensive line of work in mathematical
writing at a critical juncture in the history of the field of mathematics
education. The intellectual merit of this project, therefore, lies in its
potential to transform the field of mathematics education. The EMWTF will
capitalize on expertise from practitioners and academics across multiple
academic fields, including mathematics, writing, special, English language
learners, and gifted education as well as mathematics. The broader impacts thus
will facilitate the collaboration among and across disciplines and stakeholders
that are both rare and infrequent.