* 1545757
* An International Workshop on the Genome of Stone-based Civil Infrastructure Materials, Beijing, China, 2016
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/15/2015,12/31/2016
* J. David Frost, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Yick Hsuan
* 12/31/2016
* USD 25,000.00

Evidence suggests that the successful mapping of the human genome may
revolutionize the treatment of cancers and mental disorders amongst other
ailments. A similar concept has been conceived for research and development in
the study of engineering material. The Material Genome Initiative (MGI) which
began in the United States in 2011 is seeking to develop a material innovation
infrastructure and to incentivize a change in material design culture. The
material "genome" can be described in terms of the material composition, the
microstructure, and the inherent defects and can be determined by material
characterization methods at multiple scales. Based on the measured material
genome, multiscale mechanical models can then be established to evaluate the
influence of the material genome on material properties. With the availability
of high performance computational methods and tools, multiscale models based on
actual composition and the microstructure of materials can help to speed up the
material design process with a minimum of financial investment and labor costs.
The ultimate goal of the material genome research is to be able to design
materials of desired properties and performance by rational approaches. This has
not yet been resolved for well-understood metallic materials and may be even
more challenging to address for stone-based civil infrastructure materials, such
as hydrated cement concrete, asphalt concrete, aggregate, and human-augmented
soil. These engineered hybrid natural-synthetic materials are important for the
sustainable development of society, with significant potential impacts on both
the economy and the environment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Expanding concepts from
the human genome to the material genome raises a number of questions, including:
(i) what is the material genome? (ii) how can one identify the material genome
and evaluate the influence of the material genome on material properties? and,
(iii) how will understanding the material genome speed up discovery and
innovation in material design? An international workshop will be held at the
University of Science and Technology in Beijing, China in 2016 that will include
the world's leading researchers and educators in stone-based civil
infrastructure materials to develop a roadmap to help answer these questions in
a timely manner. The purpose of the international workshop on The Genome of
Stone-based Civil Infrastructure Materials is to: (i) review and update the
latest research and developments related to the genome of metallic and stone-
based materials; (ii) identify technical barriers to developing international
collaborations; (iii) promote the establishment of an international consortium
for the identification of the genome for stone-based materials; and (iv) develop
a roadmap for research and education in identifying and establishing a
relationship between the material genome and the properties of stone-based
infrastructure materials. The workshop will provide US participants an
opportunity to develop partnerships for future interactions with Chinese and
European researchers.