* 1545046
* CPS:Synergy:Collaborative Research: Real-time Data Analytics for Energy Cyber-Physical Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2021
* Mihai Anitescu, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 08/31/2021
* USD 382,000.00

Inadequate system understanding and inadequate situational awareness have caused
large-scale power outages in the past. With the increased reliance on variable
energy supply sources, system understanding and situational awareness of a
complex energy system become more challenging. This project leverages the power
of big data analytics to directly improve system understanding and situational
awareness. The research provides the methodology for detecting anomalous events
in real-time, and therefore allow control centers to take appropriate control
actions before minor events develop into major blackouts. The significance for
the society and for the power industry is profound. Energy providers will be
able to prevent large-scale power outages and reduce revenue losses, and
customers will benefit from reliable energy delivery with service guarantees.
Students, including women and underrepresented groups, will be trained for the
future workforce in this area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project includes four
major thrusts: 1) real-time anomaly detection from measurement data; 2) real-
time event diagnosis and interpretation of changes in the state of the network;
3) real-time optimal control of the power grid; 4) scientific foundations
underpinning cyber-physical systems. The major outcome of this project is
practical solutions to event or fault detection and diagnosis in the power grid,
as well as prediction and prevention of large-scale power outages.