* 1545720
* Bilateral BBSRC NSF/ Bio:  The Roles of Contact-dependent Inhibition in Bacterial Communities
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* David Low, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 07/31/2019
* USD 599,786.00

A wide range of bacterial species communicate with one another by a mechanism
called contact-dependent growth inhibition (CDI). In this mechanism proteins
deliver toxins to a neighboring bacterium, thereby causing inhibition of cell
growth and even death. Little is known about how CDI affects bacterial
interactions within communities containing the same species as opposed to mixed
communities containing multiple different bacterial species. In this project, a
collaborative team of US (University of California, Santa Barbara) and UK
(University of York) researchers will determine how CDI systems influence the
development of bacterial communities, using genetically engineered bacterial
cells that express different CDI toxin systems and mathematical modeling of the
bacterial populations. This project will enable a better understanding of the
mechanisms by which bacteria interact with one another and build microbial
communities, and has direct relevance to plant, animal, and human health.
Students (including women and members of underrepresented minorities) will
receive interdisciplinary training in biology, engineering and biophysics.

Contact Dependent Inhibition systems (CDI) are ubiquitous bacterial toxin
delivery systems that require direct interaction between the toxin delivery
CdiAB apparatus of the CDI+ cell and a defined receptor protein on the target
susceptible cell. Many fundamental questions about CDI remain unanswered
including the role of CDI in bacterial ecology and evolution. This project will
examine both the mechanism of CDI, and how CDI systems shape the development and
dynamics of microbial communities using a combination of molecular biology and
biochemical approaches. The investigators will generate strains with well-
characterized CDI systems in the two model organisms Escherichia coli and
Enterobacter cloacae. Subsequently, the effect of these CDI systems on
population development will be determined based on a set of qualitative and
quantitative imaging analyses at the single cell, microcolony, and biofilm
levels. These data will be used to parameterize a suite of computational models
with stochastic implementation to capture important transient interactions that
ultimately define the population structure. An integrated model that allows in
silico predictions of the CDI effect on mixed strain population structure will
be validated in several rounds of combined model refinement and experimentation.

This collaborative US/UK project is supported by the US National Science
Foundation and the UK Biotechnology and Biological Sciences Research Council.