* 1545096
* CPS: Synergy: Collaborative Research: Beyond Stability: Performance, Efficiency and Disturbance Management for Smart Infrastructure Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Steven Low, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Ralph Wachter
* 08/31/2019
* USD 182,050.00

Infrastructure networks are the foundation of the modern world. Their continued
reliable and efficient function without exhausting finite natural resources is
critical to the security, continued growth and technological advancement of the
United States. Currently these systems are in a state of rapid flux due to a
collision of trends such as growing populations, expanding integration of
information technology, and increasing motivation to adopt sustainable
practices. These trends beget both exciting potential benefits and dangerous
challenges. Added sensing, communication, and computational capabilities hold
the promise of increased reliability, efficiency and sustainability from "smart"
infrastructure systems. At the same time, new technologies such as renewable
energy resources in power systems, autonomous vehicles, and software defined
communication networks, are testing the limits of current operational and market
policies. The rapidly changing suite of system components can cause new,
unforeseen interactions that can lead to instability, performance deterioration,
or catastrophic failures. Achieving the full benefits of these systems will
require a shift from the existing focus on approaches that analyze each aspect
of interest in isolation, to a more holistic view that encompasses all of the
relevant factors such as stability, robustness, performance and efficiency, and
takes into account the presence of human participants.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project provides a research roadmap to construct
analysis, design and control tools that ensure the seamless integration of
computational algorithms, physical components and human interactions in next
generation infrastructure systems. Although there has been a great deal of
research on stability questions in large scale distributed systems, there has
been little effort directed toward questions of performance, robustness and
efficiency in these systems, especially those with heterogeneous components and
human participants. This research employs coupled oscillator systems as a common
modeling framework to (i) characterize stability and performance of
infrastructure systems, and (ii) develop distributed controllers that guarantee
performance, efficiency and robustness by isolating disturbances and optimizing
performance objectives. Practical solutions require that the theory be tightly
integrated with the economic mechanisms necessary to incentivize users to
enhance system stability, efficiency and reliability; therefore the work will
also include the design of economic controls. In order to ground the
mathematical foundations, theory and algorithms described above, the results
will be applied to three target infrastructure networks where coupled oscillator
models have played a foundational role in design and control: power,
communication, and transportation systems. This approach allows the development
of cross-cutting, fundamental principles that can be applied across problem
specific boundaries and ensures that the research makes an impact on these
specific infrastructure networks. This project will also incorporate concepts
into existing undergraduate and graduate courses.