* 1545193
* NRT-IGE: Data Science for the Built Environment
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Debbie Niemeier, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Carol Stoel
* 08/31/2019
* USD 499,466.00

NRT-IGE: Data Science for the Built Environment&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
availability of voluminous, high resolution data in both the spatial and
temporal dimensions, coupled with increasingly fast, distributed computational
resources offers enormous opportunities for tackling complex engineering and
science challenges in urban settings. These data can also play an important role
in interdisciplinary problem solving and have increasingly high value to
multiple communities of scientists and engineers. However, research in the
optimal instruction mechanisms to develop data science skills is still emerging.
This is particularly true for engineering graduate students, who are a highly
selected, technologically sophisticated population with the ability to quickly
master material. This National Science Foundation Research Traineeship (NRT)
award in the Innovations in Graduate Education (IGE) Track to the University of
California-Davis will pilot, test, and compare modes of data science
instruction. The testbed project will provide critical new information to inform
the development of new learning platforms designed to cultivate robust
computational, statistical, and data reasoning skills in engineering graduate
students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will implement a hybrid short-course
approach that 1) bridges existing code camps and semester long classes, and 2)
is coupled with a formal user group experience. A robust evaluation will be
conducted to identify the individual effects of code camps, short courses, and
users groups, as well as the effect of participating in combinations of
experiences. In addition, learning gains, self-efficacy to engage in
interdisciplinary studies that require data science principles, and career
trajectories (including decisions to take additional coursework in data science
and decisions to pursue interdisciplinary research and employment involving data
science) will be examined. The project will generate new knowledge that
addresses a particularly important gap in knowledge in terms of whether intense
short-term learning experiences result in longer-term retention of skill
development and computational reasoning. Findings on effectiveness of different
modes of data science instruction in engineering will be broadly applicable to
all data-enabled science and engineering fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF
Research Traineeship (NRT) Program is designed to encourage the development and
implementation of bold, new, potentially transformative, and scalable models for
STEM graduate education training. The Innovations in Graduate Education Track is
dedicated solely to piloting, testing, and evaluating novel, innovative, and
potentially transformative approaches to graduate education.