* 1545581
* INSPIRE: Comparative Ionospheric Science---Earth, Solar System, Exo-Planets
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2022
* Michael Mendillo, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* Martin Still
* 08/31/2022
* USD 999,875.00

This INSPIRE project is jointly funded by the Astronomy &amp; Astrophysics
Grants program of the Astronomical Sciences Division in the Mathematical and
Physical Sciences Directorate, by the Aeronomy program of the Atmospheric and
Geospace Sciences Division in the Geosciences Directorate, and by the Office of
Integrative Activities. The aim of this project is to bridge the gaps that
separate scientific communities studying the complex atmospheres of Earth, other
solar system planets, and planets around other stars ("exoplanets"). These
different systems are united by the same physics and chemistry used by geo-
scientists at Earth and by astronomers investigating other planets in our solar
system and throughout the Milky Way galaxy. Common themes need common
approaches, and results at one location can validate less certain findings
elsewhere. This program will create pathways of communication that utilize
resources more effectively, promote common modes of data analysis, create all-
purpose ionospheric models, and foster student training that removes discipline
barriers. The impact of ionospheric disturbances due to Space Weather
experienced at Earth (e.g., GPS degradations) will enable parallel studies for
Mars, where multiple satellites need reliable communication and navigation for
land-based rovers and, ultimately, human exploration.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While the Sun's ultraviolet and x-ray light is the same
for all of our planets, the gases present at each location are different, and
this leads to a vast set of ions and electrons that comprise the ionosphere at
each planet in our Solar System. Even more compartmentalized are studies of
ionospheres at planets around other stars. The scientific communities that study
them (geophysicists and astronomers) are isolated from each other -
programmatically at funding agencies and at professional meetings and societies.
This lack of cross-fertilization impedes progress. This award focuses upon the
treatment of fundamental atmospheric and space plasma processes as universal -
rather than as unique, planet-by-planet, phenomena. The team will develop the
first comprehensive archive to host all of the parameters necessary to conduct
comparative studies of ionospheres throughout the solar system and beyond, and
provide a versatile user-friendly model to do so. The research tools developed
will offer many opportunities to resolve important issues in one discipline by
applying knowledge and expertise found in other disciplines.