* 1545135
* Exploring the Status of Education for Data Science
* EDU,DUE
* 06/15/2015,05/31/2018
* Heikki Topi, Bentley University
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie August
* 05/31/2018
* USD 49,760.00

Data Science is emerging as a highly popular academic degree program type both
at undergraduate and graduate levels. Even a quick review of existing programs
reveals that there are many different interpretations of data science, and the
existing programs vary significantly in terms of their learning objectives and
curricula. The programs are offered by many different schools and departments,
including computer science, mathematics, statistics, computational science,
information science, and business. This workshop will bring together experts
from key academic communities that are offering data science degrees and the
most important academic and professional societies that have demonstrated a
long-term interest in supporting the academic community's efforts in developing
effective curricula. The purpose of the workshop is to explore the current state
of data science education and discuss actions that will best move the field
forward. The results will be reported widely to both academic and practitioner
communities, and they will serve as a foundation for further discussion and
possible model curriculum development efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop
will bring together leaders in curriculum development with expertise and
interest in data science to explore the opportunities for developing some level
of guidance for new and evolving programs of study. The questions are complex,
involving interdisciplinary issues as well as variation in what aspects of the
field are appropriate in different disciplinary settings. Workshop participants
will attempt to establish basic guidelines for further curriculum development
efforts. The result will be an exploration of the current state of data science
education and a set of actions that will move the field forward.