* 1545619
* RAPID:  Environmental impacts of Cyclone Pam on Vanuatu: implications for long-term cyclone and tsunami records for the South Pacific
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2016
* Hermann Fritz, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Judith Skog
* 06/30/2016
* USD 21,750.00

RAPID: SEDIMENTARY RECORD OF CYCLONE PAM FROM VANUATU: IMPLICATIONS FOR LONG-
TERM CYCLONE AND TSUNAMI RECORDS FOR THE SOUTH PACIFIC&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
proposal is a co-funding effort between the Sedimentary Geology and Paleobiology
Program/EAR and the East Asia and Pacific
Program/OISE/IIA.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nontechnical explanation of the
project:&lt;br/&gt;Land-falling tropical cyclones (TCs) pose an economic and
environmental hazard to coastlines of the South Pacific, however, little is
known about their long-term variability. The uncertainty surrounding TC hazards
in this region was tragically underscored on 6 March 2015 when TC Pam, one of
the most intense storms to impact the South Pacific, made landfall on Vanuatu as
a Category 5 cyclone. Records of past cyclones, developed from the sedimentary
deposits they leave behind, improve our understanding of processes and frequency
by expanding the age range of events to include centennial and millennial
timescales. However, one of the major obstacles associated with using
sedimentary deposits to reconstruct reliable records of past storms is that
sediments deposited by land-falling TCs can often be confused with those
deposited by tsunamis. PIs will address this obstacle by comparing the impact
and associated sedimentary deposits of TC Pam and the 2009 South Pacific
tsunami. This study is an important step towards improving the assessment of
hazard risk for coastlines that are vulnerable to both forms of marine
inundation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical description of the
project:&lt;br/&gt;PIs developed a unique opportunity to compare the impacts of
a known storm (TC Pam on Vanuatu in 2015) and tsunami (South Pacific tsunami in
2009) in a region where the event record is fragmentary and incomplete. A
comparison of the impact of TC Pam and the 2009 South Pacific tsunami
(previously documented by members of the team) enables an assessment of two
extreme events of similar magnitude, but different genesis. To carry out this
comparison PIs will rapidly dispatch a four-person survey team to the islands
that sustained the greatest impact (Efate and Tanna in Vanuatu). They will
collect vital physical characteristics of the cyclone?s storm surge (e.g., surge
height, inundation distance) and its associated sedimentary deposits (e.g.,
lithology, thickness, spatial extent). Through detailed stratigraphic, grain
size, and micropaleontological (foraminiferal taxonomy and taphonomy) analyses
PIs aim to identify differences in the sedimentary deposits emplaced by these
events and that these differences can be used to improve hazard assessment for
coastlines impacted by both forms of marine inundation.