* 1545676
* Collaborative Research: The Rosario Segment of the Cretaceous Alisitos Oceanic Arc (Baja California, Mexico): An Outstanding Field Analog to the Izu Bonin Arc
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2015,02/28/2018
* Cathy Busby, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 02/28/2018
* USD 242,343.00

This collaborative research project will interface closely with the IODP
projects in the Izu-Bonin-Mariana (IBM) arc by fully characterizing what is
probably its best field analog on Earth: the Rosario segment of the Alisitos
arc. DeBari has been deeply involved in the IBM proposals, and Busby is co-chief
scientist on IODP Expedition 350. Exhumed rocks from arc crustal sections have
the unique ability to inform studies of active subduction zones by "ground-
truthing" the assumptions that go into models, experiments, and interpretive
geophysics and geochemistry. Some of the questions we will ask, highly
complementary to the IBM work, are: How is arc middle crust constructed? What is
the relationship and proportion between volcanic and plutonic rocks in juvenile
arc crust? What is the tempo of constructing arc crust? How does arc crust
composition change with time? Is there any older crust that makes up significant
parts of the Alisitos arc? What can we learn about convergent margin
mineralization by comparing the Alsitos arc to the Izu Bonin arc? How does the
crustal structure of the Alisitos arc compare with seismic velocity profiles in
modern arcs? Can surface and borehole heat flow measurements in modern arcs be
related to features preserved in the geologic record of ancient
arcs?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research furthers the careers of two female
scientists (DeBari at WWU and Busby at UCSB) and their respective graduate
students. Training of these graduate students is collaborative so that both
students will become skilled at the integration of field geology, petrology and
geochronology. Scientific interaction between US scientists at WWU and UCSB and
international colleagues at UNAM in Mexico will broaden the perspectives of all
participants, and enhance research and training outcomes. The proposed project
is of interest to the broader science community, as it addresses some of the
foremost questions in the NSF GeoPRISMS science plan on the growth and evolution
of continental crust through study of island arcs
(http://www.geoprisms.org/science-plan.html#science-plan), as well as research
envisioned by the GeoPRISMS ExTerra initiative
(http://www.geoprisms.org/scd/exterra.html). One of the main products, a web-
based 'Island Arc Crust Virtual Field Model', will be used by scientists as a
reference model for IBM drilling outcomes, and in curriculum for both
undergraduate and graduate students. A field workshop in the Alisitos arc,
ideally held in conjunction with Expeditions 350-352 post-expedition meetings
and before IBM-4 drilling begins, will provide invaluable context for IBM
drilling participants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Rosario segment of the
Cretaceous Alisitos arc in Baja California is an outstanding field analog for
the Izu-Bonin-Mariana (IBM) volcanic arc. The IBM arc is under intense study by
the International Ocean Drilling Program (IODP) as an in-situ example of
present-day formation of nascent continental crust. Earth is the only planet in
the solar system with extensive felsic (Si-rich, Mg-poor) continental crust. The
rocky planets and the Moon have basaltic (Mg-rich) crusts formed early in the
history of the solar system. The volume of continental crust on Earth has grown
over time due to plate tectonic processes, dominantly because of accretion of
felsic to intermediate volcanic arcs at convergent margins. However, the
processes that produce this felsic to intermediate crust are not well
characterized in situ. The Rosario segment has superior three-dimensional
exposures of an upper- to middle-crustal section through an extensional oceanic
arc. Previous mapping of this 60-km-long segment of the Alisitos arc, done in
the 1990?s (Busby et al., 2006), will provide a framework for the proposed
study; however, that study focused mainly on field descriptions of the volcanic
rocks, with limited geochronology, and no geochemistry. The proposed study will
determine in detail the relationships between rock types at all stratigraphic
levels in the arc, using field, geochemical, and geochronological data. This
collaborative research project will interface closely with IODP Expeditions
350-352 (in 2014) and a fourth ambitious proposal to drill to the arc middle
crust (IODP Proposal 698 at site IBM-4, awaiting scheduling. These data will be
used to construct an 'Island Arc Crust Virtual Field Model' to be used by
scientists as a reference model for IBM drilling outcomes.