* 1545120
* Student Support: 52nd Annual Technical Meeting of the Society of Engineering Science (SES); College Station, Texas
* ENG,CMMI
* 12/15/2015,11/30/2016
* Alan Needleman, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 11/30/2016
* USD 15,000.00

This award will support student activities within the 52nd Annual Technical
Meeting of the Society of Engineering Science (SES), to be held October 26 - 28,
2015 on the campus of Texas A&amp;M University - College Station. The SES
technical meeting is held annually and provides a forum for the discussion and
dissemination of recent advances in research and education in topics from all
areas of engineering science. The meeting emphasizes topics on the science and
mechanics of solid and fluid media in a setting that is mostly devoted to
fundamental research and education. The organizers anticipate participation of
researchers presenting more than 500 papers, organized in 32 symposia. Each
symposium is organized by leaders in their respective fields and consists
primarily of invited participants. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The SES meeting builds
on a tradition of emphasis on interdisciplinary research at the boundaries of
science and engineering. This award will facilitate the participation of
students competing in a poster competition. Through this award, a diverse group
of graduate students will have the opportunity to present their research and
interact with their peers and with recognized authorities in their field of
choice.