* 1545903
* PIRE: ExTerra Field Institute and Research Endeavo
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2024
* Matthew Kohn, Boise State University
* Continuing Grant
* Maija Kukla
* 05/31/2024
* USD 4,066,962.00

Non-technical abstract OIA1545903 "PIRE: ExTerra Field Institute and Research
Endeavor (E-FIRE)"&lt;br/&gt;Subduction is a fundamental Earth process in which
two tectonic plates converge, forcing one plate deep into Earth's mantle.
Subduction produces most of Earth's deadliest earthquakes and volcanic
eruptions, for example around the Pacific Ocean rim's "Ring of Fire". ExTerra
(Exhumed Terranes) is a broad US geosciences consortium that investigates rocks
exhumed from fossil subduction zones - rocks whose evolution uniquely
illuminates processes otherwise obscured beneath the surface of active
subduction zones. ExTerra will partner with our sister European organization ZIP
(Zooming In between Plates) using novel field institutes to promote
collaborative research among US and European researchers focused on subduction
zone processes. The E-FIRE project develops a new paradigm for collaborative
geological research that focuses on collaborative field work to collect
materials held communally, augmented by broad interactions through workshops and
student exchanges. Each researcher contributes a different analytical expertise
to a combined effort aimed at transforming our understanding of active
subduction zone processes. International partnership is critical because
European researchers actively investigating the geology of each field area will
provide foundational field knowledge of the region and actively participate in
analysis and interpretation with US researchers. The project will integrate
students and post-doctoral scholars (Early-Stage Researchers, ESRs) into a
developing international network of scientists, help train ESRs in research and
education, and provide a model for future geoscience collaborations across
disciplines. E-FIRE will also create a uniquely valuable sample archive that
will be made accessible to the greater research community along with the data
generated by this project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical abstract OIA1545903
"PIRE: ExTerra Field Institute and Research Endeavor (E-FIRE)"&lt;br/&gt;The
purpose of E-FIRE is to trace the cycle of rocks and fluids through the
subduction process, as recorded in Earth's premier example of a fossil
subduction zone - the Western Alps, Europe. The processes by which rocks, melts,
and aqueous fluids exchange and interact among different physical components of
the subduction system control all aspects of subduction. These processes occur
deep within subduction zones, and a full understanding of these deep processes
is a challenge both for investigations using remote geophysical methods and for
scientists investigating active volcanoes above subduction zones. Investigations
of exhumed rocks from within the subduction zone provide a unique, direct source
of information regarding these processes. Specific research questions that we
will explore include: 1) How do elements cycle among crust, mantle and Earth's
surface? 2) What are the depths, temperatures, and timescales of rock
transformation and fluid release within subduction zones? and 3) What is the
mechanical behavior of materials within subduction zones? The proposed projects
will adopt a variety of approaches to address these questions, including
mineralogical and petrological analysis; textural characterization; geochemical
analysis of major elements, trace-elements (e.g. HFSE, REE, etc.), stable
isotopes (e.g. &amp;#948;37Cl, &amp;#948;13C), and radiogenic isotopes (U-Pb and
Sm-Nd); and thermodynamic modeling. E-FIRE will implement a series of Field
Institutes and Workshops aimed at developing an international, interdisciplinary
network of scientists focused on subduction zone processes. These activities,
along with student exchanges among participating institutions, will train early
stage researchers (ESRs: students and post-doctoral scholars) in research,
communication, and collaborative practice, ultimately developing a career-long
collaborative network. Samples and data collected during E-FIRE will be archived
and made available to the greater research community.