* 1545717
* 2015 Gordon Research Conference On Neuroethology The Future Is Now: Innovative Concepts in Neuroethology and New Technologies
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2015,01/31/2016
* Karen Mesce, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Sridhar Raghavachari
* 01/31/2016
* USD 10,000.00

This award will provide support to US-based students and post-doctoral fellows
and junior scientists to attend the 2015 Gordon Research Conference on
Neuroethology. This five-day conference is recognized as the major, mid-size
meeting in Neuroethology, bringing together outstanding senior and junior
scientists for discussions of the recent advances in the field. Twenty-three
invited speakers, chosen based on their creative contributions to the field and
their ability to promote fruitful discussions, have confirmed their attendance.
The theme for the meeting, entitled "In the Light of Evolution: Technology and
the Evolutionary Approach" will feature sessions that will showcase how
biological solutions inform new conceptual and technological advances in bio-
inspired robotics, smart machines and neural modeling. The results presented at
the meeting will have the potential to guide future developments in multiple
areas, including smart devices and neural prosthetics that will have
considerable societal benefits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of
this meeting derives from its small size, which promotes interactions between
participants, and the assembly of many top scientists whose research spans
neurobiology, engineering and neuropathology. It spans a wide variety of
experimental systems and focuses on areas of exceptional activity or promise.
This combination leads to fruitful comparative analyses, raises new questions
about underlying mechanisms and often leads to new collaborations. By maximizing
both formal discussion and informal interactions, the Gordon Conference on
Neuroethology will highlight exciting new developments in neuropathology and
engineering approaches in neurobiology. With respect to broader impacts, this
meeting will benefit the larger community in multiple ways. First, it will help
train and inspire the next generation of scientists, by exposing students and
postdoctoral fellows to exciting science and scientists. Second, a special
session will be organized for the benefit of junior researchers to help them
make informed choices about scientific careers in academia and beyond. Finally,
a concerted effort will be made to recruit scientists from under-represented
groups.