* 1546404
* BIGDATA: IA: Virtual Observatory of Innovation Communities and Ecosystems (VOICE): Advancing Big Data with Ecology Theory and Data Science
* CSE,IIS
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2019
* Brian Butler, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 12/31/2019
* USD 352,565.00

Today's digital revolution is fostering remarkable innovations. The landscape of
innovation is rapidly changing and thus difficult to navigate or study.
Understanding broader participation in innovation requires large datasets on the
innovation participants and their activities. As organizational and industry
boundaries become fuzzy in the digitized world, small data analysis cannot fully
explain how boundaries shift and evolve. Open innovation leads to overlapping
roles of designer and user, making it inadequate to examine innovation
development and adoption separately. Therefore, it is necessary to collect data
on larger units of analysis encompassing multiple organizations and multiple
industries engaging in both the production and use of innovations. Further, the
fast pace and risky nature of digital innovations mean that it is no longer
sufficient to retrospectively study only successful innovations , but it is
important to analyze contemporaneous data on a full range of innovations,
including emergent and potentially failing ones, as they unfold. Addressing
these challenges in conducting and studying digital innovations, this research
team will build the Virtual Observatory of Innovation Communities and Ecosystems
(VOICE) that (1) collects, connects, and curates large datasets from multiple
sources on the people, groups, and organizations engaging with multiple
innovations; (2) employs data science techniques to process and analyze these
datasets; and (3) advances an ecology theory of digital
innovation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project collects data on Big Data
innovations from popular, professional, and trade press; academic publications;
press releases; blogs and wikis; and social media. Further, a suite of theory-
informed measures and models are developed for characterizing the evolving
innovations and their communities in the Big Data ecosystem. Finally, via an
open, layered modular information platform, the project's datasets and tools are
shared widely and data and tools from other innovation ecosystems can be added
as well. The VOICE platform would become a "Hubble Telescope" for everyone to
observe and partake in digital innovations beyond those associated with Big
Data. Policymakers are able to evaluate the mix of capabilities in innovation
communities and recommend necessary interventions to broaden participation,
reduce inequality, and cultivate partnerships. By monitoring emergent trends in
different but related innovation communities, entrepreneurs and managers would
be more likely to develop or adopt the right innovation at the right time.
Overall, VOICE enhances the research and education infrastructure that supports
individuals from underrepresented backgrounds, students, educators, and other
citizens to engage mindfully with science and technology innovations.