* 1546730
* Collaborative Research: The evolution of hair and fur: Proximate and ultimate factors shaping primate pelage variation
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Brenda Bradley, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 08/31/2018
* USD 129,168.00

This project examines how core physiological and evolutionary processes shape
biological diversity. Elucidating how genetic changes and selection pressures
result in trait variation is a central goal of biology, and key to this is
identifying the links between genes, form and function, and how these can alter
the fitness of individuals and the evolutionary success of species. Moreover,
understanding why and how many cellular and body structures have evolved
independently in different species can explain how evolution takes multiple
routes to 'solve' the same problem. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The biology of hair is
an ideal system for studying these links between genetics, form and function.
Hair is an anatomical trait that is shaped by both natural selection (e.g.,
providing camouflage against predators, protection from parasites, maintaining
body temperature in cold environments) and sexual selection (e.g., signaling
sex, age, status). It is a universal characteristic of mammals, yet across
species there is striking variation in the color, pattern, growth, and texture
of hair. Moreover, many hair traits, such as tail stripes or thick woolly coats,
seem to have evolved repeatedly in different mammal lineages. Hair also is a
trait for which small genetic differences can have major phenotypic effects; for
example, red hair in humans is due to variation at a single gene.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project applies cutting-edge genomic and comparative
analyses to understand how genetic variation and selection have shaped this
important anatomical feature (hair) in humans and other primates. In so doing,
it also will provide a critical evolutionary context to understand one of the
biological traits that make humans unique (relative hairlessness). Through
conduct of the research, several undergraduate and graduate students, including
individuals recruited from groups underrepresented in science, as well as a
postdoctoral scholar, will receive extensive and broad scientific training. In
addition, because many human and animal diseases are associated with hair
changes and loss, this project is relevant for aspects of public health and
dermatological and clinical research on hair/skin conditions. Animal hair also
is an important commercial product; identifying the biological factors that
shape hair characteristics in natural-living species could eventually improve
the yield and quality of hair-based products. And finally, the project will
generate a wealth of genetic and metric data on primate diversity that will
contribute to research in conservation and evolutionary biology, as well as
furthering research in biological anthropology.