* 1546453
* BIGDATA: IA: F: Structural Anonymization Techniques for Large, Labeled, and Dynamic Social Graphs
* CSE,IIS
* 03/01/2016,02/29/2020
* John Skvoretz, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 02/29/2020
* USD 661,289.00

The objective of this work is to provide big data owners with tools to safely
share their social networks data with the research community. The specific type
of big data is large online social graphs that evolve over time due to two
different dynamic processes: one is the natural evolution of the graph with edge
and node removal and insertion; the other is a dynamic process that changes the
state of the vertices of the network. Real, longitudinal social graphs datasets
are fundamental to understanding a variety of phenomena, such as epidemics,
adoption of behavior, crowd management and political uprisings. However,
publishing real data is significantly hampered by serious privacy risks: even
when humans' identities are removed, studies have proven repeatedly that de-
anonymization is doable with high success rate. This project aims to investigate
and compare structural anonymization techniques that rely on generating graphs
with given characteristics of the original, real graph. The results of this
study alleviate the privacy and security risks related to graph sharing and
contribute to a faster understanding of natural and social phenomena on real
graphs by facilitating real graph sharing for better, faster, more impactful
research. The project also contributes to the understanding of dynamic processes
on social graphs; involves graduate and undergraduate students in
interdisciplinary research; shares resulting code on github; enhances curriculum
via collaborative teaching targeted at Sociology and Computer Science students;
and disseminates resulting knowledge to audiences ranging from middleschool to
graduate students via presentation, publications, and summer
schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project aims to approach graph anonymization
via two techniques for graph generation: dK-series techniques, introduced in the
context of internet network generation, and Exponential Random Graph Model-based
approaches (ERGM), which are the state of the art in modeling social networks in
Sociology. For each approach, the project first investigates its effectiveness
on anonymizing static social networks sampled from representative datasets (some
available, others collected as part of this effort). Second, it adapts the dK
series and ERGM techniques to dynamic social networks based on empirical
characterizations of the evolution of social relations. Third, the empirically-
described dynamic processes are added on top of the static and dynamic networks
from the previous steps. And finally, the research focuses on scaling up the
computational techniques to be able to anonymize social (thus, sparse) graphs in
the order of millions of nodes.