* 1546329
* BIGDATA: F: Large-Scale Transductive Learning from Heterogeneous Data Sources
* CSE,IIS
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2020
* Yiming Yang, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 12/31/2020
* USD 1,219,459.00

Important problems in the big-data era involve predictions based on
heterogeneous sources of information and the dependency structures in data. In
recommendation systems, for example, predictions need to be made not only based
on observed user ratings over items (movies, books, music, shopping products,
etc.), but also based on information such as demographical data of users and
textual descriptions of items. In event detection from textual data (news
stories, tweets, maintenance reports, legal documents, etc.), joint inference
must be based on who (agents), what (event types or topics), where (locations)
and when (dates), and also based on the connections among agents (in social
networks), topics (in an event-type ontology), locations (in a map) and temporal
co-occurrences. The fundamental research questions therefore include: (1) how to
develop a unified optimization framework for predictions based on heterogeneous
information and dependency structures in various kinds of tasks; (2) how to make
the inference computationally tractable when the combined space of model
parameters is extremely large; and (3) how to significantly enhance the
prediction power of the system by leveraging massively available unlabeled data
in addition to human-annotated training data which are often
sparse.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will address the three challenges via
the following four approaches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(1) A unified representation
of heterogeneous information sources using product graphs: This framework aims
to represent heterogeneous sources of data and intra-source dependencies, such
as social connections among users, semantic similarities among items, contextual
correlations among keywords, topical similarities among documents, hierarchical
relations among topic labels, and so on. Each data source will be represented
using a graph, and the individual graphs of multiple sources will be combined
into a product graph where each node corresponds to a tuple of nodes in the
individual graphs, and each link aggregates the links in the individual graphs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(2) Transductive learning over graph products: This
project plans to reduce the inference problems in a broad range of prediction
tasks to semi-supervised transductive learning problems over the product graphs
mentioned above. The training data in each task (of classification, regression
or link prediction) will be represented as a subset of labeled (or scored) nodes
in the product graph, and the labels (or scores) of those nodes will be
propagated over the links in the product graph until convergence. This project
will study various kinds of graph transductions theoretically and
empirically.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(3) Large-scale optimization algorithms: The
induced product graphs are typically extremely large. To address the
computational bottlenecks, this project will develop new scalable algorithms
based on theoretical properties and computational characteristics of spectral
graph products, including adapted versions of rank-reduced matrix factorization,
aggressive basis pruning, and sampling-based low-rank
approximation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(4) Thorough evaluations in multiple
important applications: The proposed new approach will be evaluated on benchmark
data collections for context-aware collaborative filtering, semi-structured
event detection and tracking, and expert finding via multi-source social network
analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work, if successful, will offer
principled solutions for enhancing the prediction power of systems in a broad
range of tasks, whenever recommendation, classification and regression are
involved. Technical impacts of the proposed work are expected in multiple
research fields. For further information see the project web site at:
http://nyc.lti.cs.cmu.edu/gp-trans/index.html