* 1546873
* RESEARCH-PGR: Genomic and Synthetic Approaches Linking Auxin Signaling to Functional Domains in Maize
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/2016,06/30/2023
* Paula McSteen, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Gerald Schoenknecht
* 06/30/2023
* USD 3,843,077.00

Imagine any characteristic of plants - from development of shoots and roots to
responses to the environment and pests - and it is almost certainly shaped by
the plant growth hormone, auxin. Plant cells have the ability to detect and
respond to auxin. Thus, characterizing the network of molecular components that
involved in detection and response will improve our understanding of the
multiple auxin effects. The primary goal of this project is to identify the
auxin-regulated molecular networks in corn, an economically important crop in
USA. Characterizing the roles these networks play in the growth and development
in the tassel and ear of corn will help devise strategies to improve yields. A
team of scientists from four different American universities will carry out this
work using the most modern biological techniques. This work will fundamentally
change the landscape of developmental biology in corn, and will significantly
accelerate the transfer of knowledge from the lab to the field. Results from
this work will made publically available. The research team is strongly
committed to mentoring a diverse group of future scientists and to increasing
broad scientific literacy. This project will organize workshops aimed at
expanding the professional skillsets of undergraduate, graduate and postdoctoral
trainees. Scientists from the four institutions will collaborate to develop
training modules that will involve hands-on experimentation. These modules will
specifically target audiences from K-12 schools, colleges, and the public at
large.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses a cornerstone of
developmental biology: how auxin action is specified by context-specific
deployment of signaling components, and in particular, how auxin controls
reproductive organogenesis. Team members have amassed a wealth of genetic,
genomic and molecular resources in maize to answer the question of how axillary
meristems are initiated to give rise to the reproductive structures in the
tassel and ear. Prior work has shown that components of the auxin signaling
machinery are expressed in three functional domains within the inflorescence:
the suppressed bract leaf, the boundary domain, and the axillary meristem.
Connecting auxin signaling modules with tissue-level events will require a
detailed understanding of which interactions occur in specific tissues and at
specific times. This challenge will be met with a highly integrated approach
incorporating genomic and synthetic biology tools with sophisticated informatics
and data visualization. Specifically, this project will: 1) define and
characterize the auxin signaling modules (receptors, repressors, transcription
factors) operating within functional domains of the inflorescence; and 2)
construct gene regulatory networks incorporating co-expressed genes and targets
of the auxin signaling modules.