* 1546647
* EAGER: Alternative Pathways for Biofuel formation from Furfuryl alcohol over Heterogeneous Catalysts
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2016
* Tae Jin Kim, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 07/31/2016
* USD 112,000.00

Kim (1546647)&lt;br/&gt;This is an exploratory, proof-of-concept study aimed
primarily at reacting furfuryl alcohol (a major intermediate product of biomass
refining) directly to hydrocarbon molecules containing nine to twenty carbon
atoms suitable for use as transportation fuels, specifically diesel and jet
fuel. Traditional processing is based on catalysis by sulfuric acid. This
proposal seeks to demonstrate better performance and product selectivity
utilizing supported catalysts while also providing opportunities for improved
process efficiency, reduced waste, and a greener environmental footprint.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Biomass conversion to useful products is challenged by the
broad range of intermediate products produced from the intial pyrolysis of the
biomass feedstock together with downstream conversion of the intermediates
selectively to high-value fuel and chemical products. Catalysis offers
opportunities for facilitating the downstream reactions, but reaction
selectivity to desired products is still a challenge and catalyst deactivation
is common. This project will provide a direct route for reacting a major
intermediate product of biomass refining - furfuryl alcohol - directly to C9-C20
alkanes suitable for transportation fuels, while also providing insight into the
mechanism of both the oligomerization reaction and the monomer reaction to
cyclopentanone, another commercially important product. The proposal is based on
the hypothesis that selectivity toward the targeted alkanes can be markedly
improved with respect to the homogeneous acid-catalyzed reaction by using
supported heterogeneous catalysts with tunable acidic and basic sites combined
with optimized reaction conditions. To this end, the study will screen a broad
space of catalyst formulations, reactor design, and operating conditions to
enhance C9-C20 product efficiency. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work
addresses an important area of research related to energy independence and
renewable resources in the form of cellulosic biomass, with potential to produce
economic routes to diesel and jet fuel. In parallel, the investigator will also
explore conversion of furfuryl alcohol directly to cyclopentanone, a versatile
chemical feedstock. Both studies will be conducted in collaboration with
Brookhaven National Laboratory to obtain fundamental scientific understanding of
relevance to a broad range of catalytic reactions. From an educational
standpoint, the project will provide broad catalyst training to one graduate
student and an undergraduate researcher, as well as expanding educational
outreach programs the investigator has previously established with high school
students.