* 1546713
* United States Regional GLOBE Science Fairs
* GEO,RISE
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2018
* Jennifer Bourgeault, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 07/31/2018
* USD 338,810.00

According to the Pew Research Center, results from the 2012 Program for
International Student Assessment (PISA), which measures every three years the
reading ability, math and science literacy among 15-year-olds, placed the U.S.
an "unimpressive 35th out of 64 countries in math and 27th in science." Compared
to the 34 members of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development,
the U.S. ranked 27th in math and 20th in science. Given the important
contribution that the science, technology, engineering, and math (STEM)
disciplines make to U.S. innovation and competitiveness, there have been several
high level reports calling for improved STEM instruction in our nation's
schools. Research studies on effective practices for teaching and learning about
science, technology, engineering, and math (STEM) disciplines have documented
the significant impact made when these subjects are taught using pedagogies that
emphasize hands-on, inquiry-based learning. These tactics help students gain not
only the scientific content knowledge, but also a greater understanding of the
process of scientific inquiry. Even better learning outcomes can be achieved if
problem-based or place-based approaches are incorporated, because linking the
science to issues that are relevant to people, their communities, and society in
general, helps to reach both the cognitive and affective domains of the learner.
Indeed, new national standards for STEM teaching clearly emphasize the
integration of scientific practice within classroom instruction as being a best
practice. Preparing teachers to use these pedagogical methods effectively is
essential for successful implementation, but difficult to provide at a national
scale. The challenge, then is to identify model programs for professional
development that can be scaled up, in order to transform STEM teaching
throughout the country.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project supports a pilot
effort to create six regional science fairs for K-12 students whose projects are
designed around the Global Learning and Observations to Benefit the Environment
(GLOBE) program protocols and campaigns. The GLOBE program, now celebrating its
20th year of operation, is a global, hands-on science and science education
program that engages students and teachers in collecting, analyzing, and
interpreting authentic environmental data. There are now 114 countries using
GLOBE in the classroom, with several tens of thousands teachers trained in the
GLOBE protocols. Working with a leadership team of 16 GLOBE partnerships (2-3
per region), this project is recruiting an additional 44 partner-teacher-student
teams in the U.S. to participate in the regional 1.0-1.5 day events. As part of
this effort, experienced GLOBE partners are providing monthly webinars and blogs
in order to mentor teachers, to promote higher quality implementation of GLOBE
research in the classroom. The goal of the science fairs is to foster a stronger
community connection among the U.S. GLOBE partners, promote GLOBE as a model
program for effective science teaching on a national and international level,
and provide opportunities and resources that motivate teachers to implement
authentic research projects in their classrooms. The six regional competitions
serve as a venue for honoring outstanding teams who are unable to attend other
GLOBE student conferences, annual partner meetings, or GLOBE Learning
Expeditions. It is anticipated that these regional science fairs will become an
annual event, should the pilot effort prove successful.