* 1546680
* I-Corps:  OrthoMechanica-Implantable Passive Mechanisms For Orthopedic Surgery
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2015,05/31/2016
* Ravi Balasubramanian, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 05/31/2016
* USD 50,000.00

Implantable passive mechanisms have never been developed for orthopedic surgery.
This project seeks to create a paradigm shift in the domain of reconstructive
orthopedic surgery through the exploration of the commercial market for a new
class of implantable biomedical devices. The implants are passive mechanisms
that take the form of tendon networks, levers, pulleys, and linkages. They will
be surgically placed between muscles and tendons within the body with the goal
of modifying the functional attachment of muscles to tendons and bone.
Specifically, the implants will provide the ability to scale and distribute
forces better between muscles and tendons when compared with the current
practice of using sutures to make attachments. These implants will enable
customizable and superior musculoskeletal function for the patient, thus
improving quality of life in the long term. Since such implants have never been
developed before, this project promotes the progress of science. If these
implants make it to market, the work could lead to the creation of a new
medical-device industry, thus advancing national health, prosperity and
welfare.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The work currently focuses on two classes of
implantable passive mechanisms as exemplar implants. The first class consists of
'differential' mechanisms, such as moving pulleys and levers, which distribute
forces and movements from one muscle across multiple tendons. The second class
of implants consists of 'force-scaling' mechanisms that increase the force
transferred from one muscle to a tendon. Preliminary studies show that these
implants enable customizable and superior musculoskeletal function for the
patient, thus improving quality of life in the long term. During the I-Corps
program, each member of the team will pursue activities every week that explore
the commercialization potential of the proposed technology. Specifically, the
team will bring together ideas regarding the need for such implant technology in
the surgical domain by consulting with people from different backgrounds, such
as companies that develop orthopedic implants, regulatory bodies, and medical
care centers.