* 1546906
* I-Corps:  Evaluating the Market Potential of the Mechanix Sketch Recognition Software
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2015,12/31/2016
* Tracy Hammond, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* lydia mcclure
* 12/31/2016
* USD 50,000.00

Introductory engineering courses within large universities often have annual
enrollments exceeding several hundreds of students, while MOOCS and online
classes have even larger classes. It is very challenging to achieve
differentiated instruction in classrooms with class sizes and student diversity
of such great magnitude. In such classes, professors can only assess whether
students have mastered a concept by using multiple-choice questions. However, in
a multiple choice scenario, students only have to identify the answer rather
than create the answer, and the feedback received is only of a binary nature
(right or wrong). Additionally, a growing concern among engineering educators is
that students are losing both the critical skill of sketched diagrams and the
ability to take a real system and reduce it to an accurate but simplified free-
body diagram (FBD). The proposed software program, Mechanix, provides an
artificially intelligent, scalable online instructional platform for engineering
and physics instruction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mechanix is a sketch-based
tutoring system for engineering students enrolled in statics courses. Mechanix
not only allows students to hand-draw solutions with planar truss and free body
diagrams, just as they would with pencil and paper, but it also checks the
student's work. It uses sketch recognition to determine both the component
shapes and features of the sketched diagram and the relationships between those
shapes and features. Mechanix then uses those relationships to determine whether
a student's work is correct and why it is incorrect, enabling Mechanix to return
immediate personalized feedback to the student otherwise not possible in large
classes. The iterative correction process facilitates student learning.
Additionally Mechanix relieves the instructor of the resource intensive burden
of grading even very complex, hand-sketched work. This enables the instructor to
explore creative problem solving material that may be otherwise too resource
intensive to evaluate. The Mechanix software has been successfully deployed in
the classroom at three schools with over 300 participating students, showing
promising learning and student engagement results. In this project the I-Corps
team seeks to determine customer needs in those markets where Mechanix may have
the greatest impact in its current form: learning institutions, instructors,
students and providers of educational content. The team also seeks to determine
the alignment of Mechanix with those needs and changes that may be required; and
to determine whether there exist additional markets where this technology may be
applied.