* 1546895
* WORKSHOP:  The Decline in Field Studies:  Proactive Strategies for Essential Training for the Next Generation of Biological Researchers
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2015,12/31/2016
* Thomas Fleischner, Prescott College
* Standard Grant
* prosanta chakrabarty
* 12/31/2016
* USD 39,968.00

At the very time our society struggles to adapt to changing climate, respond to
loss of biodiversity, and respond effectively to other environmental challenges,
the next generations of scientists are increasingly excluded from the primary
laboratory for understanding these issues. Field education, studying real
plants, animals, and landscapes, provides foundational learning for biologists.
But educational opportunities for field study have decreased dramatically in the
past couple decades. This workshop will address this growing crisis by convening
a select group of professionals to clarify reasons for the drastic declines in
field study opportunities, and to formulate specific strategies to remove these
obstacles. This can potentially have far-reaching and critical impacts on
biological sciences training throughout the U.S.and lead to a rebirth of field
study opportunities. Two specific tangible outcomes will emerge from the
workshop: 1) A clearly written white paper which can be widely distributed to
academic institutions and museums, posted on websites, and, 2) a summary article
to be published in a widely-read professional scientific journal. Through these
communications, ideas on how to promote field study will be made readily
available to decision-makers at a wide variety of institutions throughout the
United States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The loss of field studies is a global,
broad-based problem, one that is especially critical to biological sciences
training. This workshop will develop a strategy of "best practices" for
instructors, administrators, and the community of biodiversity scientists, with
the goal of guiding the successful reintegration of field organismal-based
courses in curricula. The workshop will address this educational crisis in two
phases. In the first phase, a select group of participants-- including faculty
and senior administrators from a variety of institutions, and with a range of
experiences, including risk management --will be convened to delineate the
specific obstacles that have discouraged institutions from supporting field
studies, and then outlining specific strategies to overcome these obstacles,
while clarifying best practices. A clearly written white paper will be produced,
for wide dissemination. In the second phase of the workshop, a subset of the
original group will re-gather to write an article for publication in a journal
of wide dissemination.