* 1546719
* RESEARCH-PGR: The Genetics of Highland Adaptation in Maize
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2023
* Jeffrey Ross-Ibarra, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 07/31/2023
* USD 4,078,598.00

Part 1: Non-Technical abstract&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Corn originated
approximately 10,000 years ago in a hot, dry, low-elevation region of southwest
Mexico. While it has since spread globally and today has the greatest global
geographic breadth of 16 staple crops, corn continues to perform poorly in the
cold. However, farmers in various regions do cultivate corn in cool, wet
mountainous regions as high as 12,000 ft above sea level. This project will
identify the genetic changes that allowed corn to adapt to high elevations. The
investigators will compare agronomic and genetic traits of corn varieties
sampled at high elevation with those from nearby lowland regions in field
experiments conducted at high, middle, and lowland sites. These experiments will
reveal the genes underlying high-elevation adaptation and will measure the
repeatability of the genetic changes underlying adaptation. Results from this
investigation will inform the development of cold-hardy corn lines for high-
elevation and high-latitude (e.g. U.S. Corn Belt) regions. Insight as to how
adaptation occurred in highland conditions can also be applied more broadly to
adapting maize to other environmental conditions. This project will foster
collaboration between academics and industry and between the United States and
Mexico, creating numerous opportunities for students, investigators, and farmers
from these countries to interact and share expertise.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part
2: Technical abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The genetic basis of plant adaptation
to local environments remains poorly characterized, despite its relevance to
crop improvement and regional climate. This project seeks to evaluate
environmental adaptation in maize (Zea mays), with focus on adaptation to high
elevation environments in wild and domesticated populations of maize. Highland
and lowland environments differ in a number of features including temperature
and precipitation, and maize adaptation to these environments has involved
agronomically relevant phenotypes. The first objective is to identify
quantitative trait loci for adaptive traits using mapping populations developed
from Mexican and South American maize, a naturally admixed population of
teosinte (i.e., wild maize) and two populations of introgression lines donated
by industry collaborators. This will enable the comparison of the loci
controlling highland traits in distinct geographical regions, across elevations,
and in multiple genetic backgrounds including elite US maize germplasm. The
second objective is to investigate population genetic evidence of selection
through studies of adaptive introgression in maize and teosinte, and divergence
in gene expression between lowland and highland maize. The third objective is to
characterize the functional consequences of an adaptive inversion polymorphism
via phenotypic and transcriptomic evaluation of introgression lines. This basic
research will be complemented by outreach activities including phenotyping
workshops to demonstrate high-throughput field data collection methods, student
exchanges, and farmer field exhibitions in conjunction with a breeding center in
Mexico.