* 1546098
* BIGDATA: F: Learning Big Bayesian Networks
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2020
* Qing Zhou, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 09/30/2020
* USD 919,305.00

A fundamental problem in analyzing big data is to extract and represent the
relations among the huge number of variables in a dataset. For example, in a
genomic dataset, one may want to find out the dependence among a large number of
genetic variations and various disease states. The Bayesian network is a
commonly used class of mathematical models to represent such complex relations
among a collection of variables, with wide applications in many scientific
fields, ranging from the biomedical sciences to the social sciences. The goal of
this project is to develop statistical and machine learning methods to construct
Bayesian networks from big data, where the datasets may contain thousands to
millions of variables. This is a challenging problem, particularly for large
networks, as seen from the fact that state-of-the-art methods can barely handle
thousands of variables. In this project, a novel divide-and-conquer approach
will be developed and implemented as open-source packages for public use. The
PIs will also study the theoretical properties of key components of this
approach. Through seminar organization and educational activities in both
graduate and undergraduate training, the cutting-edge research in this project
will be communicated immediately to a much broader
audience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed approach consists of three main
components: Partition, Estimation and Fusion (PEF). In the partition stage,
spectral clustering will be embedded into an iterative subsampling approach to
efficiently group variables into clusters. In the estimation stage, a few new
methods will be developed to estimate the structure of a Bayesian network for
each cluster of nodes, which serves as a subgraph of the big network. These
methods include convex relaxations for permutations, fast algorithms for large-
scale regularized estimation of the parameters of a Bayesian network, and novel
formulations for discrete data. The final fusion stage will merge subgraphs into
one big Bayesian network via a new method based on multiple-response sparse
regression. Rigorous analysis of the PEF learning strategy for Bayesian networks
under high-dimensional scaling will be conducted to provide theoretical
guarantees for the methods and the algorithms.