* 1546604
* EAGER: Energy-efficient Massive MIMO Processing for Millimeter-wave Communications
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2018
* Zhi Tian, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* akbar sayeed
* 07/31/2018
* USD 244,614.00

Abstract Title: Energy-efficient Massive MIMO Processing for Millimeter-wave
Wireless Communications

Abstract:

To meet the ever-growing demands for high-speed, large-capacity wireless
services, millimeter-wave (mmWave) technology has emerged as a promising option
for next-generation wireless networks. The mmWave systems operate around and
above 30GHz, where the spectrum is less crowded and the available bandwidth is
much wider than that of legacy wireless systems at relatively lower radio
frequencies. On the other hand, the use of such high frequencies incurs severe
channel path loss, which is the dominant factor limiting the coverage and
robustness of mmWave communications. A natural opportunity to cope with this
problem is to adopt massive multiple-input multiple-output (MIMO) in mmWave
transceivers, where very large antenna arrays with hundreds of antenna elements
can be packaged in a miniature size to provide large diversity-multiplexing
gains and hence significantly improved coverage, throughput and robustness
against channel fading. However, as the number of antenna elements increases,
not only the signal acquisition and hardware costs increase drastically, but
also the computational complexity of traditional antenna array processing
techniques becomes prohibitively high. The objective of this research is to
provide key technological innovations in large-scale array processing such that
massive MIMO can be utilized for high-speed mmWave wireless communications at
affordable computational costs. New signal processing techniques will be
developed to perform the key sensing tasks of mmWave massive MIMO transceivers,
including direction of arrival estimation and channel estimation, in an energy-
efficient and robust manner. Solving such computational bottlenecks of massive
MIMO is an essential step toward unleashing the well-appreciated potential of
mmWave technology, which will make available abundant spectrum opportunities for
wireless connectivity in both cellular data services and Internet of things.
Another important goal of this project is to integrate research with education
in effort to enhance the learning experiences for students in the field of
wireless communications.

This project aims to develop an innovative compressive sensing framework to
tackle the computational bottleneck in two important sensing tasks of MIMO
processing: direction-of-arrival estimation for beamforming and spatial
sectorization, and channel estimation for data demodulation. While existing
research seeks strenuously to find affordable solutions to high-dimensional
signal estimation problems over a very large angle or channel space, this
project sets forth an exploratory path that gets around this difficulty by
exploiting the inherent structures of the sensing tasks to reduce the problem
space itself. At the core of this research is a new framework of compressive
covariance sparse sensing (CCSS), which bypasses the intermediate step of
recovering the original signals whenever possible and directly extracts the
useful statistics to effect strong signal compression and efficient feature
extraction at low sampling costs. Based on the CCSS framework, new formulations,
algorithms and sensing mechanisms will be developed to efficiently solve the
direction-of-arrival and channel estimation problems in resource-constrained
mmWave massive MIMO systems, with quantified performance and cost tradeoffs.