* 1546824
* Conference:  SciSIP Conference on Modelling Science, Technology, and Innovation, May 2016
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2016
* Stasa Milojevic, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Maryann Feldman
* 08/31/2016
* USD 48,750.00

Science policy is concerned with the need to allocate resources, both monetary
and human, in an effective way to foster innovation. Advances in computational
power combined with the availability of big data on science and technology
developments create ideal conditions for the advancement of computational
modeling approaches that can be empirically validated and used to understand and
predict future developments in science, technology, and innovation. The
conference will apply a systems-science approach to review mathematical,
statistical, and computational models and discuss the creation of an up-to-date
inventory of methods and tools available to model the future direction of
STI.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This conference will bring together leading experts
from economics, social science, scientometrics and bibliometrics, information
science, physics, and science policy that focus on developing mathematical,
statistical, and computational models of different types (stochastic, agent-
based, epidemics, game-theoretic, network. etc.) to increase our understanding
of the structure and dynamics of science, technology, and innovation. The
conference will invite participation from federal funding, university
administrators and other science policy makers, to help identify potential grand
challenges.&lt;br/&gt;