* 1546993
* EAGER: Cybermanufacturing: Defending Side Channel Attacks in Cyber-Physical Additive Layer Manufacturing Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2018
* Mohammad Al Faruque, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 09/30/2018
* USD 200,000.00

Cyber-physical additive layer manufacturing, e.g., 3D printing, has become a
promising technology for providing cost, time, and space effective solution by
reducing the gap between designers and manufacturers. However, the concern for
the protection of intellectual property is arising in conjunction with the
capabilities of supporting massive innovative designs and rapid prototyping.
Intellectual property in the additive layer manufacturing system consists of: i)
geometric design of an object; ii) attributes of an object; iii) process
information; and iv) machine information. This EArly-concept Grant for
Exploratory Research (EAGER) project seeks to develop defense mechanisms for
detecting malware and counterfeit articles using a variety of signals that are
observed during the manufacturing process including acoustic, temperature,
power, and others. The project is an EAGER because both the uniqueness of the
observed signal signatures, and their utilization in securing the manufacturing
process are high risk with potential for high reward in thwarting
attacks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will demonstrate that during the
life-cycle of the additive layer manufacturing system, the intellectual property
information contained in the cyber domain can be recovered/reconstructed through
attacks occurring during the manufacturing process in the physical domain
through various non-intrusive techniques. It will then focus on creating both
machine-dependent and machine-independent defense mechanisms for avoiding such
an attack. This project will significantly impact US competitiveness over
technology-oriented manufacturing. The attack model will provide feedback to 3D
printer manufacturers and CAD tool designers to build defenses against these new
types of attack. Moreover, it will have a significant societal impact to the
explosively growing maker and crowd-sourcing community in protecting their
intellectual property. In addition, the project's approach can be used in other
manufacturing systems, e.g., CNC machines, manufacturing robots, etc. This is
possibly the very first approach to create defense for additive layer
manufacturing mechanisms against such attacks occurring in the physical domain
to get access to information of the cyber domain. This project has three
specific objectives: 1) It will demonstrate a proof of concept by presenting a
novel attack model constructed using a combination of machine learning, signal
processing, and pattern recognition techniques that utilize the side-channel
information (power, temperature, acoustic, electromagnetic emission) obtained
during the manufacturing process. 2) It will develop a machine-specific defense
mechanism against the attack model for the 3D printer. New techniques to add
additional physical process encryption, e.g. adding extra information to the
G-code to obfuscate the printing process from the attack model between the
G-code and the physical manufacturing process, will be demonstrated. 3) It will
create a new security-aware 3D-printing algorithm for the machine-independent
CAD tools that can protect against such side channel attacks. The 3D-printing
algorithm will slice the STL and generate layer description language (e.g.
G-code) randomly so that for the same 3D object, different instructions will be
sent to the 3D printer and eventually different physical features will be
extracted by the attackers.