* 1546392
* BIGDATA: Collaborative Research: F: From Data Geometries to Information Networks
* CSE,IIS
* 01/01/2016,05/31/2017
* Mauro Maggioni, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 05/31/2017
* USD 500,000.00

Big Data often results from multiple sources, giving collections that contain
multiple, often partial, "views" of the same object, space, or phenomenon from
various observers. Extracting information robustly from such data sets calls for
a joint analysis of a large collection of data sets. The project is developing a
novel geometric framework for modeling, structure detection, and information
extraction from a collection of large related data sets, with an emphasis on the
relationships between data. While this approach clearly applies to data with a
clear geometric character (e.g., objects in images), the work is also applied to
datasets as diverse as computer networks (identifying common structure in
subnets) and Massive Open Online Course homework data (automatically carrying
grader annotations to similar problems in other students'
homeworks).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The novel framework is based on the
construction of maps between the objects under considerations (point clouds,
graphs, images, etc...), and on the analysis of the networks of maps that result
as a way of extracting information, generating latent models for the data, and
transporting or inferring functional / semantic information. These tasks define
a new field of map processing between data sets and require tool sets with new
ideas from functional analysis, non-convex optimization, and homological algebra
in mathematics, and geometric algorithms, machine learning, optimization, and
approximation algorithms in computer science. Sophisticated algorithmic
techniques for attacking the large-scale non-linear optimization problems that
emerge within the framework will also be investigated.