* 1546954
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Ethnographic Research on the Question of Diaspora Among Ukraine's Displaced Crimean Populations
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2016
* Alexander C Diener, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Anna M. Kerttula
* 08/31/2016
* USD 31,494.00

This project is aimed at developing an understanding of identity formation among
internally displaced peoples from Ukraine's Crimean Peninsula following Russia's
annexation of the region in 2014. Since the annexation, thousands of Crimeans
critical of the region's new Russian authorities - particularly ethnic
Ukrainians and indigenous Crimean Tatars - have voluntarily resettled in
mainland Ukraine. As these groups lay down new roots, many have begun referring
to themselves as a "diaspora." Their use of this term is striking, as a diaspora
typically implies migration across international borders and a common ethnic
identity, while displaced Crimeans are ethnically diverse and remain within
their country of citizenship. With the question of diaspora in mind, this
project examines how displaced Crimeans in mainland Ukraine are renegotiating
ethnic, national, and regional identities in the face of new geopolitical
realities. The knowledge generated from this research project will make a
valuable contribution to understandings of the contemporary conflict between
Ukraine and Russia, with important implications for policymakers and social
scientists.

This research project will rely on ethnographic field methods - including
interviews and participant observations - to directly engage with and give voice
to communities of displaced Crimeans in mainland Ukraine. Using the concept of
diaspora to frame experiences of identity (re)construction among displaced
Crimeans serves to problematize the prevailing theoretical assumption that
migrant populations are not diasporic without a common ethnic identity and the
experience of displacement from one nation-state to another. This view excludes
groups that migrate within the borders of a nation-state, despite the fact that
differences of race, ethnicity, language, and culture may vary as much among
populations within nation-states as they do between them. This project
contributes significantly to a more critical understanding of diasporas that
overcomes the "territorial trap," or the over-reliance upon spatialities of the
nation-state to frame, interrogate, or explain social phenomena. This project
will have important implications for the study of diasporas and socio-spatial
identities more generally across the social science, with particularly salient
applications for the study of identity in Ukraine and throughout the post-Soviet
space.