* 1546488
* BIGDATA: F: Models, Algorithms, and Software for Spatial-Relational Networks
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2021
* Ananth Grama, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 09/30/2021
* USD 900,000.00

Many important big-data problems can be modeled as networks in which nodes are
mapped in physical space. To address these problems, the project investigates a
novel network abstraction called a spatial-relational network. This abstraction
targets a broad class of applications with unique big-data challenges, including
financial fraud, epidemiology, and systems engineering. The distinguishing
feature of spatial-relational networks is that the network component models
relationships that correspond to fundamentally non-spatial modes of influence
and information flow, whereas the spatial relationships represent a different
type of heterogeneous interaction. As an example, in the human connectome, edges
correspond to regions of the brain that fire together, whereas spatial proximity
reflects patho-physiological aspects such as the existence of a lesion. This
project aims to develop models, methods, and software for important analysis
problems on spatial-relational networks as well as validate them on a range of
real-world problems. The project enables fundamentally new analytic techniques
in many applications while significantly enhancing the accuracy and efficiency
of analyses techniques in others. These range from novel fraud detection
algorithms in online transactions to study of onset and progression of
neurodegenerative diseases such as Alzheimer's and Parkinson's. Beyond its
research and applications' impact, the project also targets a number of
educational contributions. These include development of a curriculum for data
sciences, online modules on big-data analytics, workshops and tutorials on the
spatial-relational network abstraction at major conferences, and opportunities
for undergraduate research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project establishes the
foundations of spatial-relational networks as a fundamental and scalable big-
data abstraction that enables novel analyses. It aims to derive efficient and
effective computational representations for spatial-networks, high-performance
algorithms for spatial-relational networks, modeling and analysis of dynamic
spatial-relational networks in which the node relations and attributes are
dynamic, but their spatial locations are fixed. Project goals include software
development and comprehensive validation on selected applications in the
analysis of data from the Human Connectome Project, the Allen Brain Atlas, and
location-based social networks.