* 1546869
* RESEARCH-PGR: Adapting Perennial Crops for Climate Change: Graft Transmissible Effects of Rootstocks on Grapevine Shoots
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2023
* Anne Fennell, Saint Louis University
* Continuing Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 08/31/2023
* USD 4,647,589.00

PI: Allison Miller (Saint Louis University)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CoPIs: Daniel
Chitwood (Donald Danforth Plant Science Center), Anne Fennell (South Dakota
State University), Jason Londo (USDA-ARS/ Geneva, NY); Laszlo Kovacs (Missouri
State University-Springfield), and Misha Kwasniewski (University of Missouri-
Columbia);&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Senior Personnel: Qin Ma (South Dakota State
University), Andrew Wyatt (Missouri Botanical Garden), and Peter Cousins (Ernest
&amp; Julio Gallo Winery, Modesto, CA). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;How do long-lived
plants cope with a shifting climate, over seasons, and from year to year? What
are the mechanisms that enable perennial plants to adjust to environmental
changes, and how does the belowground part of the plant contribute to responses
at a whole plant level? In perennial woody crops, including grapevine and most
fruit and nut trees, grafting is a surgical enhancement that splices together
the stem of the shoot system (scion) with the stem of the root system
(rootstock), often joining different genotypes or species into a single plant.
Grafting enables the development, clonal propagation, and distribution of
perennial crops into new and diverse environments by separating breeding efforts
for shoots and roots. This project uses grafted grapevines and genomics to
produce a systems-level understanding of how rootstocks modify scion phenotype
and plasticity. Results have implications for the national and global grape
industry, and woody crops in general, by advancing understanding of the genomic
basis and genetic architecture of the influence of the root system on shoot
system phenotype. Integrated education and outreach include training post-
doctoral, graduate, and undergraduate researchers in rural and urban locations
in Missouri and South Dakota, bolstered by a strong collaborative relationship
with the USDA-ARS Grape Genetics Research Unit and industrial partner Ernest
&amp; Julio Gallo Winery. Related outreach activities addressing sustainable
agriculture, crop evolution, and biodiversity are planned at the Missouri
Botanical Garden and U.S. Botanical Garden. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Clonally
propagated, grafted crop species provide the optimal study system for
understanding the ability of the root system to modulate shoot system phenotypes
across variable climates. Grapevine is an exceptional model for this work with a
sequenced and annotated V. vinifera reference genome, reference transcriptomes
for wild grapevine species, bioinformatic pipelines for SNP discovery and
transcriptome analyses, high-throughput phenotyping methods, and research and
production vineyards in diverse environments. This project focuses on root and
shoot interactions in grapevine leveraging: 1) an existing common garden
research vineyard in Missouri, to analyze inter-annual phenotypic variation in a
common scion growing ungrafted and also grafted to three different rootstocks;
2) commercial vineyards across disparate environments of California, to assay
environmental influences on root-shoot communication; 3) a new segregating
rootstock mapping population replicated in four climatic zones and grafted with
a common scion, to characterize genotype x environment interactions of scion
phenotypes modulated by the root; and 4) academic and industry partnerships, to
conduct extensive interdisciplinary training and outreach. Comprehensive
phenotypic data (RNAseq, physiological, metabolic, and morphological) will be
generated. Given increasing interest in perennial crops as important components
of sustainable agriculture, this project offers a valuable in-depth look at
genetic and environmental bases of phenotypic variation in in long-lived plants,
a fundamental challenge in biology with important applications in crop
improvement. Data generated in this project will provide an unprecedented
opportunity to produce genetic x environment interaction models and systems
biology analysis of the genetic contribution of rootstocks to scion phenotypes.
All data will be made accessible to the public through long-term repositories.