* 1546617
* RESEARCH-PGR: How do plants produce so many diverse metabolites:  A computational and experimental comparative genomics investigation in the Solanaceae
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2022
* Shin-Han Shiu, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Gerald Schoenknecht
* 07/31/2022
* USD 5,307,349.00

Part 1: Non-technical abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Plants are master chemists,
producing thousands of small molecules of varied structures and activities. Some
of these specialized metabolites have well established roles, including
protection from diseases and insects and attraction of beneficial partner
organisms. Some are used by humans as medicines and environmentally safe
pesticides. The metabolic pathways for only a small fraction of these compounds
are well understood, leaving much to learn about how plants produce this
enormous diversity of products. This research will focus on specialized
metabolism in the Solanaceae (nightshade) family, which includes the important
crops tomato, potato, peppers and eggplant and in which a great diversity of
natural products is documented. The overarching goal is to develop computational
and experimental approaches to discover new plant chemicals and to find the
genes that plants use to make small molecules that are valuable for agriculture
and human wellbeing. The project outcomes will expand the understanding of the
biochemical and genetic mechanisms by which plants produce different classes of
specialized metabolites. This research will support breeding and transgenic
approaches to improve specialized metabolite synthesis in crop plants to
increase resistance to disease and insects and enhance crop value; it will also
develop new methods for combining computational and experimental approaches in
the study of metabolism. The project outreach activities include summer research
for undergraduates from under-represented groups, training of faculty for
primarily undergraduate institutions with substantial minority enrollments, and
a summer program for science outreach to
adults.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part 2: Technical
abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The identification of genes involved in
specialized metabolism is of great importance, since changes in these genes
provide a basis for lineage-specific chemical diversity. This project will
provide quantitative assessments of the differences between specialized
metabolism genes and other genes. The predicted portion of the genome devoted to
specialized metabolism within the Solanaceae will be tested using hypothesis-
driven experimental approaches. This analysis of the Solanaceae family, which
includes important crops as well as models in plant ecology and evolution, will
establish a paradigm for computationally predicting and experimentally
validating specialized metabolism-related genes across the plant kingdom. The
project will take advantage of the rapidly increasing plant genome and
transcriptome resources in the Solanaceae to define computationally the
characteristics of genes encoding specialized metabolic enzymes. The
computational approaches will be coupled with analytical chemical methods,
including mass spectrometry and nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy, to
discover specialized metabolites and to guide the identification of candidate
genes encoding enzymes that produce novel metabolites. In vitro protein
biochemistry and functional genomics methods will be employed to validate gene
candidate functions, and to improve the accuracy of the computational methods.
The project outreach activities include summer research for undergraduates from
under-represented groups, training of faculty for primarily undergraduate
institutions with substantial minority enrollments, and a summer program for
science outreach to adults.