* 1546393
* BIGDATA: Collaborative Research: F: Study of a Cyber-Enabled Social Computing Framework for Improving Practice in Online Computing Communities
* CSE,IIS
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2020
* Carolyn Rose, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Wu He
* 12/31/2020
* USD 1,598,501.00

Data science techniques have revolutionized many academic fields and led to
terrific gains in the commercial sector. They have to date been underutilized in
solving critical problems in the US educational system, particularly in
understanding Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (STEM) learning
and learning environments, broadening participation in STEM, and increasing
retention for students traditionally underserved in STEM. The goals of the
Directorate for Education and Human Resources through the Critical Techniques
and Technologies for Advancing Foundations and Applications of Big Data Science
&amp; Engineering (BIGDATA) program are to advance fundamental understanding of
key questions in the field, and catalyze the use of data science in Education
Research. Computing has become an integral part of the practice of in modern
science, technology engineering, and mathematics (STEM) fields. As a result, the
STEM+Computing Partnership (STEM+C) program seeks to integrate the use of
computational approaches in STEM teaching and learning and understand how this
integration can improve STEM learning, engagement, and persistence. In this
proposal, the Principal Investigators (PIs) will examine environments that many
people engage in independently to learn computing, online communities and
massive open online courses (MOOCs). This activity could be very compelling as
people come to these environments because they have personal goals to learn the
material. However, a challenge in these environments is that there is little
support for learning. In addition, these environments are not adaptive to
learners' needs. This project will tackle both of these challenges. The PIs will
first characterize groups of learners to understand their needs and then design
approaches to personalizing the environments based on those
needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs address a need for both learning and
independent online work communities by providing a combined learning work
community. Many authentic production communitites, such as GitHub, do not
provide support for novices who want to learn to contribute. Similarly many
learning communities, such as MOOCs and other online learning environments, do
not provide outlets for learners' products to become authentic. The PIs will
combine data from MOOCs and online communities to discover groups of
participants who behave in similar ways and investigate how to support the needs
of these groups. This will lead to the proposed novel combined learning and work
community that both provides support and offers authentic outlets for work
products that are valued beyond a particular course.