* 1546686
* LTER: LTER5:  Understanding Ecosystem Change in Northeastern Puerto Rico
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2020
* Nicholas Brokaw, University of Puerto Rico-Rio Piedras
* Continuing Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 03/31/2020
* USD 4,000,451.00

This long-term research project in Puerto Rico integrates research, educational
activities, and outreach to broad audiences through examination of responses of
wet tropical forests to disturbances. Development of strategies to manage and
conserve tropical forested ecosystems globally depends critically on
understanding the mechanisms by which these ecosystems respond to natural and
human-induced change. The program will train numerous graduate and undergraduate
students, especially members of underrepresented groups, producing a cadre of
collaborative, multidisciplinary scientists who can link population, community,
and ecosystem approaches to provide a predictive understanding of environmental
change. An active schoolyard program develops K-12 curricula in science and
mathematics throughout Puerto Rico, including a new 'data jam' workshop in which
teachers will use the project's data to investigate basic ecological questions.
The program will engage Puerto Rican high school students and teachers in
educational programs at the El Verde Field Station. To date, 954 teachers and
1662 students have participated in an interactive teaching website, the Journey
to El Yunque. The project collaborates with other large-scale networks including
the National Ecological Observatory Network, the Luquillo Critical Zone
Observatory, the Cloud Forest Research Coordination Network, and the Forest
Global Earth Observatories, strengthening research infrastructure to tackle
future challenges. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Luquillo LTER project will, over
the coming three years, explore the development of novel ecosystems resulting
from the separate and combined effects of increased drought and hurricane
frequencies as these disturbances are mediated by land use legacies. Researchers
predict that novel ecosystems resulting from these altered disturbances will
differ from previous and current ones both structurally and functionally, and
will integrate biogeochemistry, productivity, and population and community
ecology studies to understand these differences. Two new experiments will be
added to ongoing efforts: a stream drought experiment in which stream flow is
reduced by manipulation and a forest through-fall reduction experiment in which
rainfall is manipulated. The stream experiment will manipulate stream flow to
examine the short- and long-term effects of drought on biota and biogeochemical
cycling. The through fall exclusion experiment will determine the impact of
multiple short-term droughts on soil biogeochemistry as well as on microbes,
seedlings, and litter organisms. Results from both manipulations will be
incorporated into models to investigate long-term effects and to evaluate the
feasibility of future large scale manipulations that are logistically
challenging in the forested ecosystems. A novel canopy trimming experiment will
continue to simulate hurricanes in order to examine the effects of changes in
hurricane frequencies and to separate the effects of canopy openness from
deposition of material to the forest floor on forest composition, soil carbon
storage, nutrient dynamics, and forest floor community structure. Results will
test the hypothesis that increased frequency of intense hurricanes will increase
the dominance of shade intolerant species with cascading effects through other
biota and biogeochemistry. This integration of observational and experimental
approaches is powerful because the effects of these disturbances over long time
periods are poorly understood. The potential to gain insight into the mechanisms
whereby these disturbance regimes result in future non-analog ecosystems in
tropical forests is high and will significantly advance understanding of
ecosystem ecology.