* 1546923
* Collaborative Research: RAPID: Nevado del Ruiz Volcano, Colombia:  Enhancing Geodetic Observations and Digital Elevation Models in Response to Recent Activity
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2017
* Glen Mattioli, UNAVCO, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 06/30/2017
* USD 19,977.00

In 1985, a relatively small eruption at Nevado del Ruiz volcano in Colombia
killed approximately 23,000 people in or near the town of Armero. A glacier at
the top of the volcano partially melted, contributing to a large lahar that
moved quickly downslope, inundating the town with large volumes of water mixed
with volcanic ash and rock. Recent activity at Nevado del Ruiz appears similar
to the precursor activity observed in 1985 has local scientists at the Servicio
Geologico Colombiano (SGC), the national geological survey of Colombia and the
investigators on this grant concerned that another destructive lahar event
similar to the 1985 event could initiate in the near future. Unfortunately
despite Colombian government efforts to discourage human settlement in areas
surrounding Nevado del Ruiz that are particularly susceptible to the channeling
of destructive lahars, local Colombians have quickly forgotten the past
destructive potential of this volcano and much development has occurred in at-
risk areas since the 1985 lahar. This grant is congruent with NSFs mission of
promoting the progress of science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Support from this Grant
for Rapid Response Research (RAPID) will enable the development of a high
resolution digital elevation model (DEM) of the Nevado del Ruiz volcano in
Columbia coupled with GPS observations of surface deformation.&lt;br/&gt;The
investigators will employ a University of South Florida owned terrestrial Ku-
band radar, drone-based aerial photogrammetry and Structure from Motion software
to generate a very high resolution DEM that is a necessary input to the new
generation of quantitative lahar models that will inform risk mitigation plans
and will gain better resolution of volcanic edifice surface deformation with an
expanded GPS network surrounding Nevado del Ruiz. The surface deformation
observations can offer clues to pressure changes in the shallow magmatic
plumbing system and help advise early warning decisions. The terrestrial radar
will be used to generate interferograms of the spatial variability of
deformation patterns and changes in the velocity of the capping glacier at
Nevado del Ruiz, that if quickly melted by heat from accelerated volcanic
activity, would be responsible for lahar generation.