* 1546402
* Bilateral NSF/BIO-BBSRC - Linking Cell Growth with Proliferation in the Plant Root Meristem
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2020
* Albrecht von Arnim, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Manju Hingorani
* 07/31/2020
* USD 706,344.00

The goal of this collaborative US/UK project that engages researchers at the
University of Tennessee and the University of London is to better understand how
plants coordinate the biosynthesis (production) of proteins with cell division
as they grow. This is important because plants must carefully integrate
information about available nutrients and their energy supply before deciding
whether or not to invest limited resources into growth and the irreversible
production of new cells. The work will lead to insights into the physiological
and molecular processes that underpin the agricultural productivity of crop
plants and will help to optimize plant function and crop productivity by genetic
improvement. The project will develop the scientific workforce by training
postdoctoral scientists, PhD students, as well as affiliated junior
investigators with advanced multi-disciplinary skills at the interface of
experimental and computational systems biology, skills that are highly portable
in the academic and industrial sectors of the life sciences. Outreach to the
general public will also be performed, in collaboration with an artist that uses
plant life-related themes in her installations.

Protein synthesis (translation) is a major sink for the carbon and nitrogen
compounds that, once assimilated through photosynthesis, drive cell growth and
proliferation. The project seeks to decipher how protein synthesis-driven cell
growth is connected to cell proliferation in meristematic plant cells, using the
root tip of the plant reference species Arabidopsis as an experimental system.
An underlying hypothesis that shall be tested is that growth regulatory
signaling pathways coordinate both the cell cycle and protein synthesis in
response to growth stimulating signals. To this end, cell biological markers of
cell proliferation will be imaged over time in strains harboring genetic lesions
in key signaling pathways. Data on translational efficiency will be collected
using genome-wide techniques in order to identify the targets of translational
regulation in actively growing tissues. Translation data will be fitted to an
emergent computational model of mRNA translation in order to derive biochemical
parameters of translation such as the initiation rate. Finally, a network model
will integrate new and published data to predict cell cycle transitions in
response to the signals that drive cell proliferation and translation. The
project is a collaboration between two experimental labs, who have complementary
expertise in the regulatory processes that underpin cell division and protein
translation. The two teams are joined by two computational investigators, who
likewise contribute complementary expertise in machine learning, statistical
modeling, pattern recognition and dynamic modeling using deterministic and
probabilistic algorithms.

This collaborative US/UK project is supported by the US National Science
Foundation and the UK Biotechnology and Biological Sciences Research Council.