* 1546273
* BIGDATA: Collaborative Research: IA: Hardware and Software for Spike Detection and Sorting in Massively Parallel Electrophysiological Recording Systems for the Brain
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2019
* Andreas Tolias, Baylor College of Medicine
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 09/30/2019
* USD 150,000.00

Understanding how the brain works is arguably one of the most significant
scientific challenges of our time and the focus of the BRAIN initiative. It is
widely believed that neural circuit function is emergent, the result of complex
interactions between constituents with individual neurons forming synaptic
connections with thousands of other neurons. Mapping of these complex circuits
has been virtually impossible because of the reliance on electrophysiological
recordings which sample these networks extremely sparsely. These tools for
extracellular spike recordings are only able to simultaneously record from
several tens to a few hundred neurons. Raw signals from these recording
electrodes are first filtered to remove out-of-band signals. Putative spike
events are then detected and extracted. Finally, these snippets of time-series
event are sorted, typically on the basis of waveform shapes, into clusters. Even
at the very modest bandwidths for these systems, computing systems struggle to
save the data and process the resulting data sets. Scalability of these
measurement techniques by many orders of magnitude in recording density and
channels will be essential to future progress in understanding neuron circuits.

This project is exploiting emerging electrophysiological recording systems in
which the electrode (and channel) count is increased by almost three orders of
magnitude over conventional systems with data bandwidths exceeding 1GB/sec. To
handle these data bandwidths and resulting data volumes and deliver scalability,
this project will develop dedicated hardware and associated algorithms for spike
detection and sorting that allow these tasks to be performed in real-time in
close proximity to the recording system. Compression by more than three orders
of magnitude is possible by these means by taking advantage of the special
spatiotemporal local structure in these data sets; by exploiting strong prior
information about the spiking signal and reducing the dimensionality of the
problem accordingly; and by adapting and extending modern scalable nonparametric
Bayesian inference methods. In addition to providing important new tools for
neuroscience, the tools developed here for scalable real-time event detection
and annotation have broad applicability to other spatiotemporal data sets (or
more generally, any data set comprising multiple streams of data, in which the
streams could involve different data modalities) in which objects of interest
are spatially and temporally localized with fixed spatial footprints. Examples
abound in cell and molecular biology, particle and solid-state physics,
financial monitoring, monitoring of power networks, and sensor networks.