* 1546969
* Collaborative Research: EARS: Interference mitigation by stream decomposition enabled by liquid-metal adaptive antennas
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2019
* Aria Nosratinia, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 08/31/2019
* USD 197,782.00

Interference between users is one of the main impediments for the growth of
wireless networks such as the ones used by mobile phones. Developing practical
methods to mitigate interference is critical for the future of wireless
technology. The proposed research addresses the problem of interference, and
therefore has a large potential impact on economic growth as well as quality of
life. This project has two interconnected components. First, based on recent
information theory results, communication streams will be decomposed into many
small streams; these can be managed, combined, and split to combat interference.
Second, adaptive liquid-metal antennas will be investigated for interference
mitigation. As liquid metals can be made to change their physical shape, they
can enable antennas that can be adjusted to reduce interference. Research and
education for this project will be tightly integrated through Vertically
Integrated Projects that involve students ranging from PhD students to
sophomore-level undergraduates, including under-represented minority and female
students. The results of this research will be disseminated widely through the
web, technical conferences, and seminars. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Exciting
discoveries in recent years have pushed the boundaries of understanding
interference. The theoretical capacity of interference channels in several
operating modes has been established, and new theoretical techniques such as
interference alignment have been discovered. However, many practical challenges
stand in the way of realizing these promising techniques. This project has two
interconnected components for developing interference-mitigation techniques for
wireless networks that create a new direction in interference mitigation aimed
at practicality and wide applicability. The first component of the project
decomposes the communication stream into "microstreams" to fit the transmissions
into the contours of available opportunities, in a manner that improves rates
while limiting the damage of interference. The broad principle of breaking
communication into many small pieces has a long and distinguished pedigree,
including ARQ in the data link layer and TCP/IP in higher layers. The proposed
research introduces a novel manifestation of this time-tested principle to
produce new approaches that combat interference in the physical layer. The
second component of the project investigates adaptive liquid-metal antennas that
generate radiation patterns to avoid interference in a manner not possible with
signal processing alone; in particular their unique flexibility helps to avoid
"singular" values of channel gains that prevent interference mitigation. The
unique strengths of liquid-metal antennas are perfectly showcased in this
application, because the exact manner of microstream combining can have a strong
effect on performance, and this is where liquid-metal antennas promise to have a
strong impact. The proposed activity will play an important role in the
advancement of knowledge and understanding in the field of wireless
interference. The project will develop practical methods for coding and decoding
under interference. Furthermore, it will lead to a basic understanding of how
liquid-metal antennas can affect capacity in interference networks.