* 1546374
* The impact of a large episodic disturbance on an invasive (outbreak) coral: Will Typhoon Maysak promote or suppress an invasive Montipora sp. Coral on reefs of Ulithi, Micronesia
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2018
* Avigdor Abelson, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 07/31/2018
* USD 165,540.00

Ulithi Atoll, in the Federated States of Micronesia, is the fourth largest Atoll
in the world, and was an important staging area for the US Navy 3rd fleet during
WWII. The Atoll contains dynamic coral reefs, and communities of people that
depend on them. Ulithi has been subjected to a number of human and natural
disturbances, including Typhoon Ophelia that hit in 1960. Local fishermen
believe that this event started an invasion process by a 'weedy' invasive coral
that covers reefs, and removes essential habitat for fish and octopus,
potentially threatening these ecosystems. Four years ago, local people invited
the investigators to Ulithi to study the reefs and work together to enhance
fisheries and reef health. The investigators sequenced the invading coral DNA
and identified it as a new species of Montipora. However, its invasion dynamics
remain a mystery. In early April 2015, Ulithi was hit again by a major
disturbance: super Typhoon Maysak. The Typhoon destroyed most structures on the
island, and removed much of the coral formations visible from shore. Using their
baseline data of the past four years, the investigators, along with a team of
students, seek to map the effect of the Typhoon on the invasive Montipora. Using
genomic sequencing, they hope to better understand the role of Typhoon Maysak on
the establishment and dispersal of this invasive coral. This project provides a
unique opportunity to study the effects of a rare event, and invasion processes,
and to broadly disseminate findings, raising awareness about coral reefs,
climate change, and unique human-natural coupled systems. Their experiences will
be made available on social media and the project website
onepeopleonereef.ucsc.edu, as well as through NSF.

Super typhoon Maysak struck Ulithi Atoll on March 31, 2015, where an
invasive/outbreak species of Montipora has affected shallow coral reefs over at
least the last 50 years. The research the investigators propose will elucidate
the effects of this rare but high impact event on a biological invasion using
genomics and reef sampling to investigate Micronesian reefs that were dominated
by Montipora before the typhoon, and more 'pristine' reefs where Montipora was
absent or in low densities. The investigators will be relating these findings to
existing data that were collected from these sites over the past four years.
These studies will advance our understanding of biological invasions in coral
reef systems, explore the unusual occurrence of a coral species as an outbreak
organism, and contribute to our knowledge of how high impact, episodic
disturbances - likely to increase in frequency with the advance of global
climate change - may affect threated coral reef ecosystems world-wide.