* 1546411
* BIGDATA: F: IA: Robust Convolutional Modeling for Massive-Scale Electron Microscopy Data
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2018
* Abhay Pasupathy, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 09/30/2018
* USD 889,719.00

Microscopy is a pillar of modern science, which enables us to understand,
inspect and improve on nature. While the technology of modern microscopes has
progressed by leaps and bounds in the past decades, the methods used by
microscopists to analyze data remain primitive. Common to new and emerging
modalities of microscopy is the generation of massive, multi-dimensional data
sets. This project develops fundamental analysis tools to extract basic motifs
from these datasets; in particular, from data produced by scanning tunneling
microscopes. These analysis tools will transform microscopy imaging by improving
the quality and statistical significance of atomic-scale observations of
materials. Key analysis goals that will be addressed include guarantees that
algorithms produce models which accurately reflect the physics of the material
of interest, and that algorithms perform reliably on practical data which may
contain noise and errors. Key experimental goals include the generation of large
scale data sets from multiple microscopy modalities which will be used to test
and extend the analysis tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project leverages recent
advances in high-dimensional nonconvex optimization to address fundamental
challenges in convolutional data modeling, the problem of modeling data as
superpositions of translated motifs. Because the goal is to produce accurate
information about novel materials whose properties are not yet understood, the
investigators seek algorithms which exhibit (i) guaranteed performance,(ii)
robustness to gross errors and (iii) scalability to massive, high-dimensional
datasets. Building on recent progress in dictionary learning, the investigators
study the properties of efficient methods for recovering models with one or more
motifs. They seek highly scalable algorithms for these problems, using
Riemannian optimization and active set methods. They study variants which are
robust to commonly occurring gross errors, including pixel and scanline
corruption, and contrast variations. The algorithms are applied to study
materials for which previous analysis methodologies fail, including materials
with multiple types of defects, quasiparticle interference, and high temperature
superconductors. For each of these materials, high resolution scanning tunneling
microscopy and spectroscopic imaging will be performed to produce large-scale,
multidimensional data sets. Data sets on well-studied materials will be used to
test and verify analysis algorithms, and the application of these algorithms to
data sets on novel materials will be used to transform our understanding of the
electronic structure of complex materials. Data sets on other microscopy
modalities will also be obtained to generalize analysis tools to multiple scales
in space, time and energy.