* 1546510
* BIGDATA: F: BCC: Data driven optimization of classroom learning activities
* EHR,DGE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Zoran Popovic, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Finbarr Sloane
* 08/31/2020
* USD 1,499,992.00

One of the most exciting potential benefits of big data is that it will enable
better decision making in applications such as teaching software, patient
treatment plans, and user personalization. In many complex domains involving
people, the number of descriptions of a situation and the number of potential
decisions that can be made to improve upon the previous situation is enormous.
The sheer size of this problem implies that careful selections of additional
data must be made to improve decision making. In health, these decisions could
involve a course of treatment; in learning these could involve remediations such
as additional practice, in personalization it could involve improved choices for
consumers. This proposal will develop new algorithms that are especially
effective in coming to close to optimal decisions
quickly.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will aim to develop novel algorithms
that specifically address these needs, and thus enable data intensive systems to
be efficiently used towards solving the decision making process. Since novel
algorithmic methods of this kind are best developed, refined and tested on a
real domain, the project will focus on the educational domain of classroom
learning activities that optimize learning outcomes. However, the algorithms
will be applicable to numerous other decision making domains. Specifically the
project will focus on finding algorithmic solutions
for:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(1) Large-scale deployment and data collection of
lesson enactments in thousands of classrooms worldwide.&lt;br/&gt;(2) Data-
driven methods to efficiently determine the likely most important parameters of
the classroom decision making process.&lt;br/&gt;(3) The development of novel
reinforcement learning algorithms with a focus on efficient use of data to
rapidly converge towards beneficial policies.&lt;br/&gt;(4) Using data to
determine the key model and decision parameter space bottlenecks, which, if
removed, could significantly&lt;br/&gt;improve the outcomes of the Reinforcement
Learning process. The efficacy of the optimized policy will be determined by the
improvement of classroom learning performance at scale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
methods that will be developed by this project are general enough to be directly
applicable to domains of patient treatment, or any other domain that involves
unknown model dynamics and decision space that involves people. The
Reinforcement Learning methods will similarly find practical use in situations
where a decision policy is deployed in a large number of instances
asynchronously and in other high-risk settings where reducing over-exploration
as much as possible is of high importance.