* 1546290
* BIGDATA: Collaborative Research: F: Making Big Data Accessible on Personal Devices: Big Network Algorithms, External Memory, and Data Streams
* CSE,IIS
* 12/01/2015,11/30/2020
* Erik Demaine, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 11/30/2020
* USD 500,000.00

Big networks are constantly growing in both size and relevance: from social
networks such as Facebook and Twitter, to brain networks, gene regulatory
networks, and health/disease networks.  The traditional approach to analyzing
such big datasets is to use powerful supercomputers (clusters), ideally large
enough to store the data in main memory.  The downsides to this approach are
that many potential users of big data lack such powerful computational resources
(e.g. point-of-sale Bitcoin blockchain analysis), and it can be difficult to
solve unexpected problems within such a large infrastructure (e.g. image
analysis after the Boston Marathon Bombing).  The algorithms developed in this
project will enable the processing of huge datasets on computational devices
with a limited amount of fast memory, connected to a relatively slow external
data source.

This project will investigate the extent to which complex network analysis can
be performed on a single computer, even a mobile device such as a smartphone. To
this end, the project will develop external-memory, cache-oblivious, and
streaming algorithms for analyzing and understanding big network data, even on
relatively weak computational devices.  These algorithms will make big data
analysis accessible to a much broader audience, enabling new applications. The
approach uniquely combines advanced algorithmic techniques, including
approximation algorithms, parameterized algorithms, graph algorithms, graph
structure theory, and computational geometry, to solve real-world problems on
big networks.