* 1546298
* EAGER: Investigating Seasonal and Interannual Variability of Central Asia Paleo-Hydroclimate
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2017
* Syee Weldeab, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 06/30/2017
* USD 55,237.00

This award uses funds, under the auspices of the EArly-concept Grants for
Exploratory Research (EAGER) program, for a project aimed at establishing a
Uranium-Thorium based age model for stalagmites from Kyrgyzstan, Central Asia,
generating preliminary proxy data, and calibrating environmental proxies against
drip water chemistry from caves.

The overall science goal is to use the results of this research to help improve
the understanding of mid-latitude hydroclimate response to rapid climate changes
on a variety of timescales. The project also has an educational goal of
providing training for two Hispanic-American undergraduate students who are
already working in the researcher's lab as research assistants.

Specifically, project funds will support several analyses such as cave drip
water chemistry, trace elements, fluorescence emission and intensity, delta
18-Oxygen and delta 13-Carbon, and stalagmite carbonate mineralogy as well as
development of a U-Th based age model and the collection of cave drip waters.

The project activities fit well into the potentially transformative, high-risk,
and exploratory nature of the EAGER program because they are inherently
interdisciplinary and rely on untested ideas and techniques. The analytical
activities of the study are novel and thus would likely not fare well in the
regular merit review process, especially without some preliminary data.

If successful, this project could have a significant impact on the field of
paleoclimatology by providing a chronology and time series from a new natural
data archive in an area sensitive to hydrologic change on varying timescales.
The project could lead to novel and transformative ways to explore hydroclimate
studies in collaboration with other science disciplines.