* 1546711
* EAGER: Fact-Gathering and Planning for a National-Scale Cyberpractitioner Program
* CSE,OAC
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2016
* Stephen Wolff, INTERNET2
* Standard Grant
* Sushil K Prasad
* 12/31/2016
* USD 41,500.00

Workforce development and career pathways of non-faculty IT professionals,
scientists, and engineers who are in the support role of the computation and
data-enabled scientific research and development enterprises at various
universities, supercomputing and other centers and national laboratories are
issues of national importance. This project proposes a workshop and related set
of activities to explore and report on the status, career pathways, training,
and growth opportunities of this community of "cyber-practitioners." The
workshop's results will impact the community itself, and those communities of
faculty members, students, domain scientists and administrators it interfaces
with. This project will help map the contemporary landscape of cyber-
practitioner skills and occupations, help identify professional development
opportunities, and suggest better ways of integration into the university
structures and other administrative units relevant to this community.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop will bring together a diverse set of
stakeholders including non-faculty IT and scientific professionals from
universities, computing centers including supercomputing centers and programs
such as XSEDE, campus champions, and from national laboratories, and
representatives from faculty in computational sciences, and university
administration. The project will carry out a career-path analysis survey to
document cyber-practitioner career progressions, and prepare a skills inventory
of their soft and hard skills. The workshop intends to define the cyber-
practitioner profession and address questions pertaining to entry into and exit
from the profession, career challenges, typical modes of training and
preparations, and growth options and fit within university and other relevant
administrative structures.