* 1546428
* BIGDATA: IA: Exploring Analysis of Environment and Health Through Multiple Alternative Clustering
* CSE,IIS
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2020
* David Kaeli, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 12/31/2020
* USD 876,648.00

While many disciplines have become increasingly exploratory given that large-
scale and multi-source data collection has become prevalent, we find that
volumes of data that were carefully collected and studied to answer project-
specific questions, are neglected and unstudied, even if they hold key answers
to tomorrow's questions. This project addresses this challenge by developing
novel data analysis, alternative clustering, data visualization and acceleration
solutions to enable exploration and identification of connections hidden in
diverse data sets, leading to new discoveries and knowledge. In particular, the
data analysis algorithms will be applied to a large dataset taken from an
ongoing National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences (NIEHS) project that
is assessing the impact of water-borne pollutants on premature birth rates in
Puerto Rico. The exploratory analysis will focus on discovering the unknown
underlying environmental factors and processes that may more broadly impact
health and the environment. As such, this study promotes progress in data
science, environmental science and health. Note that this project will address
women?s health in an under-served population. In addition, this project supports
education through graduate research support, development of inter-disciplinary
tutorials, and creation of a new undergraduate class that addresses the
intersection between machine learning approaches and parallel
computing.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The environmental health data comprises of
multiple heterogeneous sources with varying temporal and spatial resolutions:
mass spectrometer readings to identify targeted and non-targeted compounds in
well and tap water, participant surveys detailing personal care and household
products use in the home, and analyzed placental, blood and urine samples. Such
complex data challenges traditional clustering algorithms in the following ways.
The first challenge is in defining the appropriate similarity measure for each
type of data source. The second step involves how to integrate information from
these multiple sources for clustering. The third challenge is that in
exploratory analysis, the solution found may not be what the analyst is looking
for. How can one discover alternative solutions given this knowledge? In real
world applications, data can often be interpreted in many different ways.
However, existing multi-source fusion methods can only find a single solution.
This study will develop new alternative clustering approaches, exploring
multiple heterogeneous information sources. The project will deliver both visual
and scalable solutions to enable sifting through the mountains of data
efficiently. Moreover, the project will produce parallel libraries within Spark,
and demonstrate the power of these new methods to this environmental health
application.