* 1546908
* Graduate Student Travel Support Program for the 2015 V.M. Goldschmidt Conference in Prague, Czech Republic, August 16-21, 2015
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2016
* Carla Koretsky, The Geochemical Society
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 07/31/2016
* USD 20,000.00

This award will support participation by doctoral students in the 2015V.M.
Goldschmidt Conference in Prague, Czech Republic, during August 16-21, 2015.
This travel grant will enable the best and brightest students from the US and US
Territories, students who might otherwise be unable to attend due to financial
constraints at their home institutions, to benefit from all the advantages this
meeting has to offer at this turning point in their respective careers. The
Goldschmidt conference is the premier venue for geochemistry and the chosen
students will be exposed to the latest advances in the field of geochemistry.
The conference offers an excellent opportunity for networking of students who
are close to graduation and will be entering the workforce. In addition to oral
and poster presentation in 25 theme sessions, students can participate in field
trips and workshops associated with the
conference.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Applications will be collected from the
students, then reviewed and ranked by a volunteer committee of scientists. The
Geochemical Society is contributing $10,000 so that a total of 24 students, who
are presenting their work at the conference, will receive $1,250 each toward
travel expenses. Considerations for the award are the preparation of the
application package, the demonstrated need for the funds, the selection of a
diverse pool of applicants based on gender, sex, representation and geographical
distribution. Every effort is made to encourage underrepresented minorities and
people with disabilities to apply for funding.