* 1546689
* EARS: Machine Learning and Social Protocols for Enhancing Spectrum Access for Wireless Communications
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2019
* Janne Lindqvist, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Sprintson
* 09/30/2019
* USD 300,000.00

Radio spectrum is a scarce resource that needs to be managed. Towards this end,
this project designs, implements and studies novel protocols for enhancing
access to radio spectrum by taking advantage of the fundamentals of human
behavior. It produces technologies, theories, and guidelines for protocols that
are expected to significantly improve the efficiency of spectrum access. This
may lead to substantial societal impact by allowing more work to be done with
the same resources. Success will also benefit the environment by limiting the
infrastructure needed for the required data traffic; both energy and
infrastructure investment can be minimized. Further, the project creates a model
of human behavior in a specific technical context that can serve as a basis for
similar projects in other technology areas involving resource optimization. The
project creates anonymized datasets, and tools to analyze human and wireless
behavior, all of which will be distributed to the general public. This project
has important educational and training benefits at high school, undergraduate
and graduate levels, including undergraduate research prototyping projects, and
new graduate-level courses and seminars. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
interdisciplinary project applies and develops expertise from areas of social
computing, machine learning, wireless technology, security engineering, physical
analogs, mobile systems, and user-centered design. The project implements and
deploys a system that enables efficient bandwidth sharing with machine learning
and social protocols that goes beyond what is possible with technology alone.
Social protocols are cooperative yet discretionary methods that allow to users
distribute access more fairly using inherently natural decision-making processes
as opposed to externally imposed ones. The project consists of three major
activities: (1) study the main approaches to social protocols, including
persuasive computing, clinical behavior change theories, and micro-tasks; (2)
develop a system that observes users trying to access the network and
facilitates control rules that allow maximum value to users in the most
transparent way; and (3) deploy these social protocols and the system in live
networks to evaluate the approaches in real-life settings.