* 1546259
* BIGDATA: Collaborative Research: IA: Population Reproduction of Poverty at Birth from Surveys, Censuses, and Birth Registrations
* CSE,IIS
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2020
* Michael Rendall, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 12/31/2020
* USD 842,390.00

The potential for upward mobility from one generation to the next is fundamental
to the wellbeing of a democratic society, and to that society's long-term
economic productivity. Poverty at birth is a condition affecting more than 1 in
4 American children. It is a critical barrier to children's subsequent
development and life chances, and therefore to breaking intergenerational cycles
of disadvantage. Both mother's and father's characteristics contribute to the
chance that a child will be born into poverty. Therefore it is important to
incorporate both the mother and father into the scientific modeling of the
experience of poverty at birth from one generation to the next. Existing data
and methods do not allow for this modeling in representative samples of the U.S.
population, especially as it evolves as an increasingly multi-ethnic society.
Limited data are collected on the characteristics of every birth in the United
States. Limited additional data on all individuals and their households are
collected every 10 years in the Census. Larger amounts of data per individual
and household are collected every year from random samples that are
representative of the U.S. population. These samples include the large-scale
American Community Survey and numerous medium- and small-scale sample surveys.
This research develops and evaluates statistical estimation and simulation
methods to combine data from all these sources to answer questions about
intergenerational mobility. The research will answer questions about the degree
of persistence of poverty at birth from one generation to the next across
different race and ethnic groups, and about the roles of education and family
formation in creating upward mobility versus persistence of disadvantage. Open-
source, user-friendly software for the statistical methods developed in the
project will be made available to researchers. The project also develops
graduate students' skills in Big Data methods in statistics and the social
sciences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has as its goal the development of a
transformative, Big Data approach to exploiting the rich "traditional" data
sources to build social-scientific theory in a statistically-rigorous and
empirically-comprehensive way. In no single nationally-representative data
source is poverty at birth observed for the mother-father-child triad. The
triad's poverty statuses at each one's birth are instead linked in a model that
simulates four connected processes: (1) educational progress predicted from the
birth conditions of household poverty and parents' education, race, ethnicity,
and immigrant statuses; (2) couple formation and dissolution; (3) couple
fertility and unpartnered women's fertility; and (4) household poverty when
their own children are born. The "Big Data" of this project consist of more than
100 million births, combined with census, microcensus, large-scale cross-
sectional survey, and medium-scale and smaller-scale longitudinal survey data
sources that together include millions of years of exposure to schooling, to
partner-matching, and to partnered and (co-residentially) unpartnered births.
These multiple sources of data of the study, unlike in many Big Data
applications, are all either complete enumerations or probability samples of a
well-specified population. The project develops combined-survey and combined
population-and-survey estimation methods to estimate with enhanced precision the
individual behavioral parameters of the process, and develops a simulation-
modeling approach to generating inference about causal associations that emerge
from the four connected processes, integrating the multiple sources of
uncertainty about each component process. Results and methodological advances
will be disseminated to the scholarly community through presentations and peer-
reviewed journal articles. Additional, broader dissemination will occur through
project investigator contact with the news media and other forums for engagement
with the broader policy community about the project results and their
significance.