* 1546751
* I-Corps:  Transforming the Web to Support New Ideas: Beyond the Feed and the Board
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2015,12/31/2015
* Andruid Kerne, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 12/31/2015
* USD 50,000.00

Web curation is a popular online activity people engage in to help them
understand the digital content they encounter. Common techniques for doing this
include bookmarks, documents, slides, blogs, boards, and social media feeds.
However, these forms are linear and thus, restrictive. Web content is highly
interconnected and dynamic. The proposed technology, IdeaMâché, provides people
with easy and powerful tools that facilitate collecting, organizing, and
presenting digital content in new ways which allow them to express relationships
and synthesize ideas. IdeaMâché has the potential to transform how people
interact with and think about their digital content. It is accessible to users
of personal computers and mobile devices with web access. Students, educators,
researchers, businesses, and anyone who works with information can benefit from
our approach to discovering, assembling, learning from, and thinking about
information online. The proposed innovation has the potential to bring
expressive power to more people in diverse contexts, supporting learning and
innovation, and advancing society?s well-being. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This team
has developed a cloud-based, interactive curation environment for gathering,
assembling, annotating, and exhibiting digital content. Its unique value is
derived through a powerful free-form and expressive medium of curation. It
surpasses the static and constricting representations of PowerPoint slides,
Pinterest boards, and Facebook feeds. Expected significant outcomes of the
proposed work include: a free-form medium of curation that stimulates critical,
associational, and creative thinking, support for spatial and visual
transformations to help users juxtapose and synthesize emergent ideas through
clippings and annotations, a zoomable user interface that makes use of cognitive
chunking in order to support the meaningful assembly of large amounts of
content, a spontaneous gathering interface that uses direct manipulation
clipping to automatically capture contextual and personalized metadata, and the
integrated exhibition and sharing of these curations in popular social media.
The team hypothesizes that the proposed new technology will mitigate cognitive
load, reduce effort, and provide expressive power for gathering, organizing, and
exhibiting information. IdeaMâché has already been fruitfully used by over 4,000
students, spanning 11 course offerings in 5 departments, at Texas A&amp;M
University and Prairie View A&amp;M. In order to help demonstrate the commercial
potential of IdeaMâché during the I-Corps process the team will focus on
improving areas that will provide greatest impact to potential customers. This
includes improving the web presentation of IdeaMâché, expanding its social media
integration, and allowing IdeaMâché web curations to be embedded in other web
pages.