* 1546638
* EAGER: Secondary foundation species as drivers of ecosystem resilience
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2015,11/30/2018
* Christine Angelini, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 11/30/2018
* USD 156,458.00

Foundation species, such as corals, kelp, and conifer trees, are dominant,
structure-forming organisms that are often the focus of management because they
exert powerful control over all other plants and animals in the ecosystem and
the regulation of ecosystem services. Secondary foundation species are dependent
on foundation species and by further affecting biodiversity and the microclimate
can help maintain biological productivity, chemical balances, and other
ecosystem functions at higher levels than those maintained by foundation species
alone. Theory predicts that ecosystems that support high biodiversity and
functioning, like those structured by foundation and secondary foundation
species, should be especially resilient to environmental stresses, like
droughts, heat spells and disease outbreaks, that might otherwise drive
ecosystems to collapse. This project uses salt marshes on the Georgia coast as a
model ecosystem to test these theories. These marshes are structured by a
foundation species, cordgrass, with clusters of ribbed mussels as secondary
foundation species. An experiment in actual marshes will be conducted to help
determine whether an overlap of mussels within cordgrass increases resistance to
or recovery from drought and grazing by snails, two stresses that have acted
together to kill more than 250,000 acres of cordgrass here over the last twenty
years. One PhD student from the University of Florida will participate in this
project along with two undergraduate students. Outreach will be through
participation of the investigator in an after-school summer program for K-5
girls, a spring-break program for 7-8th grade girls, and a public school science
teachers program. The results will also be used for designing new approaches to
managing and conserving ecosystems that optimize the benefits of multiple
foundation species.

Over 18 months, the researchers will use rain and tide exclusion structures and
snail inclusion cages to manipulate drought and snail grazing in plots that
contain aggregations of 0, 40 or 80 mussels to test their hypothesis that the
level of resistance and rate of recovery of eight, distinct ecosystem functions
and two indices of salt marsh multifunctionality to these stressors increase
with increasing numbers of mussels. In addition, they will measure five of the
same ecosystem functions in aggregations that vary in size at sites distributed
from Florida to North Carolina to investigate if mussels enhance salt marsh
resilience to natural fluctuations in environmental stress across this region.
In analyzing changes in invertebrate communities, soil conditions, grazing
intensity, and ecosystem functions over time, this project will expose the
ecological and biogeochemical mechanisms by which this secondary foundation
species may mediate resilience and to identify whether larger aggregations
provide more protection against these stressors than smaller aggregations within
salt marsh landscapes. As a result, this experiment and survey will produce
information critical to evaluating if hierarchical interactions among foundation
and secondary foundation species should be incorporated in our conceptual
understanding of forces that regulate biodiversity, ecosystem functioning, and
resilience.