* 1546965
* HBCU RISE: Design of Nanostructures for Energy efficient Devices
* EDU,EES
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2020
* Matthew Edwards, Alabama A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Victor Santiago
* 03/31/2020
* USD 999,866.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities Research Infrastructure for
Science and Engineering (HBCU-RISE) activity within the Centers of Research
Excellence in Science and Technology (CREST) program supports the development of
research capability at HBCUs that offer doctoral degrees in science and
engineering disciplines. HBCU-RISE projects have a direct connection to the
long-term plans of the host department(s) and the institutional mission, and
plans for expanding institutional research capacity as well as increasing the
production of doctoral students in science and engineering. With support from
the National Science Foundation, Alabama A&amp;M University aims to address the
energy crisis by developing energy efficient devices and power generators.
Alabama A&amp;M University will train at least four graduate and two
undergraduate students, and a total six K-12 teachers and twelve secondary
school students. This project will increase the number of Ph.D. students at
Alabama A&amp;M University by 30%. This project has the potential to contribute
significantly to the pool of minority students trained in energy harvesting and
nanoscience that is vital to the nation's energy
infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research involves the design
of nanostructures and the fabrication of energy efficient devices for white
light sources, thermoelectric power generators, and energy harvesters from
ambient sources. The research objectives include: 1) improving infrastructure in
Optics and Materials Science research; 2) designing nanostructured glasses with
enhanced luminescence properties and demonstrating bright white light emission
under low power diode laser excitation; 3) developing nano-structured multilayer
and/or single layer Thermoelectric (TE) devices and TE waveguides for high
temperatures applications; 4) fabricating and characterizing nanocomposite
films; and 5) designing piezoelectric/pyroelectric generator system and
fabricating cantilever and stack harvesters to demonstrate proof of concept.
This research will enable Alabama A&amp;M University to: (1) design efficient
diode pumped white light sources and laser materials, which are free from
pollution; (2) design more efficient thermoelectric power generators; and (3)
develop clean energy sources. This project will expand the scientific literacy
of all citizens on issues related to NSF's mission, scientific achievement, and
technological advancements.