* 1546806
* Research-PGR: Gene Regulatory Networks Required to Make a Soybean Seed
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2024
* John Harada, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Gerald Schoenknecht
* 08/31/2024
* USD 5,550,360.00

During the next 50 years we will need to produce more food than in the entire
history of humankind on a decreasing amount of land for agriculture. A major
challenge for the 21st century, therefore, is to increase the yields of major
crop plants, such as soybean, using state-of-the-art genetic technologies in
order to increase food production using the limited amount of land available for
growing crops. Seeds represent a major source of food for human and animal
consumption. The experiments in this project will investigate seed
differentiation in higher plants. The long-term objective of this project is to
use state-of-the-art genomic technologies to uncover the gene regulatory
networks, or DNA control circuits, required to "make a seed." There are several
reasons that support the selection of soybean for this study. Soybean seeds are
one of the largest sources of protein feed and vegetable oil in the world,
providing $30 billion annually in farm value to the U.S. Soybean seeds are
uniquely suited to study the basic processes controlling seed development.
Finally, there are enormous genetic resources for soybeans that will facilitate
progress, including the availability of its entire DNA sequence. Undergraduates
majoring in both science and humanities from three universities, including a
historically African-American university, will also participate in this project
in order to learn first-hand about the "excitement of scientific discovery" and
the role crop genetic engineering plays in society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
goal of this project is to identify the gene regulatory networks that are
responsible for controlling the differentiation and function of major soybean
seed regions and subregions throughout development- including the embryo,
endosperm, and seed coat. Chip-Seq experiments will be used to identify
downstream gene targets and cognate DNA control elements of transcription
factors (TFs) that are specific for each seed region and subregion from
fertilization through maturation. Bioinformatic approaches will be used to
construct regulatory networks that guide and control specific seed functions
spatially during development. SELEX-Seq experiments will complement the Chip-Seq
studies by identifying the DNA binding motifs for each region- and subregion-
specific TF in vitro. Functional studies using a seed protoplast system will be
used to perturb and validate TF gene targets identified with Chip-Seq in vivo.
The significance of these experiments is that they will provide new insights
into the gene circuits and cis-control modules that are important for "making a
soybean seed." By understanding the DNA "wiring" required for the establishment
of seed form and function, novel approaches can be designed for increasing seed
yield and, therefore, food production.