* 1546607
* EAGER: Quantum Transition State Theory for Electronically Nonadiabatic Processes
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2017
* Nandini Ananth, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Evelyn Goldfield
* 06/30/2017
* USD 240,000.00

With this EAGER award, the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods
Program in the Chemistry Division is supporting Professor Nandini Ananth at
Cornell University to develop models that describe processes where quantum
mechanics is important for understanding the dynamics of complex chemical and
physical systems. Characterizing chemical processes by understanding
interactions at a sub-atomic level and by quantifying reaction rates is central
to our understanding of chemistry, physics and biology. The introduction of
classical transition state theory (TST) revolutionized our understanding of
chemical reactions, because it allowed the efficient calculation of reaction
rates for large systems in which it is not possible to do exact, detailed
quantum mechanical calculations. Despite its many successes this theory cannot
correctly describe processes where quantum mechanical behavior plays an
important role. Recently, a quantum TST (QTST) was derived that incorporates
quantum effects into formalism that resemble classical TST. In this work, Ananth
and her coworkers are working to extend the QTST to a fundamentally important
class of reactions for which it is currently inapplicable - electron and energy
transfer processes. Developing such a theory could provide unprecedented
insights into the mechanism of complex photo-induced chemical
reactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are two significant technical challenges
that must be met in extending QTST to electron and energy transfer processes.
First, the discrete electronic states of the quantum system must be replaced
with continuous, classical variables that are necessary for the TST formulation.
Second, nonadiabatic effects arising from coupling between electronic state
transitions and nuclear motions must be accurately described. Ananth employs a
mapping protocol based on Schwinger's angular momentum theory to map discrete
states to Cartesian phase-space variables and uses the path-integral
representation of quantum mechanics to incorporate nonadiabatic effects into an
exact, classically isomorphic expression for a real-time, flux-side correlation
function. The desired TST expression will be obtained as the short-time limit of
the flux-side correlation function. This nonadiabatic QTST will be general, and
can be used to provide a good estimate of reaction rates and insights into
reaction pathways for any nonadiabatic, quantum mechanical chemical process.
Further, the research team aims to establish a rigorous derivation of an
approximate, path-integral based dynamics to provide quantitate reaction rates
and detailed mechanistic information from real-time simulations of complex
chemical systems.