* 1546676
* Meeting: Chronobiology Workshop, Sao Paulo, Brazil, November 3, 2015
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2015,01/31/2016
* Roberto Refinetti, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 01/31/2016
* USD 23,400.00

The one-day Workshop on Chronobiology in Sao Paulo, Brazil, brings together
junior and senior scientists from countries throughout the Americas, and offers
an opportune environment for the exchange and discussion of the latest topics in
chronobiology, the study of biological rhythms such as sleep-wake adaptations to
solar cycles. The workshop also serves to identify relevant research topics and
approaches that are addressed particularly well in the context of international
collaborative work. The award provides support to US-based principal
investigators to participate in this workshop. The intellectual merit of the
workshop derives from its small size, which promotes interactions between
participants, the assembly of many top scientists in chronobiology, the
international make-up of the participants, and its temporal and spatial
contiguity with the 13th biannual Latin American Symposium on Chronobiology.
With the Latin American foreign partnership as well as a strong representation
of women among session chairs and speakers, the workshop provides opportunity
for outreach to populations underrepresented in science. The close, intensive
interactions with senior members in the field afforded by this highly
interactive workshop offer learning and networking opportunity for the many
trainees and junior faculty participating in this event.

The workshop includes 4 roundtable sessions, each consisting of 4 brief
presentations followed by a thorough discussion, and one keynote presentation.
The roundtable topics include molecular as well as network, and circadian as
well as sleep-focused themes. The collection of presentations spans a
complementary range of topics and experimental systems with considerable promise
for impactful activities. In addition to engendering a fertile ground for the
development of new collaborations between US and Latin American laboratories,
the format of the workshop and the composition of speakers and roundtable chairs
foster broadening participation in STEM disciplines as well as exchange of ideas
across professional levels and ethnic diversity. These aspects, combined with
the workshop's central goal of exchanging and advancing exciting new ideas in
chronobiology, constitute long-term benefits for the larger Chronobiology
community.