* 1546743
* Extratropical Transition and Recurvature of Tropical Cyclones in a Changing Climate
* GEO,AGS
* 03/01/2016,02/28/2022
* Gary Lackmann, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Varavut Limpasuvan
* 02/28/2022
* USD 610,874.00

When tropical cyclones move poleward, they can produce adverse societal impacts,
especially when they make landfall. While many tropical cyclones weaken as they
move out of the tropics, a subset of these systems actually intensifies, and may
increase in size. A recent example is Hurricane Sandy, which affected the Mid-
Atlantic and Northeastern US in the fall of 2012. In recent years, there has
been intensive study of how climate change would affect the frequency and
intensity of tropical cyclones. However, only limited research has examined how
climate change affects the important category of tropical cyclones that move out
of the tropics. One expected result of climate change is warming air at upper
levels in the tropics; prior research demonstrates that this upper warming
limits the strengthening of tropical cyclones that would otherwise occur.
However, tropical cyclones that move out of the tropics may escape this
mitigating influence. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Therefore, one goal of this study is
to test the hypothesis that tropical cyclones exiting the tropics will show a
greater intensity increase with warming than would storms that remain in the
tropics. Another goal is to determine if and how warming changes the fraction of
tropical cyclones that undergo the re-intensification process mentioned above.
Finally, this project will also analyze changes in the locations and seasons in
which tropical cyclones form. All of these goals will be accomplished using
methods that are similar to what has been done in studying how tropical cyclones
that remain in the tropics respond to climate change, but with a study area that
extends well outside of the tropics. Highly sophisticated computer models, of
the type used in weather prediction, will be used in combination with larger-
scale changes obtained from climate models. Then, comparing "present day" to
"future" simulations, with all else equal, allows determination of changes in
the strength and frequency of tropical cyclones moving poleward into mid-
latitude locations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses gaps in
understanding of how climate change would influence the intensity and frequency
of the subset of tropical cyclones that move out of the tropics, affecting
higher-latitude locations. This category of tropical cyclones is extremely
important, because it is precisely these systems, as they exit the tropics,
which exert the strongest influence on the major population centers in mid-
latitude locations such as the US. Given their importance, it is perhaps
surprising that the response of these systems to climate change has not received
more research attention to date. The project will also determine if geographical
and/or seasonal changes in tropical cyclone activity will change with the
climate. Owing to the highly technical nature of this project, the graduate
students who work on it will gain valuable skills in scientific computing, data
analysis and visualization, and in science communication. Graduate research
assistants working on this project will be invited to assist in supervising
undergraduate researchers, thereby gaining experience in leadership and
mentoring.