* 1546335
* BRAIN EAGER: Building reliable high-throughput consensus for neuronal morphologies
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2017
* Giorgio Ascoli, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 08/31/2017
* USD 299,990.00

This EAGER project will provide all neuroscientists and computer scientists with
much needed reliable, repeatable, high-throughput, quantitative data to begin
piecing together the complex puzzle of the neural structure-activity-function
relationship. Recent breakthroughs in genetic labeling and microscopic imaging
have energized the research community with unprecedented optimism in the ability
to collect the enormous amount of data that is necessary to quantify
statistically representative samples of neurons in multiple species,
developmental stages, and conditions, across the overwhelming variety of cell
types throughout the nervous system. Due to the sheer extent and branching
complexity of axonal and dendritic arbors, however, the bottleneck in the
advancement of progress in this endeavor is no longer raw data acquisition, but
the digital reconstruction of the corresponding morphology. The BigNeuron
initiative (bigneuron.org) promises to consolidate and further advance the gains
in automated tracing, and the ongoing development of multiple algorithms
provides a strong insurance of robustness. Now, formulating a consensus from
these alternative results is critical to prevent dispersive fragmentation and
thrust the field into a new era of discovery. BigNeuron is porting all available
algorithms for automated reconstruction of neuronal morphology under a unified
open source framework. Each of the multiple BigNeuron algorithms will create
non-identical digital tracings from every neuronal image stack. A remaining
unsolved step is to morph these multiple variants into a single optimal
consensus reconstruction that would de facto become a community standard. While
human expertise is currently the gold standard (and the ground truth may not be
known), even the reconstructions of the exact same neuron by two trained human
operators will not be identical and need to be reconciled. Thus, to ensure
scalable to whole-brain throughput, an automated method is needed to transform a
collection of non-identical tracing versions into a consensus reconstruction,
ideally with a confidence (or variance) associated with each branch. The
specific aims of this project are to design, implement, test, refine, and deploy
a method to generate a consensus neuronal reconstruction from the multiple
digital tracings produced by each of the available algorithms. Specifically, the
team will first create a draft working algorithm by synergistically combining
two recently introduced complementary approaches. The resulting initial
procedure for morphological consensus production will serve as straw man for
community discussion in several meetings and workshops. After expert feedback
and new ideas have been incorporated, the consensus generation process will be
finalized for incorporation into the BigNeuron pipeline. Results from this
project will be available to researchers and science educational users through
the NeuroMorpho.Org website.