* 1546900
* RESEARCH-PGR: Analysis of Genes Affecting Plant Re
* BIO,IOS
* 01/01/2017,12/31/2023
* Fuxin Li, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Gerald Schoenknecht
* 12/31/2023
* USD 4,752,521.00

Genetically engineered crops and medicines are widespread in today's society. To
engineer plants effectively, genes must be first inserted into DNA and then
plants containing the new DNA must be grown to maturity. For many plants, these
steps of transformation must be overcome in order to study gene function and to
engineer crops for genetic improvements. This project uses advanced DNA sequence
databases, imaging, and computational methods to map the genes that control the
process of regeneration and transformation needed for genetic engineering. The
project develops new and more efficient image acquisition and analysis software
that will enable scientists in many fields to study plant regeneration and
related processes more rapidly and precisely. At the same time, the project is
developing a program to educate high school teachers and students about the
foundation of genetics and genomics as an important step to communicate
effectively about genetically engineered crops and food. Educational modules
will contribute to teacher curricula in partnership with the Science &amp; Math
Investigative Learning Experiences (SMILE) program at Oregon State University as
part of an extensive STEM network of high school teachers and students in rural
and underserved communities in the Pacific Northwest.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Regeneration of differentiated organisms from single cells
is a critical need for functional genomics and for the production of genetically
engineered organisms. The project will conduct a genome-wide investigation of
the genes that control regenerability and transformation (RT) in Populus, which
is one of the best studied crop species with respect to these traits. Extensive
genomic resources for Populus will be leveraged, including rich transcriptome
databases, a high-quality reference genome, and a fully resequenced genome-wide
association study (GWAS) population of 1,084 undomesticated genotypes with
extremely low levels of linkage disequilibrium. The value of the GWAS population
for gene identification for a variety of traits, including those related to in
vitro regeneration, has already been established. The project will identify
genetic elements that control RT, develop novel phenomic methods based on image
analysis, and develop new social science and education methods for teaching
about genetic engineering to diverse high school students and teachers. The
specific objectives are to (1) explore a variety of RT methods to maximize
variation in RT responses; (2) develop new phenomic tools, including an image
capture and generalizable machine-vision system, to precisely determine in vitro
phenotypes; (3) using GWAS, map sets of alleles that are associated with
variation in RT frequency; and (4) study cognitive processes with respect to GE
crops, develop case studies and new teaching materials, deliver them to rural
and underserved communities in the Pacific Northwest, and through publications,
social media, and conferences share the project?s insights and teaching modules
internationally.