* 1546790
* EAGER: Novel biocatalysts based on artificial metallo-cofactors in flavoproteins
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2017
* Stefan Lutz, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 08/31/2017
* USD 117,715.00

Lutz (1546790)

The proposed work will generate proof-of-concept data on re-engineering the
active site of the flavoprotein, Old Yellow Enzyme (OYE), to perform hydrocarbon
chemistry aimed at producing chemicals that are difficult to synthesize by non-
biological approaches. To this end, the proposal will focus on creating new
artificial biocatalysts by integrating catalytically active organometallic
complexes in the active cofactor site in the interior of the enzyme. The new
biocatalysts so-formed will be assessed for their potential to catalyze C-C bond
forming reactions. Moreover, the general approach of substituting artificial
prosthetic co-factors has potential for general applicability to many areas of
chemical synthesis and chemical conversion to useful products. The project will
also feature educational components to train students in the diverse engineering
and scientific disciplines required for success in the bioengineering area, and
will continue the principal investigator's (PI's) involvement in a number of
programs aimed at increasing interest and education in STEM areas amongst
underrepresented minorities in the greater Atlanta area.

The proposal capitalizes on the utility of flavin-dependent oxidoreductases as
enzymes capable of biocatalysis at the laboratory scale. Specifically, the PI
and his students will create new artificial biocatalysts by integrating
catalytically efficient copper-bis(oxazoline)(Cu-BOX) complexes in the active
site of Old Yellow Enzyme. Although challenging, the PI is well positioned to
carry out this synthesis successfully based on more than three years of work in
his lab on OYE which has already demonstrated substantial improvements in the
enzyme's native redox activity. These studies have confirmed the PI's capability
to make substantial changes in the active site without compromising the overall
structural integrity of the enzyme. The modified enzymes will then be tested for
catalytic activity via asymmetric cyclopropanation of styrene and ethyl
diazoacetate, a benchmark reaction for C-C bond formation. By exploring new
possibilities for the flavoprotein, the incorporation of artificial cofactors
based on organo-metallic ligands could dramatically expand the toolbox for
biocatalysis.