* 1546334
* Workshop on Nonlocal Models in Mathematics, Computation, Science, and Engineering
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2016
* Tadele Mengesha, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 08/31/2016
* USD 17,010.00

This award supports the participation of students, postdocs, early career
researchers, and under-represented groups seeking to attend the three-day
workshop on "Nonlocal Models in Mathematics, Computation, Science, and
Engineering," to be held on October 26-28, 2015 at Oak Ridge National Laboratory
(ORNL), Oak Ridge, Tennessee. Nonlocal models are a type of mathematical model
of relatively recent vintage that has proved to be very effective for modeling
certain challenging physical phenomena, such as fracture in solid mechanics. The
purpose of the workshop is to bring together experts from the mathematical,
computational, scientific, and engineering communities who work with nonlocal
models and provide a platform for the exchange of ideas. The workshop encourages
the inclusion and participation of junior scientists and members of under-
represented groups in STEM. This award will present them the opportunity to
interact with and learn from leading researchers working with nonlocal models,
along the way contributing towards the development of the next generation of
researchers in nonlocal theories. Through the proposed activities, the award
also facilitates increased partnership between the University of Tennessee and
the government research laboratories ORNL and Sandia National Laboratories. More
information can be found at http://nlmcse.usacm.org

The technical focus of the workshop is on the emerging research area of nonlocal
modeling, which has presented new challenges to mathematical and numerical
analysis, and its computational implementation. Nonlocal theories have wide
ranging application: heat and mass diffusion, nonlocal mechanics, pattern
formation, image processing, self-organized dynamics, Levy flights, and jump
processes, to list a few. Invited speakers and participants will bring expertise
from a wide array of related fields, including mathematical and numerical
analysis of nonlocal and fractional models, numerical methods and discretization
schemes, multiscale modeling and adaptivity in nonlocal models, software
implementation in nonlocal models, peridynamics models for material failure and
damage, nonlocal heat transfer and mass diffusion, anomalous transport in
nature, and other engineering and scientific applications in which nonlocal
modeling is useful.