* 1546007
* 2016 AMS Mario J. Molina Symposium; New Orleans, Louisiana; January 10-14, 2016
* GEO,AGS
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2016
* Renyi Zhang, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 09/30/2016
* USD 10,000.00

This project supports a named symposium to honor Dr. Mario J. Molina to be held
as part of the 96th American Meteorological Society (AMS) Annual Meeting in New
Orleans, Louisiana on 10-14 January 2016. Dr. Molina has made fundamental
advances to atmospheric chemistry both in the troposphere and stratosphere. His
research was instrumental to the negotiation and the establishment of the
Montreal Protocol to protect the ozone layer by prohibiting the release of
anthropogenic gases that destroy stratospheric ozone. Dr. Molina was awarded the
1995 Nobel Prize in Chemistry for his pioneering research in understanding the
stratospheric ozone loss mechanism.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Molina's pioneering
research on the impacts of chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) on stratospheric ozone
demonstrated the vulnerability of the natural environment and promoted the
public awareness of the potential harmful consequences of anthropogenic
activities. This project supports 5-10 early career scientists (i.e.,
undergraduate students, graduate students, post docs, and un-tenured professors)
and one invited keynote speaker (i.e., Dr. M.J. Molina) to attend the
symposium.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The 2016 AMS Mario J. Molina Symposium will
provide broader impacts by hosting training opportunities for young scientists
in the atmospheric chemistry, climate, and policies. Graduate and undergraduate
students are encouraged to participate and present their research in this
symposium. Best student oral presentations and poster papers will be selected at
the meeting and recognized by the AMS Atmospheric Chemistry Committee. The
International Commission on Atmospheric Chemistry and Global Pollution (ICACGP)
is a co-sponsor of this symposium.