* 1546738
* RAPID: Assessment of Cascading Failures and Collective Recovery of Interdependent Critical Infrastructure in Catastrophic Disasters: A Study of 2015 Earthquake in Nepal
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2016
* Nazife Ganapati, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* David Mendonca
* 07/31/2016
* USD 49,962.00

The objective of this Rapid Response Research (RAPID) project is to collect
time-bound data on the nature, impacts, and recovery process related to
cascading infrastructure failures from the 2015 Earthquake in Nepal. Due to the
growing frequency and magnitude of natural disasters, understanding of the
relationship between interdependencies and cascading failures in infrastructure
systems is critical for strategic investments to enhance community resilience.
The outcomes of this research will include a database of cascading failures and
associated attributes and variables in interdependent infrastructure systems,
which can be utilized to inform planning and decision making processes. By
studying the pre-disaster infrastructure interdependencies, post-disaster
cascading failures, and restoration interdependencies, this study will help
policymakers in the United States, Nepal, and other countries prone to disasters
to establish methods and processes to integrate resilience into their
infrastructure planning and strategic investment efforts.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite emerging knowledge on resilient infrastructure
systems, the number of empirical studies related to cascading failures and
collective recovery of interdependent infrastructure is rather limited. This
RAPID project addresses this gap in knowledge by collecting and analyzing data
related to the power grid, transportation, water, sewage, and communication
networks from the 2015 Earthquake in Nepal. The data to be collected will
include primary and secondary infrastructure failures, failure modes, duration
of service disruption, pre- and post-disaster conditions and performance, and
post-disaster infrastructure restoration. These data will be collected through
local infrastructure agencies and direct field observations. Geo-tagged photos
and videos of infrastructure failures and damages will be used along with GIS
information to capture and document the nature and the extent of cascading
infrastructure failures across space and time. The other group of data to be
collected is related to the decision making processes of infrastructure agencies
for restoration and recovery of infrastructure systems. The primary method for
collecting these data will include in-depth interviews with elected and
appointed public officials at local and national levels involved in restoration
and recovery efforts. Finally, a public survey will be conducted to collect data
related to extent and duration of disruptions in infrastructure services in
Kathmandu, Nepal. The collected data will be analyzed through the use of
statistical and network analysis methods. In addition, a meta-network analysis
will be conducted to answer the questions of who, what, why, how, and when to
better understand restoration interdependency in infrastructure systems. The
collected empirical data could be used as a foundation for verification and
validation of the existing analytical models related to cascading infrastructure
failures. Hence, the results will enable better understanding of the nature and
impacts of cascading failures in interdependent infrastructure systems. In
addition, this research will advance the understanding of the dynamics of
restoration interdependency and provide insight into ways to influence the
collective recovery of infrastructure systems in the aftermath of a catastrophic
disaster.