* 1546959
* I-Corps L:  University of Florida Unites Teachers to Reform Education in Science: Preparing a New Generation of Middle Grades Science Teacher Leaders (U-FUTuRES 2.0)
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2016
* Rose Pringle, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Karen Crosby
* 07/31/2016
* USD 50,000.00

Through the NSF Innovation Corps for Learning Program (I-Corps L), this project
will develop ways to increase the scale and impact of a professional development
model to transform middle grades science teaching and learning. Our nation's
middle grades science teachers, the portal to science engagement and success in
high school and beyond, are overwhelmingly under prepared to meet certification
requirements and public expectations for student performance in science. Many
middle grades science teachers complete a college degree in a field other than
science or science education. This transformative, classroom-focused, field-
tested professional learning program has the potential to simultaneously bolster
middle grades science teachers? disciplinary content knowledge and teaching
skills. This I-Corps L team project addresses the pressing national need for
stronger middle grades science teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The U-FUTuRES 2.0
model (University of Florida Unites Teachers to Reform Education in Science v.2)
will be expanded from the current model of district, school, and classroom
reform to respond to the pressing national need for improved science teaching.
Current coursework developed through a collaborative effort between science
educators and partnering scientists at the University of Florida, will deepen
middle grades science teachers' content knowledge and transform their classroom
approach to an inquiry-based, learning-goals-driven, highly engaging and
challenging science learning experience for all their students. Incorporated in
this innovation will be strategies for establishing a partnership with school
and district leaders striving to support both the development and broader impact
of their science teacher leaders in their schools and districts. It is expected
that the proposed innovation in professional learning and leadership development
will result in increasing teachers' knowledge of disciplinary core science
concepts, science and engineering practices and cross-cutting concepts,
transformed teaching practice, and improved student engagement and learning
outcomes. The project goal is to prepare middle grades students for success in
rigorous high school science courses, the gateway to STEM educational
opportunities and careers.