* 1546975
* IACUC Institute: Improving Oversight of Animal Care and Use Programs Through Active Learning
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Elisa Hurley, Public Responsibility in Medicine and Research
* Standard Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 08/31/2018
* USD 581,372.00

Changes in federal regulations present challenges to Institutional Animal Care
and Use Committees' (IACUCs) abilities to effectively meet their responsibility
for the oversight of animal care and use programs at the nation's biomedical
research institutions. Often IACUCs are unaware of new regulations or have a
limited understanding of the extent of their authority---both of these factors
can affect their institutional compliance with federal guidelines. Directed
efforts to improve IACUC training are required so that all IACUC members are
engaged, highly knowledgeable, and confident in their role in assuring
compliance with animal welfare regulations. Public Responsibility in Medicine
and Research (PRIM&amp;R), an educational nonprofit organization, will develop
the Train the Trainer IACUC Institute (TTII) in which a large cohort of national
IACUC trainers will be trained to incorporate active and peer-directed learning
in their educational activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific activities of
the TTII are to: 1) hold focused training sessions to teach existing IACUC
trainers to practice effective instruction using active learning techniques that
have been shown to increase knowledge transfer and to encourage IACUC trainers
to incorporate these active and peer-directed learning methods into their own
courses and educational sessions for IACUC members and staff; and 2) to develop
and utilize meaningful metrics that enable assessment and improvement of IACUC
training programs. The ultimate goal of the TTII is to improve oversight of
animal care and use programs nationwide by ensuring that oversight activities by
IACUCs accurately reflect current regulatory standards and equipping IACUC
members and staff with the knowledge and confidence to reduce regulatory burden
while maintaining compliance with federal laws and standards.