* 1546648
* Support for the Advances in Catalysis Symposium in the 2015 International Advances in Functional Materials Conference; Stony Brook, NY
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2015,01/31/2016
* Tae Jin Kim, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 01/31/2016
* USD 5,000.00

1546648&lt;br/&gt;Kim, Tae Jin&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal supports travel
and registration costs for graduate and undergraduate students from United
States universities attending the Advances in Catalysis Symposium that will be
held as part of the 2015 International Advances in Functional Materials (AFM)
Conference from June 29-July 3, 2015 at SUNY Stony Brook in Stony Brook, NY. The
funds sought in this proposal will be used to defray travel and registration
costs for approximately 10 graduate and undergraduate students from United
States institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The catalyst symposium and related
talks will provide students an opportunity to learn about the most recent
advances in the field of catalysis, as well as emerging areas of research and
technological interest. They will also have an opportunity to present their own
research findings and discuss results with other students and established
experts in the field. Catalysis is an important enabling technology for many
pressing economic and societal needs, including energy sustainability, chemical
manufacturing and petroleum refining, shale gas processing, and environmental
protection. Conference participation will help train the next generation of
catalytic scientists and engineers, and also inspire undergraduate students to
pursue careers in the area of catalysis, thus ensuring a well-trained workforce
to meet growing demands in the catalysis area.