* 1546698
* Convection and Balanced Tropical Dynamics
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2020
* David Raymond, New Mexico Institute of Mining and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 07/31/2020
* USD 521,733.00

This project studies the fundamental dynamics through which tropical convection,
meaning the overturning motion found in tropical cumulus clouds and associated
with intense precipitation, interacts with the larger-scale horizontal
atmospheric circulation in which it is embedded. The work focuses on the
evolution of convection within African easterly waves (AEWs), tropical waves
disturbances with wavelengths of 2,000 to 2,500km which originate over West
Africa and propagate westward over the northern tropical Atlantic. AEWs are of
particular interest as they play a key role in the formation of tropical storms
and hurricanes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work is based on preliminary findings
suggesting a chain of meteorological relationships that can lead to the
development of heavy rain. One is that cyclonic vorticity (a measure of the
strength of cyclonic rotation or shear in the horizontal circulation) at a mid-
tropospheric level (say 600mb) can produce warmer temperatures above and colder
temperatures below that level, reducing moist convective instability around the
level. This reduction in mid-tropospheric instability leads to a bottom-heavy
mass flux profile in the cumulus clouds, in which most of the ascending motions
within the clouds occur at low to middle levels of the troposphere. The bottom-
heavy mass flux profile in turn leads to a reduction in the efficiency of
convection for exporting static energy from the convecting region, which
requires stronger convection to maintain the energy export. Meanwhile, lower
instability leads to moistening of the convecting region through a process
referred to as moisture quasi-equilibrium (a result derived in part from
research under AGS-1148594), so that both enhanced moisture and more vigorous
overturning motions contribute to intensification of rainfall. Preliminary work
suggesting these relationships was performed using field campaign data from
T-PARC/TCS-08 (Thorpex Pacific Asian Regional Campaign/Tropical Cyclone Motion
experiment) and PREDICT (Pre-Depression Investigation of Cloud Systems in the
Tropics). Work performed here further tests and explores the proposed chain of
causality from mid-level vorticity to convective precipitation, and also
considers mechanisms through which more vigorous convection in turn affects the
mid-level vorticity and large-scale circulation. The work is conducted through
both examination of observational data, including data from field campaigns,
satellites, and reanalysis products, and the construction of simple models
representing the hypothesized relationships.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As noted
above, processes leading to the development of convective precipitation in AEWs
are of practical as well as scientific interest given that they can lead to
landfalling Atlantic hurricanes. More specifically, the work focuses on the
early stages of tropical storm genesis, which is among the most difficult
challenges in tropical cyclone forecasting. The project also fosters
international scientific collaboration, as it involves work with a collaborators
in Chile and Croatia, and the work is performed at a Hispanic-serving
institution. In addition, the project provides support and training for a
graduate student and an undergraduate summer intern, thereby providing for the
future workforce in this research area.