* 1546202
* Conference:  Partial Support for Model Arctic Council (MAC)
* GEO,OPP
* 01/15/2016,06/30/2017
* Mary Ehrlander, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Anna M. Kerttula
* 06/30/2017
* USD 35,000.00

This award supports the expenses for student participation in the Model Arctic
Council (MAC) 2016 workshop. MAC 2016 will engage graduate and undergraduate
students from universities in the United States and other Arctic countries in a
simulation of Arctic Council processes. The University of Alaska Fairbanks (UAF)
will host the event in March 2016 during the United States' Chairmanship of the
Arctic Council, immediately before the Senior Arctic Officials meet at UAF.
Students will assume roles of the Arctic Council Member States, Permanent
Participants, and Observers in addressing matters of concern in the Arctic. The
seven-day program includes plenary lectures by experts on Arctic social and
environmental issues and simulated meetings of a working group and Senior Arctic
Officials, followed by a simulated Ministerial Meeting of the Arctic
Council.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Students will present their resolutions to the
actual Arctic Council Senior Arctic Officials on the final day of the MAC
exercise. The program is designed to be a biennial event hosted in even years by
a UArctic partner university in the country chairing the Arctic Council.
Biennial US-only events held at American partner universities in odd years will
expand opportunities for American students and enhance continuity. The
objectives of the MAC are to: 1) develop students' knowledge of the Arctic as a
region, of circumpolar politics, and of northern Indigenous peoples; 2) increase
students' understanding of Arctic Council objectives and processes; 3) prepare
students to assume leadership roles in the circumpolar north; and 4) enhance
student and faculty collaboration among UArctic institutions. Students will
prepare for the simulation within university courses on international relations
or related topics offered by collaborating faculty at UAF and other
participating universities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the workshop is to
increase knowledge among the participants and stimulate their interest in the
Arctic and potential to contribute to or utilize Arctic social science research
in future decision making. In addition there is the potential contribution to
the literature on experiential learning and the synergy with other Arctic
Council activities, as well as the Arctic Science Summit Week. The broader
impacts of the workshop will be realized by the international student
participation; increasing knowledge of a wide spectrum of issues and concepts
that affect Arctic communities among young scholars; influencing potential young
leaders to take an interest in the Arctic - and supporting an Arctic Council
activity during the U.S. Chairmanship of the Arctic Council.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The student selection process is appropriately rigorous,
including a plan for recruiting participants from underrepresented groups; the
activity supports international collaborations with other institutions in
Norway, Russia, and Iceland; and there is a good dissemination plan for the
results documents, both in public and academic fora.