* 1546971
* PKAL Capital Region Network Workshop at the University of the District of Columbia
* EHR,HRD
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Lily Liang, University of the District of Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Claudia Rankins
* 07/31/2019
* USD 49,947.00

The Capital Regional Network Workshop at the University of the District of
Columbia (UCD) aims to bring together UDC and its partners, Morgan State
University, Hampton University, and Bowie State University, with Project
Kaleidoscope of the Association of American Colleges and Universities to enhance
professional development opportunities for science, technology, engineering and
mathematics (STEM) faculty and expand the national discourse on broadening
participation in undergraduate STEM education by involving Historically Black
Colleges and Universities (HBCUs). This workshop presents an opportunity to
capture the best practices of HBCUs, which are known to result in positive
outcomes for African American STEM students, and transfer them to a broader
range of institution types. Two-hundred faculty and administrators are expected
to attend the workshop.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This initiative will help STEM
faculty and institutions in the Capital Regional Network to build their
knowledge of how students learn; develop their capacity for and use of best
practices in STEM pedagogy; facilitate their use of effective inside- and
outside-the-classroom STEM learning experiences; help to integrate research into
the undergraduate courses and curriculum; and promote collaboration among
faculty across the institutions in improving learning outcomes in STEM for
majors and non-majors alike. It is expected that this regional network will
sustain itself and will grow because of the infusion of a broader audience of
STEM faculty and its track record in enhancing STEM faculty self-efficacy.