* 1546963
* Collaborative Research: SNOWIE: Seeded and Natural Orographic Wintertime clouds: the Idaho Experiment
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Katja Friedrich, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 08/31/2020
* USD 560,351.00

This award is for an observational and modeling campaign that will address the
impact of cloud seeding on orographic winter precipitation. There is a lack of
concrete evidence that cloud seeding has the intended impact of increasing
precipitation, yet several states in the western US have conducted seeding
operations over many years. With advanced observational tools and computer
modeling the researchers involved in this project believe that they can build
the scientific foundation for weather modification as a tool for precipitation
enhancement. The researchers will heavily instrument the area around the Idaho
Power Company's seeding operations in the Payette Mountains to collect data on
the effectiveness of these activities. This award represents a public/private
partnership that has the potential to improve the viability of the cloud seeding
operations and has implications for the water-hungry populations in the western
US. Multiple graduate and undergraduate students would be involved in the field
work and data analysis, ensuring the development of the next generation of
atmospheric scientists.

The Seeded and Natural Orographic Wintertime clouds: the Idaho Experiment
(SNOWIE) field campaign will take place in early 2017 in the Payette Mountains
of Idaho. The main observational assets that will be used are the University of
Wyoming King Air research aircraft with in-situ and remote sensing instruments,
the CSWR Doppler on Wheels mobile radars, and a host of ground-based remote
sensing and in-situ precipitation sensors. The overall goals of the project are
to understanding the natural dynamical and microphysical processes by which
precipitation forms and evolves within orographic winter storms and to determine
the physical processes by which cloud seeding with silver iodide (AgI), either
from ground generators or aircraft, impacts the amount and spatial distribution
of snow falling across a river basin. The core scientific objective of the
proposal are to: 1) Evaluate the role of mesoscale and microscale dynamics and
of the underlying terrain in the formation, growth, and fallout of natural ice
crystals in winter storms through observations, 2) Investigate how the natural
snow growth process is altered as a result of airborne AgI seeding through both
observations and model simulations, and 3) Evaluate the effects of ground
seeding on snowfall amount and distribution.