* 1546452
* BIGDATA: Collaborative Research: F: Nomadic Algorithms for Machine Learning in the Cloud
* CSE,IIS
* 01/01/2016,09/30/2021
* Inderjit Dhillon, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 09/30/2021
* USD 610,432.00

With an ever increasing ability to collect and archive data, massive data sets
are becoming increasingly common. These data sets are often too big to fit into
the main memory of a single computer, and so there is a great need for
developing scalable and sophisticated machine learning methods for their
analysis. In particular, one has to devise strategies to distribute the
computation across multiple machines. However, stochastic optimization and
inference algorithms that are so effective for large-scale machine learning
appear to be inherently sequential.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main research goal
of this project is to develop a novel "nomadic" framework that overcomes this
barrier. This will be done by showing that many modern machine learning problems
have a certain "double separability" property. The aim is to exploit this
property to develop convergent, asynchronous, distributed, and fault tolerant
algorithms that are well-suited for achieving high performance on commodity
hardware that is prevalent on today's cloud computing platforms. In particular,
over a four year period, the following will be developed: (i) parallel
stochastic optimization algorithms for the multi-machine cloud computing
setting, (ii) theoretical guarantees of convergence, (iii) open source code
under a permissive license, (iv) application of these techniques to a variety of
problem domains such as topic models and mixture models. In addition, a cohort
of students who can transfer their skills to both industry and academia will be
trained, and a graduate level course on scalable machine learning will be
developed.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will enable practitioners
in different application areas to quickly solve their big data problems. The
results of the project will be disseminated widely through papers and open
source software. Course material will be developed for the education of students
in the area of Scalable Machine Learning, and the course will be co-taught at
UCSC and UT Austin. The project will recruit women and minority students.