* 1546633
* Collaborative Research: The Nepal Earthquake and Limits on Moment, Fault Geometry and Time Dependent Stress Changes
* GEO,EAR
* 06/15/2015,05/31/2016
* Rebecca Bendick, University of Montana
* Standard Grant
* Luciana Astiz
* 05/31/2016
* USD 31,915.00

The M7.8 earthquake occurred on 25 April 2015 in Nepal is unique among recent
Himalayan earthquakes, as it failed to release entirely the pent up stress
accumulated since a previous similar earthquake there in 1833. Instead, stress
was transferred from 40 km north of the capital, Kathmandu, to 8 km to the
south, shifting the 2 million population of the Kathmandu Valley about 1.3 m to
the southwest in the process. Of major concern is that this stress is now
poised, either to diffuse benignly as slow slip, or to be released violently in
a future Mw&amp;#8804;7.5 earthquake. US Embassy officials in Kathmandu are
concerned that a major aftershock of this size occurring on the outskirts of the
capital would have catastrophic consequences to the already weakened buildings
of the city, and would greatly impair the rescue operation to the thousands of
villages wiped out by the April 25, 2015 earthquake. In this collaborative rapid
project, the PIs will install instruments in the region south of Kathmandu to
identify what is exactly happening to this stress. The hope is that processes
similar to those occurring on the San Andreas fault in California prevail,
namely that stress are being released slowly, in which case it would be possible
to infer that a future major earthquake is unlikely. The PIs also recognize that
the 2015 earthquake may provide clues to future earthquakes near Kathmandu, in
that it may be possible to gain insights into what may happen next by re-
evaluating historical earthquakes occurred near Kathmandu in the period from
1833 to 1866. We are collaborating with Nepali students and faculty in Tribhuvan
University to undertake these studies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs plan to
install two arrays of GPS units on stable monuments between Kathmandu and the
frontal thrusts of the Himalaya- a 35 km wide distance with instrument spacing
as close as 5 km. The narrow spacing will permit them to detect slip of the
Himalayan d√©collement should it be occurring, and will permit them to
distinguish various forms of spatial strain diffusion, or locally locked
asperities should these exist. Data from each instrument will be telemetered to
Boulder and the data will be processed daily and archived with easy public
access. A number of campaign GPS sites will be also installed that will be
measured at six-month intervals (or more frequently) by students from Tribhuvan
University. The PIs envisage that up to eleven additional GPS instruments will
be deployed. The PIs plan also to gather time-sensitive intensity data from the
epicentral region that may be used to calibrate the attenuation of surface
acceleration in the 2015 earthquake. They will use these data to calibrate
historical intensity data from the 1833, 1835, 1866,1934 and 1936 Nepal
earthquakes, that will used to constrain the rupture areas of these former
events, and how they relate to the 2015 earthquake.