* 1546863
* RESEARCH-PGR: Discovery and Functional Characterization of Genes Regulating Plant Immunity in Perennial Crops
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2023
* Claude dePamphilis, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Gerald Schoenknecht
* 08/31/2023
* USD 3,568,549.00

The human population is projected to grow to 9.6 billion by 2050, requiring a
50% increase in food and fiber production. A major constraint to this goal is
crop losses due to microbial plant diseases which destroy approximately 15% of
the world's total crop production every year. Advances in the science of plant
disease control are needed to reduce crop losses to disease. Plant genomes
encode thousands of genes involved in disease resistance, called the plant
immune system. For some crops, modern science has made rapid progress in
identifying disease resistance genes and using them in plant breeding, but for
others such as long-lived tree crops, it is much more difficult to make rapid
progress. This project will explore the plant immune system via a comprehensive
study of the genes important for disease resistance to key pathogens of an
important crop, cacao, which is the source of chocolate, and an important cash
crop for millions of farmers in developing countries. The methods, tools and
knowledge gained will be directly applicable to discovery of genes underlying
important traits in other crops, especially trees and many perennial grasses. In
addition to contributing to building a global partnership in reaching the goals
of feeding a growing population sustainably, this project will involve students
and young scientists in the US and in developing countries though international
exchanges and collaborations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will establish a
new approach for use with perennial crop plants to identify candidate loci for
disease resistance using a model tree crop, Theobroma cacao (the chocolate
tree). Whole genome re-sequencing and transcriptome sequencing of a core
collection of highly diverse cacao genotypes will provide the genetic
information necessary to drive the discovery of genes critical for pathogen
resistance. Functional analysis of these genes will test their role in
resistance and set the stage for future translation of these basic findings to
guiding more efficient breeding programs utilizing a wider array of genetic
diversity. Importantly, the methods, tools, and knowledge gained will be
directly applicable to discovery of genes underlying important traits in other
crops, especially heterozygous perennials such as trees and many grasses which
are not particularly amenable to approaches developed for the major annual crops
such as corn and soybean. The basic evolutionary and functional principles that
will be discovered can be generalized to most if not all crop plants. To promote
and build genomics research capacity in developing countries and to promote
inter-disciplinary cross-training the project will support scientific exchanges
between project members and foreign collaborators, through postdoctoral,
graduate and undergraduate student training at multiple institutions and will
involve students from minority serving institutions. The results of this study
will be made publicly available through electronic resources and publications.