* 1546197
* Bilateral NSF/BIO-BBSRC: The design logic of Hedgehog-based pattern formation.
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2019
* Michael Elowitz, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Charles Cunningham
* 07/31/2019
* USD 500,000.00

A key challenge in biology is to understand how cells communicate and respond to
one another. This is particularly important in developing embryos where cell
communication is responsible for creating the patterns which are the template
for the formation of functioning organs. In this project which is a
collaboration between researchers at the California Institute of Technology (US)
and the Francis Crick Institute (UK), investigators will use a novel
quantitative approach to examine signaling in the Sonic Hedgehog pathway (a
signaling pathway very important in development) at the single cell level that
leads to neural patterning in a model tissue culture system. The results will
elucidate the mechanism that controls the precision of cell fate decision and
tissue patterning in the developing spinal cord. These broader impacts of these
principles are likely to be relevant for understanding other signaling pathways
involved in diverse developmental processes. This project will also provide a
unique opportunity for training graduate students at the interface of biology
and computation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During embryonic development and in
response to injury, tissues must establish, or re-establish, precise spatial
arrangements of specific cell types. A common strategy of tissue patterning
involves morphogens; locally produced, secreted molecules that diffuse to form
concentration gradients. These gradients provide the tissue with positional
information that is used to regulate spatially specific genes controlling cell
fate decisions. Moreover, morphogens also regulate the downstream target genes
that can affect the morphogen movement, intracellular signal transduction and
the elaboration of target gene expression. This provides a means for morphogens
to generate gradients and positional information with context-specific shapes
and dynamics to instruct tissue pattern formation. A key limitation in
understanding the architecture of pathways that control morphogen expression has
been the lack of direct readout and control in embryonic tissues. To address
this deficiency, this research project will combine novel quantitative single-
cell and tissue engineering approaches in well-defined cellular model systems.
The aim of this project is to understand the design principles that produce the
dynamics and gene responses of the Hedgehog (SHH) pathway, which are involved in
diverse developmental processes, in particular patterning the neural system. The
following fundamental questions about morphogen-mediated tissue patterning will
be addressed: (1) How are the dynamics of morphogen gradients generated and
controlled? (2) How do the genes in individual cells interpret the quantitative,
dynamic information encoded by morphogens into discrete cell fates? (3) How do
fluctuations, or "noise", limit the precision of patterning, and how do cells
overcome these limitations? A broader impact of this project will be predictive,
quantitative models connecting morphogen dynamics to cell fate decision-making,
which provides insights into numerous Shh-dependent processes in embryos and
organisms, and also enables researchers to control and repurpose Shh signaling
in order to engineer patterning in manufactured tissues. This project will also
provide a unique opportunity for training graduate students at the interface of
biology and computation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative US/UK project
is supported by the US National Science Foundation and the UK Biotechnology and
Biological Sciences Research Council.