* 1546480
* BIGDATA: Collaborative Research: F: Streaming Architecture for Continuous Entity Linking in Social Media
* CSE,IIS
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2020
* Yuhong Guo, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 12/31/2020
* USD 799,339.00

A large fraction of the ever-growing internet content is found in social media
such as (micro)blogs. Users access it to both form and share their opinions
about events and people, election preferences, product and brand
recommendations. This situation provides opportunities to create added layers of
data mining and analysis regarding users' views on developing events, products,
services, or government actions; at the same time, it raises challenges for
Entity Linking (EL) in social media. EL is the task of linking an extracted
mention to a specific definition of the entity. The definition of an entity is
usually a pointer to a Web page that defines the entity. Information extraction
from social media generally faces many challenging issues due to: message
volume, message speed (Twitter alone generates over 500 million messages per
day), variety, free-form language, lack of context, large reference variation
and language diversity. Hashtags are an essential part of the ethos of social
networks. They are used to denote brands, events, people, social rallies, etc.
The hashtag disambiguation problem is to detect synonymous hashtags and
recognize the polysemic ones. For example, the hashtag '#BHaram' refers to the
entity 'Boko Haram', defined at Wikipedia page en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Boko_Haram
or at National Counterterrorism Center Web web page
www.nctc.gov/site/groups/boko_haram.html. The purpose of this project is to
perform EL in social media. This work will benefit multiple segments of society
that rely on applications using data from microblog systems, such as targeted
monitoring of Twitter and Facebook to collect and understand users' opinions
about a recent product or a world event; data aggregation (e.g., reviews about
products and services); and data mining for early crisis detection and response
as well as national security. This project is one more step towards addressing
the government's latest initiative of fighting crime using big data.

The goals of this project are to research algorithms to detect in near real-time
those pieces of text in messages that reference entities, Web pages that
describe entities, and to link entity references to Web pages and across
microblog systems so that together a broad, more complete characterization of
each entity can be automatically generated. The proposed approaches are based on
innovative techniques that include: incremental, iterative message analysis;
smart indexing techniques with live updates to support fast incremental entity
reference detection; computationally light soft-clustering of messages to
improve entity reference detection; and fast incremental K-partite graph
clustering. The resulting artifacts (e.g., software tools) will be made
available to benefit researchers in academe and industry. Distribution of free,
open-source software for implementing the techniques developed will enhance
existing research infrastructure. The project will support and train at least
three PhD students, as well as involve undergraduate students in research at
Temple University and Binghampton University. The project web site
(http://cis.temple.edu/~edragut/projects/nimel.htm) includes more information on
the project, software, datasets, educational materials, and publications.