* 1546723
* I-Corps L:  B2 Scholars: A Professional Development Model from BioQUEST
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2017
* Brian Walsh, BioQUEST Curriculum Consortium, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Junhong Chen
* 07/31/2017
* USD 50,000.00

Through the NSF I-Corp for Learning Program, this project will develop ways to
increase the scale and impact of an effort to help community college biology
faculty to meet the challenges facing this segment of higher education. The
program, called the B2 Scholars program, is a model professional development
program which is designed to provide a community of practice to increase the
rate of adoption of pedagogical reforms, and encourage participants to remain
active in disciplinary and education communities. The model combines education
and social science research about adoption of instructional reform, effective
pedagogical approaches, and additional skills needed by at risk students to
succeed in academia. Community colleges serve an enormous number of
undergraduates: estimated enrollment for Fall 2014 was 12.4 million students.
High percentages of these students come from low socioeconomic backgrounds, are
groups underrepresented in STEM disciplines, are non-traditional students, and
work while pursuing degrees. Working with these students requires a strong
understanding of how students learn, how to help students overcome cognitive and
content barriers, and how to develop the professional skills recent research has
demonstrated are necessary for academic success. Unfortunately, most community
college faculty are provided few resources, both in terms of funding and time,
for professional development that would help them keep abreast of current
educational information. The B2 Scholars program is designed to directly impact
the success of community college students by providing bioscience community
college faculty with the skills and resources to enhance student success. The
program's emphasis on bioscience faculty is a reflection of the popularity of
bioscience majors; in 2007-08, health sciences was the most popular STEM
Associate's degree at 21% of STEM degrees (1,627,000 students) and this area
continues to show enormous growth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The B2 Scholars program
will help enhance community college faculty pedagogical skills within their
discipline, promote broader participation in disciplinary and educational
communities, and encourage these faculty to assume leadership roles in designing
the future of postsecondary education. The model has been developed based on
educational research and lessons learned over BioQUEST's past 29 years in
biology education reform. The program utilizes a combination of face-to-face and
virtual communities to allow participants to develop meaningful relationships
and support each other through the challenges of adopting and implementing
educational reforms. This model has the potential to be a valuable template for
additional BioQUEST professional development programs serving other faculty
communities. By increasing the widespread implementation of these professional
development practices, this project will help to improve the effectiveness
community college educators.