* 1546580
* Support for International Ocean Science Activities Through the Scientific Committee on Oceanic Research
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Edward Urban, Scientific Committee on Oceanic Research (SCOR)
* Continuing Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 08/31/2019
* USD 1,751,808.00

Support for the international oceanographic activities of the Scientific
Committee on Oceanic Research (SCOR) that are relevant to U.S. interests in
marine sciences and the Division of Ocean Sciences. Support of these
international activities through SCOR began in 1987. The SCOR provides an
international, interdisciplinary, non-governmental focus for ocean research and
makes it possible for national ocean science communities to (1) participate in
international research projects, (2) identify important ocean science issues and
create working groups to address the issues, and (3) participate in capacity-
building activities (40% of SCOR national committees are based in developing
countries). Funding in this request provides partial support for SCOR Working
Group activities, and international projects such as International Ocean Carbon
Coordination Project (IOCCP), GlobalHAB, Surface Ocean - Lower Atmosphere Study
(SOLAS), Integrated Marine Biogeochemistry and Ecosystem Research (IMBER), and
GEOTRACES. These activities also are supported by other international and
national sponsors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These major programs have origins in US
and have turned to SCOR to provide a forum for international planning and
coordination. SCOR's impact has and will continue to be evident in the
standardization of measurement protocols, sharing of data, coordination of ship
time, and the enlargement of field studies which would be impossible without
international coordination.