* 1546708
* Meeting on Transformation-Enabled Genomic Research in Crop Plants to be held November 15-18, 2015 at the Holiday Inn, Clearwater Beach (FL)
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2016
* Neal Stewart, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Anne W. Sylvester
* 07/31/2016
* USD 68,583.00

PI: Fredy Altpeter (University of Florida) Co-PIs: Nathan Springer (University
of Minnesota); C. Neal Stewart (University of Tennessee)

The workshop brings together a diverse group of scientists to explore solutions
to a critical bottleneck in plant functional genomics. DNA sequencing itself is
no longer a challenge in genomics. Instead, the roadblock is how to understand
gene function, which ultimately requires that each gene be altered or replaced
cheaply, quickly and efficiently. At the present time, such ability has not seen
any improvements over the past decade, and has been identified as a crushing
bottleneck to further discoveries of gene function by the plant genomics
research community. This workshop will identify gaps in knowledge, training and
tools needed to advance the ability to edit genomes by adding or removing DNA
from plant cells. Workshop participants will discuss over-arching questions
about the nature of the science involved and the technical problems to overcome,
discuss how the science can move forward, and explore how to broaden
participation. The steering committee will collate the community-driven ideas
into a guiding document, or white paper, which will serve as the roadmap for
future actions, and which will be published for wide dissemination.

The ability to knock out or overexpress genes remains the gold standard for the
validation of gene function. Knockouts could be obtained at random from
mutagenesis or from transposon or T-DNA tagging, but the process is inefficient.
Alternatively, knockouts can be directed towards the gene being studied via RNAi
technology. Recently the advent of CRISPR/Cas9 technology has made targeted gene
modification very efficient. However, plant tissue culture, genetic
transformation, and regeneration are still needed, and these areas have had
little research over the past decade. As a consequence, advances in genomics are
being hindered. Accordingly, workshop participants will 1) Inventory the state
of the art (efficiency), current capacity, and the research community's needs
for transformation technologies; 2) Evaluate research and funding strategies to
meet current and future needs, including the possibility of establishing
centralized facilities; 3) Evaluate what is known about the biology of
transformation and identify knowledge gaps; and 4) Evaluate alternative
technologies for transformation, including the potential of nanotechnology and
strategies that will minimize or ultimately avoid the use of tissue culture for
transformation of crop plants. The result will be a roadmap of funding
priorities, including those research problems that require immediate solutions
and those that require longer time frames to bring to fruition. The roadmap will
be published in an open-access, refereed journal.