* 1546657
* RESEARCH-PGR:  A Genome-level Approach to Balancing the Vitamin Content of Maize Grain
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2022
* Carol Buell, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 07/31/2022
* USD 4,484,197.00

This collaborative research project is directed at identifying a subset of the
~40,000 genes in the corn genome that work together to determine the levels of
five essential and limiting dietary vitamins in kernels: vitamin E and the four
B vitamins, B1 (thiamin), B2 (riboflavin), B3 (niacin) and B6 (pyridoxine). By
combining approaches similar to those used in the Human Genome project, the
researchers will identify alleles, special variations in these "vitamin" genes,
and learn how to put them together to generate high amounts of vitamins in corn
kernels. An important outcome of this research will be the knowledge by which to
enhance these micronutrient levels in corn kernels such that diets in which
maize is a major component provide a balanced nutritional content. Such direct
translation of these findings will be the eventual incorporation and fixation of
identified alleles in maize breeding programs that are favorable for the
increased levels of vitamins E and B to enhance the food and feed supply chain.
In addition, this research will provide guiding principles for parallel efforts
in other agricultural crops and thus enable predictive breeding and metabolic
engineering of more nutritious crops worldwide. Finally, integration of research
with education within the project will permit training of the next generation of
plant scientists with knowledge of plant genetics, breeding, genomics,
biochemistry, and bioinformatics.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to
leverage the tremendous genetic and genomic tool sets developed in maize the
past decade to advance and accelerate our fundamental understanding of the
genes, alleles and genetic mechanisms controlling synthesis and accumulation of
vitamins that are limiting in maize grain and hence result in vitamin
deficiencies in maize-based diets: four B vitamins (B1, thiamine; B2,
riboflavin; B3, niacin; B6, pyridoxine) and vitamin E. This project brings
together a team of scientists with divergent but complementary knowledge and
skills that together will allow the genes, alleles and underlying mechanisms
controlling these nutritional traits to be elucidated and the knowledge deployed
on a global scale. Specific objectives are to (i) perform genome-wide
association studies with the maize Ames inbred line panel (n~2,000) to identify
and resolve quantitative trait loci (QTL) controlling accumulation of these
micronutrients; (ii) assess the role of rare alleles by constructing and
analyzing segregating F2 populations derived from Ames lines that are extreme
outliers for traits; (iii) determine the contribution of expression QTL and
presence-absence variants (PAVs) to vitamin composition using whole
transcriptome sequencing data obtained from grain 24 days after pollination in
500 inbred lines that represents the phenotypic variation of the Ames panel;
and, (iv) perform genomic prediction with the Ames panel to accelerate the
efficiency of breeding improved grain micronutrient composition in developing
countries. The broader impacts of this project to the broader scientific
community and public will be ensured through a set of coordinated activities
that engage students, postdoctoral associates, scientists and the public. Data
and biological resources generated in this project will be made accessible to
the community. Data will be disseminated through publications, project websites
and long-term repositories such as the NCBI's SRA and MaizeGDB.