* 1546985
* EAGER/Collaborative Research/Cybermanufacturing: Just Make It: Integrating Cybermanufacturing into Design Studios to Enable Innovation
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2017
* Christopher Williams, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 08/31/2017
* USD 99,976.00

Additive manufacturing, in which physical products are fabricated in a layer-by-
layer fashion, is creating renewed interest in manufacturing. Additive
manufacturing offers numerous advantages over traditional manufacturing
processes, such as machining, casting, and forging, but it is not always the
most cost effective method for fabricating parts. In many cases, subtractive
manufacturing techniques (i.e., fabrication processes like machining that remove
material to create a finished part) are more cost-effective, but they require
additional expertise and set-up compared to the "push button" technology
available on many additive manufacturing systems. In order to further improve
accessibility to all digital fabrication technologies, and to better inform
"makers" of the manufacturability of their designs, the team of this EArly-
concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) project will create a set of
design tools and software applications that provide rapid manufacturing feedback
in terms of geometry, material, quality, lead time, and cost to fabricate a
component. The cybermanufacturing system will be integrated into undergraduate
mechanical engineering design studios at three partner institutions (Georgia
Tech, Penn State University, and Virginia Tech) and will be formally assessed in
order to answer the research question, "How does this cybermanufacturing system
and resulting design assessment capability enable innovation?" This work will
lay the foundation for future, larger-scale cybermanufacturing efforts that will
connect engineering students and the broader maker community with a larger array
of manufacturing capabilities and know-how, making them better prepared for the
engineering and entrepreneurial workforce of tomorrow. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project's cloud-based cybermanufacturing system will be comprised of
applications (apps) for additive and subtractive manufacturing that will provide
an integrated view of the semantic information needed to assess
manufacturability of part designs. The cybermanufacturing system leverages
state-of-the-art advances in tool path planning for multi-axis machine tools
based on novel voxel-based flexible data representations for product geometry,
which will further the flexibility and accessibility of subtractive
manufacturing. The resulting system will be deployed in the partner
institutions' vibrant, yet distinct, design studio environments that offer
hands-on design/build experiences to several hundred undergraduate engineering
students each year. The impact of the system on the design process will be
measured directly using novel assessment instruments designed to probe salient
aspects of innovation in product design and their impact on the students
engaged. This project's approach will inform requirements for mapping more
expansive networks and manufacturing capabilities in future cybermanufacturing
service systems.