* 1546997
* I-Corps L: SUNY Replication Project
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2019
* Joseph Skrivanek, SUNY System Administration
* Standard Grant
* Alexandra Medina-Borja
* 07/31/2019
* USD 50,000.00

Through the NSF Innovation Corps for Learning Program (I-Corps L), this project
will develop ways to increase the scale and impact of a tutoring, mentoring, and
advising program to help community college students to complete Associate's
degrees and successfully transfer to four-year institutions. Increasing the
number and diversity of students entering, persisting and graduating with STEM
degrees; and significantly aiding them with STEM internships and job placements
is imperative to solving the critical national and state workforce deficit that
encompasses 63 STEM occupations categorized by the U. S. Department of Labor.
Improving STEM education pathways to engage and retain students in STEM programs
requires creative interdisciplinary real world experiential learning strategies
that integrate technology in delivering and reiterating content to 21st century
learners. Community colleges represent a special opportunity for increasing STEM
majors. Two-year institutions are 'the entry point into higher education for
most first-generation college students, particularly those from low-income,
minority, and immigrant backgrounds'. Studies have shown that only 25 percent of
these students complete a two-year degree and transfer to a four-year
institution and only 17 percent complete a bachelor's degree. In 2000, the
Baccalaureate and Beyond Community College Mentoring Program (BBCCMP) was
founded to assist underrepresented minority, low income, and first generation
community college students from six State University of New York (SUNY)
community colleges with the transition from the two-year to four-year
institutions and transitions either into the workforce or to graduate or
professional school. The program involves tutoring, mentoring, and advising at
the two and four-year institutions as well as a summer research program. In the
almost fifteen years of the program, over 300 students have been involved. Over
80 percent of these students completed their Associate's degree and transferred
to four-year institutions. Over 70 percent of these students are completing
their bachelor's degree and 33 percent are going on for post-graduate work. This
I-Corps for Learning project will develop ways to extend the impact of this
program to other institutions throughout the country.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
BBCCMP Program at Purchase College provides an extensive array of student
supports. These begin when the student is recruited from the community college.
Faculty coordinators at the community college identify and advise students who
wish to enter the program. In addition, the program provides peer tutors and
mentors at the community college. Students participate in a summer research
program that not only provides research opportunities, but also has workshops on
skills building, transferring, and career and post-baccalaureate opportunities.
Students also participate in cohort and career building. In 2010 the SUNY
Replication Project created a New York-based ecosystem in STEM based on the
success of the Baccalaureate and Beyond Program within SUNY. Subsequently, six
regional hubs comprising a mixture of two-year and four-year institutions were
formed, and representatives met again at a second conference in 2012, to scale-
up working with community colleges on student transitions. Through the NSF
I-Corps initiative, this project will investigate sustainable methods to expand
the success of BBCCMP to a larger number of institutions.