* 1546665
* I-Corps L:  CyberMentoring Network (CMN) for Broadening the Participation of Underrepresented Students in STEM
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2017
* William McHenry, Jackson State University
* Standard Grant
* Junhong Chen
* 07/31/2017
* USD 50,000.00

Through the NSF Innovation Corps for Learning Program (I-Corps L), this project
will develop ways to increase the scale and impact of the CyberMentoring
Network. This network will provide a suite of innovative web-based and mobile
tools to address the preparation, retention, and graduation of STEM students.
The CyberMentoring Network is specifically adapted for cases in which there are
no formal networks in place to mentor students based on their specific needs.
One of the keys to broadening participation of individuals from groups that have
been traditionally underrepresented in STEM is to provide students with readily
available information essential to making informed decisions and to assist
institutions of higher education identify, recruit, mentor, retain, and place
prospective STEM students. By offering students resources and access to mentors
who are practitioners in the STEM field, students will be better able to
understand the applicability of their coursework to their professional career.
Furthermore, the CyberMentoring Network will impact students' social networks,
social capital for work in STEM fields, and their preparation for graduate and
professional school. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Implementation of the CyberMentoring
Network will be initially in minority serving institutions. The CyberMentoring
Network will be instrumental in broadening the participation of individuals from
groups underrepresented in STEM and thus, contribute to the strengthening of the
STEM workforce. First-year students tend to experience the most difficulties in
transitioning from high school to higher education institutions with STEM
majors. These students tend to fall behind because they may not be well prepared
for college STEM courses or because they may feel intimidated by the subject
areas and/or fast-pace of the programs. The CyberMentoring Network will utilize
web-based and mobile tools tailored to the needs of STEM students. These tools
are designed to mentor and empower minority and underrepresented students to
access, research, organize, track, and realize their career options.
CyberMentoring Network provides students with an easy way to communicate and
interact from any geographic location with peers and STEM mentors (both
educators and practitioners), create a support network, and access information
about STEM careers.