* 1546278
* CCF: EAGER: Dimension Reduction and Optimization Methods for Flexible Refinement of Protein Docking
* CSE,CCF
* 01/01/2015,09/30/2017
* Yang Shen, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 09/30/2017
* USD 88,573.00

Proteins are the 'workhorse' molecules in cells. Their interactions with each
other, nucleic acids, ligands, and other molecules underlie many important
cellular processes. Therefore, elucidating protein interactions, preferentially
at the atomic level, is important to understanding these processes and treating
them in diseased cells. Protein docking achieves the purpose computationally by
finding the protein conformation of the lowest free energy values. Solving such
a free energy minimization problem is challenging for two reasons. First, the
search space is extremely high-dimensional because proteins are not rigid bodies
but rather flexible when interacting. Secondly, the free energy function is very
costly to evaluate and rugged to optimize. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research directly addresses these challenges to
protein docking at the refinement stage. First, the dimension of the search
space will be substantially lowered. Although proteins consist of hundreds to
thousands of atoms, not all collective motions of those atoms are physically
meaningful. The proposed methods will decompose the space of collective atomic
motions into that of rigid-body motions and that of a few relevant flexibility
motions by applying novel normal mode analysis (NMA) tools. Second, the search
efficiency for the energy minimum will be substantially improved. Energy
landscape in the reduced search space will be characterized and state-of-the-art
search methods will be applied for energy minimization in the space. The
proposed research will also produce insights on the reduced conformational space
of protein interactions and the landscape of free energy functions in the
reduced space. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;The ability to
predict how proteins interact with efficiency and accuracy is of tremendous
value to understanding the structural and functional organization of life,
developing diagnosis and therapeutics tools to cure diseases, and discovering
approaches to improve bioenergy yields. The proposed research is
interdisciplinary and thus expected to be useful to biologists who need protein
docking tools to aid their study as well as computer scientists who need to
apply or develop dimension reduction and optimization methods. Project will
provide training opportunities to students in developing interdisciplinary
skills.