* 1546732
* Core Support for the National Academy of Sciences' Board on Chemical Sciences and Technology (BCST) and Chemical Sciences Roundtable (CSR)
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Teresa Fryberger, National Academy of Sciences
* Continuing Grant
* Michelle Bushey
* 08/31/2018
* USD 983,154.00

The Divisions of Chemistry (CHE) and Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental and
Transport Systems (CBET) fund this award to the National Academy of Sciences to
support the core activities of both the Board on Chemical Sciences and
Technology (BCST) and the Chemical Sciences Roundtable (CSR). The results of
BCST and CSR discussions and workshops are disseminated through workshop reports
made available through professional societies, scientific and trade
publications, and on the web.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The BCST has broad
representation from academe and industry and uses its collective expertise to
identify the needs of the community and to provide peer-reviewed consensus
reports, workshops, and symposia, as broad outreach into the chemical community
and beyond. The BCST enhances the impacts of the chemistry and chemical
engineering communities by engaging in questions of importance to federal
decision-makers. BCST members oversee a portfolio of ad hoc studies in three key
areas of education, workforce, and research issues. Specific areas of
consideration include: energy and sustainability, safety, and security. By
raising issues impacting the conduct of chemistry and chemical engineering
research with federal officials, BCST helps assure that the community of
practitioners can remain at the forefront of knowledge.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CSR provides an apolitical forum for leaders in the
chemical sciences and engineering, with the objective of enhancing understanding
of issues that affect government, academic, national laboratory, and nonprofit
sectors. CSR discussions provide a vehicle for interaction among the
participants, and for education, exchange of information, and discussion of
issues and trends that affect the chemical sciences. CSR engages leading
scientists and engineers to identify and explore, through workshops, emerging
topics of importance to the community of practitioners and beyond.