* 1546918
* International Travel: 40th International Conference on Infrared, Millimeter, and Terahertz Waves, August 2015
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2016
* Xi-Cheng Zhang, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Dimitris Pavlidis
* 07/31/2016
* USD 9,900.00

The proposed project seeks financial support for conference attendance costs by
the PI and his students to attend a conference to be held August 23-28, 2015 in
Hong Kong. The conference addresses the "terahertz (THz)gap" where bright
sources of light and sensitive means of detection do not exist. The THz gap
covres frequencies invisible to the naked eye in the electromagnetic spectrum,
lying between microwave and infrared in the range from 0.3 to 3THz. The
?International Conference on Infrared, Millimeter, and Terahertz Waves (IRMMW-
THz) 2015 will address scientific and technological activities from millimeter-
waves to the THz regime and the far-infrared region of the electromagnetic
spectrum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Topics ranging from micro- and nano-
scale devices and structures to large-scale accelerators and tokamaks and their
applications will be covered. Other topics to be addressed include among other
applications in Biology, Medicine, Security and Defense, Spectroscopy and
Material Properties, Sources, Detectors, and Receivers. The conference will
foster advances in the leading research of Technology by gathering a diverse
group of experts.&lt;br/&gt;The conference will include plenary keynote
speakers, oral paper presentations, posters sessions as well as demo and
exhibition sessions that will encourage the exchange of ideas in the THz area.
It will encourage young researchers in the US to present their research work to
the international community working in this field and will provide a great
opportunity for learning both fundamentals as well as advanced principles.