* 1546024
* Scientia Arctica: A Knowledge Archive for Discovery and Reproducible Science in the Arctic
* GEO,OPP
* 02/15/2016,01/31/2022
* Jeff Dozier, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Cooperative Agreement
* Marc Stieglitz
* 01/31/2022
* USD 6,008,044.00

Investigators at the University of California Santa Barbara, the NSF-funded
DataONE at the University of New Mexico, and NOAA (through the University of
Maryland) will build and operate a multi-institutional knowledge archive serving
diverse Arctic disciplines, including ecology, earth science, atmospheric
science, oceanography, anthropology, archaeology, and social and political
science. The archive will provide the capability to preserve and enable
discovery of all products of NSF Arctic Science Section funded research,
including data, metadata, software, documents, and provenance that link these in
a coherent knowledge model, using infrastructure from the DataONE federation of
data repositories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This cooperative agreement will support
a comprehensive archive of data from Arctic research funded by the NSF Arctic
Sciences section, which necessitates a system that can handle the complexity,
heterogeneity, and volume of data generated in the Arctic. By building upon
successful repository infrastructures that already handle these kinds of data
the repository will come online at project inception, be immediately useful to
researchers, and undergo continuous improvement through feature expansions and
refinement. Novel features in the archive will enable critical linkages between
data, science, and policy. A data science fellowship program, training
workshops, and a short course will provide interdisciplinary training
opportunities for at least 190 graduate and undergraduate students. Selection
will promote underrepresented groups with the goal to increase the diversity of
data scientists in the research community. Students returning to their home
universities will help communicate data science issues and will effect a large
change across science disciplines nationally. In addition, the new
infrastructure and data will have a lasting impact on Arctic research and policy
globally. Arctic science has policy and societal importance that are
disproportionally large, partly because of the impacts of climate change in the
Arctic, and partly because of the resource implications on the oil, gas, and
other industries that are affected by these changes. Digital research data will
serve as a foundation for new insights that impact both science and
society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Data storage will be accomplished utilizing the UC
Santa Barbara KNB Data Repository (KNB, formerly the Knowledge Network for
Biocomplexity) for its versioning and accessioning to enable an effective
archive. Data will be replicated to administratively diverse institutions at the
KNB, the Centers for Environmental Information (NCEI) and the Amazon cloud, as
this is critical to long-term preservation. DataONE researcher-facing tools will
be adapted to provide convenient pathways to document and archive diverse data
formats as part of scientists' normal workflow. This infrastructure will be
supported with an outstanding set of community services, including data
discovery tools, metadata assessment and editing, data cleansing and
integration, data management consulting, and user help-desk services. A data
recovery team will engage the community to prioritize and rescue critical Arctic
data from past NSF research that is currently inaccessible. In addition to the
traditional functions of a data archive, modern cloud-based data facilities will
support detailed provenance tracking of the science process, data usage and
citation reporting, linkages among heterogeneous disciplines, and direct
linkages between the literature, investigators, and funding programs. Usability
and outreach specialists will engage an interdisciplinary Arctic Science
Advisory Board and the broader polar science communities to drive continuous
improvement by evaluating tools and services, gathering requirements and use
cases, and prioritizing improvements to infrastructure and service offerings of
the archive. Usage data and usability studies will drive an iterative cycle of
assessment and development to improve operations.