* 1546035
* Leadership Workshop for Achieving Scale for Inclusion in STEM
* EDU,DRL
* 06/01/2015,11/30/2016
* Margaret Glass, Association of Science-Technology Centers
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca A. Kruse
* 11/30/2016
* USD 98,564.00

Despite strong efforts by many people and institutions and a deep, ongoing
commitment from the National Science Foundation, progress remains uneven and
slower than desired with respect to broadening participation of people from all
parts of society in the science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM)
fields. The broadening participation challenge will become even more urgent with
increasing demographic and socioeconomic changes underway in our nation. Through
this conference and workshop grant, the Association of Science-Technology
Centers (ASTC) will convene a group of diverse thought leaders from across
higher education, profit, non-profit, K-12 and informal STEM education sectors
for one day of brainstorming and prioritizing possible ideas, strategies, and
actions that could be aggressively pursued by broadening participation
initiatives. The findings of this workshop could support ongoing, field-wide
discussions about the next generation of projects and efforts to address issues
of underrepresentation in STEM. This workshop will build upon a foundation of
existing NSF programs and funded projects and will draw upon ongoing efforts by
ASTC's Center for Advancement of Informal Science Education (CAISE) to address
broadening participation challenges in informal STEM learning environments. The
project is funded by the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program, which
seeks to advance new approaches to, and evidence-based understanding of, the
design and development of STEM learning in informal environments. This includes
providing multiple pathways for broadening access to and engagement in STEM
learning experiences, advancing innovative research on and assessment of STEM
learning in informal environments, and developing understandings of deeper
learning by participants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Inclusion Across the Nation
of Communities of Learners that Have Been Underrepresented for Diversity in
Engineering and Science (INCLUDES) Leadership Workshop will engage up to 55
local and non-local participants from the higher education, profit, non-profit,
K-12 and informal STEM education sectors that have been selected for their
extensive but varied experiences with efforts to broaden participation in STEM.
Before the workshop, participants will prepare for the plenary talks, panel
presentations, and breakout session discussions by reading selected literature
about effectively scaling innovations, collective impact strategies, catalytic
innovations, and other related theory. Specific goals of this one-day workshop
are 1) to consider potential scalable high-impact innovations in STEM education
to assure success for all people across the nation; and 2) to generate ideas,
strategies, and actions that could substantially alter the current landscape and
potentially achieve a transformative change for inclusion. ASTC proposes to
disseminate the workshop findings to worksop participants, the broader
communities to which participants belong, and even the National Science
Foundation. A workshop synthesis report and other content generated at the
workshop (speaker slides, presentation video, graphic documentation to name a
few) will reside at ASTC's informalscience.org website. ASTC proposes an
extensive communications media strategy that will draw stakeholder attention to
these resources and support field-wide discussion and action around broadening
participation.