* 1546677
* EAGER: Reconstructing the Seismic History of the Teton Fault Using Lake Sediments at Grand Teton National Park, WY
* GEO,EAR
* 11/01/2015,10/31/2017
* Mark Abbott, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Richard Yuretich
* 10/31/2017
* USD 42,225.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A non-technical description of the project, which
explains the project's significance and importance&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
spectacular scenery of Grand Teton National Park is largely the result of
movement along the Teton Fault, which is still active today. Numerous lake
basins populate the mountain front and earthquakes resulting from fault movement
produce landslides that accumulate distinctive sediment layers on the lake
floor. This project will investigate these sediments in order to determine the
characteristics of the layers resulting from fault movement and to calculate the
recurrence interval of earthquakes in the Grand Teton region over the past
15,000 years. In addition to developing methods for the long-standing problem of
identifying the tectonic influences upon sediment deposition, this research will
help Grand Teton National Park evaluate earthquake hazards and provide the basis
for an educational program for park visitors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; A technical
description of the project&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This EAGER project will employ a
comprehensive suite of well-established methods to investigate this distinctive
geologic setting, where past tectonic activity is unusually well preserved in
lake sediments. Multi-beam sonar bathymetric mapping, seismic surveys, and
sediment cores from multiple lakes located directly on the Teton fault will be
evaluated to produce: i) a high-resolution (centimeter-scale) bathymetric map of
lake-floor morphology; ii) an inventory of landslide deposits and slope failures
preserved in multiple basins positioned along the Teton fault trace; and iii) a
continuous and accurately dated 15,000-year-long record of earthquakes and
earthquake-driven disturbances at Grand Teton National Park. The paleoseismic
record generated through this research is a key initial step toward developing a
solid understanding of interactions among tectonic, climatic, and geomorphic
processes, including their relative roles in driving landscape evolution. The
results will also contribute to the development of a promising method for
constructing paleoseismic records from lake sediments.