* 1546106
* EAGER: Mechanisms of selection in plants with different reproductive strategies
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2018
* Jannice Friedman, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 12/31/2018
* USD 149,905.00

Reproduction is the most fundamental measure of evolutionary fitness for any
living organism. A major aspect of the evolution of different reproductive
strategies involves sexual selection - i.e.,competition among males to fertilize
an egg, or the selective choice by females to mate with particular males.
However it is still unclear the extent to which sexual selection occurs in
plants, both because they often have male and female parts in the same flower,
and because they are sessile and rely on pollinators to transfer the pollen
(i.e., male gametes). Understanding the degree to which female plants exert
choice for particular males could shed light on a central feature of plant
fertilization and reproduction. This research will use a new assay to overcome
the technical challenges of observing events taking place inside the
reproductive tract of female plants. This research has the potential to pave the
way for understanding the interactions between male and female gametes with
implications for overcoming reproductive failure and increasing seed production,
and for understanding fundamental processes in evolution that have thus far been
difficult to study in plants. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will elucidate
the mechanisms of sexual selection in plants, focusing on female interactions
with the growing pollen tube. The project will use a new combination in
vivo/vitro assay where intact styles are pollinated and pollen tubes germinate
and grow down the style. The pollinated style is excised and placed on
artificial media with individually excised ovules. By varying the combinations
and numbers of pollen grains and ovules, this approach provides the unique
benefit of disentangling pollen tube-style interactions, pollen tube
competition, and pollen tube-ovule interactions. In addition the research will
use a phylogenetic comparative context to understand the strength and evolution
of sexual selection, by exploiting diversity in pollination and mating system in
the genus Thalictrum. The project will also benefit the scientific community and
the public by including outreach and training components. Collaboration with the
popular Museum of Science and Technology will provide mentoring and public
workshops to Syracuse City school children.