* 1546840
* INSPIRE: Unraveling Factors that Determine Fast Growth of a Photoautotroph
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Himadri Pakrasi, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 08/31/2020
* USD 1,000,000.00

This INSPIRE award is partially funded by the Systems and Synthetic Biology
program in the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences in the Directorate
for Biological Sciences; the Biotechnology and Biochemical Engineering program
and the Environmental Engineering program in the Division of Chemical,
Bioengineering, Environmental, and Transport Systems in the Directorate for
Engineering; the Office of Integrated Activities, and the Office of
International Science & Engineering. This award is aimed at generating systems
level insights into the processes and dynamics that influence growth in model
photosynthetic organisms. As such, this project has important implications for
fundamental understanding of a complex and essential biological process, and has
significant implications for biotechnology applications. Photosynthesis is the
engine of life on our planet, and organisms that live off of photosynthesis,
such as cyanobacteria, algae, and plants, are primarily responsible for carbon
sequestration in the biosphere. On the planet today, such oxygen-producing
photosynthetic organisms assimilate 100 petagrams (100 gigatons) of carbon per
year. In contrast, organisms that need chemical nutrients as sources of energy
assimilate only 0.3 petagrams (0.3 gigatons) per year. This INSPIRE project is
aimed at unraveling the most important factors that control growth rates of
cyanobacteria, a model photosynthetic organism. It brings together two different
fields, cyanobacteria physiology and mathematical modeling, to abstract
fundamental rules of growth parameters and dynamics. It will help design tool
kits for engineering cyanobacteria and other photosynthetic microorganisms to
enable increased biomass production, an essential requirement for biotechnology
applications for sunlight driven carbon-neutral production of food, feed and
fuel. The project will also provide training for international undergraduates
and engage students under the iGEM training program.

The team of researchers identified recently a unicellular cyanobacterium,
Synechococcus elongatus strain, UTEX 2973, with the fastest growth rate among
all cyanobacterial strains studied to date. Surprisingly, this strain is a close
relative of Synechococcus elongatus PCC 7942, a well-studied model
cyanobacterial strain. The two share greater than 99% genome sequence identity.
However, the growth potential of Synechococcus 2973 is nearly three-fold better
than Synechococcus 7942. The investigators will determine the key factors that
are responsible for fast growth of cyanobacteria by applying experimental
molecular approaches to compare Synechococcus 7942 with Synechococcus 2973,
using adaptive evolution, and developing metabolic and expression (ME) models.
They will compare the transcriptome of the two strains under different light
intensities, CO2 levels and growth phases. The integrating of ME models for
Synechococcus 2973 and Synechococcus 7942 with the transcriptomic data generated
are expected to uncover metabolic and expression differences that contribute to
the increased biomass production of Synechococcus 2973. The photosynthetic and
carbon fixation efficiencies will also be measured to better elucidate
mechanistic differences between these strains. In addition, a subset of
mutations identified by genome comparison will be analyzed in an effort to
recapitulate the fast-growth phenotype.