* 1546672
* Meeting: Life on the Edge: Biology, Physiology, and Evolution of Extremophiles, Portland, Oregon, January 2016
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2016
* Annie Lindgren, Portland State University
* Standard Grant
* Mamta Rawat
* 07/31/2016
* USD 9,700.00

This award supports the participation of researchers and their students in a
symposium entitled "Life on the Edge: Biology, Physiology, and Evolution of
Extremophiles" which will be held at the annual Society for Integrative and
Comparative Biology (SICB) meeting in January, 2016 in Portland Oregon, home to
the Center for Life in Extreme Environments (OMSI) at Portland State and the
Oregon Museum of Science and Industry. The aims of this symposium are to: (1)
synthesize current knowledge of the biology of organisms that live in very
extreme environments (extremophiles) by uniting a diverse group of researchers
who do not generally attend the same meetings, and (2) provide a platform to
discuss how to best use the enigmatic nature of these unique organisms as a tool
for informal STEM education. The very nature of the existence of extremophiles
is often enough to pique public interest in the biological sciences. Thus, we
have partnered with OMSI to offer a workshop to SICB attendees that includes
dynamic, hands-on and reflective activities designed to introduce basic science
communication concepts and techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports
the participation of researchers and their students in a symposium entitled
"Life on the Edge: Biology, Physiology, and Evolution of Extremophiles" which
will be held at the annual Society for Integrative and Comparative Biology
(SICB) meeting in January, 2016 in Portland Oregon, home to the Center for Life
in Extreme Environments (OMSI) at Portland State and the Oregon Museum of
Science and Industry. Recent advances in fields such as high-throughput
sequencing, metagenomics, and transcriptomics are now uncovering some of the
mechanisms by which organisms are capable of not only surviving, but also
thriving, in extreme ecosystems. One shortcoming in the field of extremophile
biology is that researchers tend to collaborate largely with those studying
similar taxonomic groups, resulting in a lack of overall communication in
methodological and theoretical advancements. This lack of broad-scale
interaction is of particular concern in light of the potential impacts of
climate change on these ecosystems. To foster new collaborations across broad
disciplines in extremophile biology, researchers from diverse taxonomic and
academic backgrounds have been invited to participate in a symposium.