* 1546742
* RESEARCH PGR:  An interdisciplinary approach to deciphering molecular signaling pathways controlling plant-symbiont associations in legumes and cereals.
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2022
* Joshua Coon, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Gerald Schoenknecht
* 07/31/2022
* USD 2,707,714.00

Part 1: Non-technical abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The roots of crop plants
contain important microorganisms that allow the plants and microbes to satisfy
their nutritional needs. The relationship between these two very different types
of organisms is called symbiotic because both partners benefit from the
association. The plant converts sunlight and carbon dioxide into sugars and
other organic compounds that are supplied to the microbes in the roots. The
microbes provide phosphate and nitrogen to the plant in forms that the plant can
readily ingest. These symbiotic associations permit the growth of some crops
without added fertilizer. For example, plants are unable to convert gaseous
nitrogen in the atmosphere into a reduced form that can be incorporated into the
proteins, vitamins and other critical biomolecules that allow them to germinate,
develop and grow. Certain crops, such as the legumes (e.g., beans, peas and
alfalfa) harbor nitrogen-converting bacteria within specialized structures in
their roots that provide this reduced nitrogen to the plant. Most crops do not
have these bacteria and must rely on the application of nitrogen fertilizer for
optimal growth. This project seeks to obtain a molecular understanding of this
symbiotic association between plant and microbes, with a long-term goal of
enabling such an association in non-leguminous crops like corn and wheat, which
currently require extensive fertilization to sustain crop yield. A broader
impact of this project is a summer Plant Proteomics Workshop, which provides
training in proteomic and genomic profiling to the entire plant research
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part 2: Technical
abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to profile the early molecular
events in the recognition of and response to symbiotic microbes (nitrogen-fixing
rhizobia and arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi) by the model legume crop, Medicago
truncatula and the model monocot, rice. This approach will enable a comparison
at the molecular level of the mechanisms by which these two crop groups
recognize their beneficial microbes. The analysis of the shared and distinct
chemical and genetic factors in these two systems should provide tools and
information to enable the engineering of beneficial associations between cereal
crops (e.g., rice, corn, wheat) and nitrogen-fixing rhizobia. The specific aims
are (1) the identification of host proteins modified by phosphorylation,
acetylation or ubiquitinylation in first hour following signal reception, and
validation of potentially active candidates from this and from the previous
project award period, (2) the integration of proteomic and transcriptomic
responses into networks that can be compared in the two species, using
informatics and computational modeling, and (3) a high-throughput screen for
symbiosis factors using a newly developed chemical genomics chip system. This
project will expand a Plant Proteomics Workshop for training in the latest
large-scale proteomic and genomic profiling technologies.