* 1546862
* RESEARCH-PGR: Defining the Sumoylation System in Maize and Its Roles in Stress Protection
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2020
* Richard Vierstra, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 07/31/2020
* USD 930,142.00

Crop plants require suitable mechanisms to survive and perform well under
unfavorable environments in order to maintain high productivity. Recently, a
small protein called SUMO was discovered, and it appears to protect plants
against environmental stresses like heat and drought. Recent experiments with
plants exposed to environmental stresses have shown that the SUMO protein may
significantly affect how genes are expressed under those unfavorable conditions.
The SUMO protein becomes rapidly and reversibly attached to a group of proteins
that affect the pattern of gene expression during environmental stress. The
goals of this project are to understand the functions of SUMO during stress and
determine whether its manipulation in crops might provide novel approaches to
improve stress tolerance. This project will characterize the mode of action of
the SUMO protein, and identify all the other proteins that interact with SUMO
under stress. To help understand how SUMO helps maize survive stress, we will
also determine why maize mutants missing key components are now hypersensitive
to stress. Collectively, this fundamental research will identify key points in
maize SUMOylation that can be exploited to improve stress protection, not only
in maize but in other crops as well. This project will train postdocs, graduate
students, and undergraduates at Washington University in St. Louis. It will also
develop patentable technologies related SUMO and stress tolerance that can
sustainably enhance food and biofuel crop yield.

SUMO is an influential regulator in eukaryotes that works following its post-
translation addition to other intracellular proteins. Recent studies with
Arabidopsis discovered that SUMOylation selectively modifies a number of
critical regulators during stress that impact chromatin accessibility,
DNA/histone modification, transcription, nuclear pore function, and mRNA
processing/export. Their combined activities imply that stress-induced
SUMOylation helps plants reversibly adjust chromatin architecture and the
resulting RNA landscape to better survive adverse conditions. Unfortunately,
appreciation of SUMO is lacking for crops, thus precluding rational redesign for
agricultural benefit. To overcome this knowledge gap, this project will define
how SUMOylation works in maize (Zea mays), using as essential backdrops our
recent success in creating germplasm to study SUMO via proteomic approaches.
This project will: (i) describe how the maize SUMO system works biochemically
and responds to various environmental challenges, (ii) combine transgenic lines
expressing tagged SUMOs with established mass spectrometric methods to define
the maize 'SUMOylome' and its linkage sites, (iii) determine quantitatively how
the SUMOylation status of individual targets is impacted by stress, and (iv)
understand how SUMO helps maize survive adverse environments through the
phenotypic and biochemical analyses of system mutants generated by either Mu
transposition or CRISPR/Cas9 gene editing technologies. Collectively, this
project will generate much-needed reagents, techniques, and mutants that will
help define how SUMO reorganizes maize chromatin and its transcriptome during
stress, and identify key points in SUMOylation that can be manipulated to
improve stress protection in many crop species.