* 1546612
* BRAIN EAGER:  Genetic Access of Neuronal Populations Activated by Two Experiences in the Same Animal
* BIO,IOS
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2017
* Liqun Luo, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Sridhar Raghavachari
* 12/31/2017
* USD 299,999.00

The mammalian brain consists of hundreds of millions to billions of nerve cells
(neurons) that form complex networks. How perception, cognition, and action are
reflected by the activities of neurons is a central question in modern
neuroscience. The investigators have previously developed a genetic method to
mark neurons that are activated by a specific sensory experience or behavioral
episode, so they can visualize their connections and measure their activities.
In this research, the investigators will develop new methods to improve the
signal-to-noise ratio to more effectively identify the active neurons, and to
mark two separate experiences differentially in the same animal so they can
directly compare physiological properties of two populations of neurons, such as
those before and after learning. The success of these approaches will enable
scientists to compare brain representations of different stimuli and behavior,
and what changes occur after learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The method used to
mark active neurons (TRAP, for targeted recombination in active populations)
utilizes the property of immediate early genes, whose transcription is activated
by neuronal activity. This was achieved using mouse genetics to place a drug-
inducible Cre recombinase under the control of immediate early gene promoters,
such that experience in the drug-active period turns on Cre reporter transgenes
permanently. This research will utilize a combination of viral transduction and
mouse genetics to differentially label neurons that are activated by two
separate experiences. In addition, a strategy of using light to locally silence
inhibitory neurons will be used to enhance excitation-to-inhibition ratio, and
thereby enhance TRAP efficiency, in a much narrower time window during the drug-
active period. The new transgenic mice and viral vectors will be deposited in
public repositories after validation.