* 1546653
* BIGDATA: EAGER: Using Big Data to Investigate Longitudinal Education Outcomes through Visual Analytics
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2018
* Alex Bowers, Teachers College, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* John Cherniavsky
* 09/30/2018
* USD 299,680.00

BIGDATA: Using Big Data to Investigate Longitudinal Education Outcomes through
Visual Analytics&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Data science techniques have
revolutionized many academic fields and led to terrific gains in the commercial
sector. They have to date been underutilized in solving critical problems in the
US educational system, particularly in understanding Science, Technology,
Engineering and Mathematics (STEM) learning and learning environments,
broadening participation in STEM, and increasing retention for students
traditionally underserved in STEM. The goals of the Directorate for Education
and Human Resources (EHR), through the EHR Core Research program, for the
Critical Techniques and Technologies for Advancing Foundations and Applications
of Big Data Science &amp; Engineering (BIGDATA) program are to advance
fundamental research aimed at understanding and solving these critical problems,
and to catalyze the use of data science in Education Research. This Early
Concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) will employ data from national
representative datasets including approximately 35,000 students to investigate
course taking patterns in high school and how these relate to critical outcomes
such as college attendance, high school and college success, and career choices.
Few investigators have attempted to answer this question with this scale of
data. Therefore, this proposal will contribute significantly to the field's
understanding of factors that affect success in high school and college.
Building on these new insights will enable the potential to create interventions
at the high school and college level based on data about what works to improve
graduation and workforce outcomes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Education
Longitudinal Study of 2002-2012 (ELS:2002) and High School Longitudinal Study of
2009 (HSLS:2009) are representative samples of high school students who were
tracked through college and into their early career. ELS has 15,000 students and
HSLS has 21,000 students. For ELS, NCES surveyed students in 10th and 12th
grade, then sophomore year of college, and then when they were approximately 26.
NCES collected transcripts for high school and college, and high school and
college achievement, attitudinal, participation and demographic variables. The
Principal Investigator will first use visualizations to identify potential
patterns of difference in outcomes and then use growth mixture modeling (GMM)
and receiver operating characteristic analysis (ROC) to investigate the
statistical significance of those patterns.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is
supported by the EHR Core Research (ECR) program. The ECR program emphasizes
fundamental STEM education research that generates foundational knowledge in the
field. Investments are made in critical areas that are essential, broad and
enduring: STEM learning and STEM learning environments, broadening participation
in STEM, and STEM workforce development