* 1546990
* EAGER: Evaporation of  mucosalivary fluid in the context of disease transmission
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2017
* Lydia Bourouiba, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 07/31/2017
* USD 119,554.00

1546990(Bourouiba)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is a proposal to study the
dispersion and evaporation of biologiocal fluids that are violently emitted (as
in sneezing and coughing). These fluids play an important role in pathogen
propagation and the spreading out of disease through the air and through systems
for circulating air in buildings and vehicles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
research will explore the role played by fluid dynamics in disease transmission.
The problems examined involve several fluid dynamics problems, including
multiphase flows, turbulent flows, small-scale surface tension dominated flows
and elastic complex and non-Newtonian flows. The proposed research will
specifically examine, with detailed experimental measurements, the differences
between the evaporation processes of mucsoalivary fluid droplets ejected during
violent expirations in the form of droplets and those of water droplets. It is
also proposed to investigate how the ejection mechanism of the mucosalivary
fluid droplets in dense sneeze or cough suspensions affects their evaporation
process when compared to their evaporation in isolation or dilute suspensions.
Fundamental physical laws and mathematical modeling will be used to gain
insights with general applicability for several diseases. Results from this
research might lead to the development of a new area of research altogether: the
area between rigorous fluid dynamics and mathematical modeling of epidemiology.
Mentoring of students is proposed, while the PI and her team will also reach out
to the MIT Museum in Cambridge for the development of activities that target the
public.