* 1546740
* RAPID: Breaking drought as an opportunity to examine regional vs. local constraints on microbial community responses to environmental change
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Christine Hawkes, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 08/31/2018
* USD 148,912.00

More than twice the amount of carbon is stored in soils than is found as carbon
dioxide in the atmosphere. Microbes consume soil organic material for both
carbon and nutrients, and so their activities dictate how much carbon is
retained by soils, and how much is released. Current models used to forecast how
microbes will affect soil carbon assume that they all behave exactly the same in
response to moisture and temperature no matter where they are located. By
contrast, recent research by the PI has found that soils from drier regions did
not have the same capacity to respond to moisture as soils from wetter sites.
These local 'historical contingencies' make it more difficult to accurately
predict future soil carbon storage and loss. Also complicating the picture is
that the PI's prior studies have taken place during an extended regional drought
period, and therefore could reflect a temporary condition created by drought
stress. This year, her sample sites in Texas are experiencing excessive
rainfall, and even flooding, which could affect both regional immigration and
dormancy/resuscitation dynamics that might overcome local historical constraints
and allow for soil microbes to better acclimate to a change in moisture. This
RAPID award will enable her to test these ideas. Her team will take advantage of
this rare wet year in 2015, the first in Texas since 2007. These studies will
result in improvements in our understanding of how soil microbial communities
function and respond to changes in precipitation, knowledge that is important to
agriculture, range land and forestry management. One technician, one graduate
student, and several undergraduates will receive training through this project.
The undergraduates will be recruited from a class taught by the PI for freshman
as part of the Freshman Research Initiative at the University of Texas, Austin,
which implements innovative research-based education and targets
underrepresented groups in STEM fields. The graduate and undergraduate students
also will be encouraged to develop a related independent research
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this RAPID project is to determine
how the balance of local vs. regional processes affect historical contingencies
in microbial responses to environmental change. The current wet year provides an
opportunity to separate local vs. regional drivers. This will be addressed by
(1) testing for release of historical contingencies on soil respiration
responses to moisture, (2) documenting whether community composition shifts
occur in parallel in the field, and (3) examining two mechanisms that likely
underlie the previous observations of contingencies: dormancy/resuscitation and
immigration dynamics. This research will be accomplished using a combination of
a steep rainfall gradient where the PI and her lab have worked for 9 years, as
well as lab microcosm experiments to generate moisture response curves and
manipulate dispersal. Results have the potential to improve how soil
biogeochemical processes are forecast in climate change scenarios. If historical
contingencies persist despite this wet year, then local spatial variation in
process responses may be necessary for accurate forecasting. Alternatively, if
regional processes rescue prior historical contingencies and allow soils to
acclimate to a new rainfall regime, then models might be improved by
incorporating lags in process responses.