* 1546011
* EAGER: Novel Memory Design with Ballistic Deflection Transistors
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2017
* Martin Margala, University of Massachusetts Lowell
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 06/30/2017
* USD 144,504.00

Building exascale computing systems using conventional silicon technology is
prohibitive due to the excessive power consumption and poor power efficiency of
the system. The majority of the power consumed by a computer system is
attributed to the operation of the memory. In addition, embedded memories
typically occupy up to 80% of the area of the microprocessor. The realization of
new technologies that offer significant (orders of magnitude) improvements in
speed, power consumption, and integration densities is needed. Presently there
is no clear winner for next-generation circuit technology; however, nanoscale
devices and structures based on quantum transport is one of the choices. In this
category, ballistic transport nanostructures operational at room temperature are
gaining momentum. Ballistic Deflection Transistor (BDT) technology offers
picosecond nanoscale memory design opportunities. The goal of this project is to
investigate the physics and limitations of integrating picosecond BDT memories
on a larger scale and the impact on fabrication, experimental characterization,
and physical modeling. The project offers students working on the project
interdisciplinry training in material science, device physics, nanofabrication,
and advanced electronics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will pave the way
to transformational concepts and ideas in design of ultrafast nanoscale latches
and memories, enabling efforts towards exascale for nxt generation of computing
capabilities. It encompasses device physics and modeling, novel architectures,
and covers four focus areas and a special demonstration project: (1) Modeling of
ballistic nanodevices and circuits using the ballistic mobility concept based on
carrier transport in media with nonlinear conductivity, (2) Fabrication and
characterization of nano-scale ballistic deflection transistors (BDTs) and their
implementation as THz-switching digital circuit elements integrated into memory
circuits; (3) Development of the concept of BDT access switches for memory cell
control: and 4) Investigation of early concepts of Sub-picosecond (THz
bandwidth) BDT RAM cell design operation based on ballistic nanodevices. The
concept of a new memory cell will revolutionize data storage systems. To prove
the feasibility of concept, a six terminal ballistic deflection transistor
comprising a source terminal, two gate terminals and three drain terminals will
be fabricated, with a triangular shape deflector in its center. The deflector
will be placed in such a way that left, right and top (bottom) vertex of it is
pointed towards the left drain terminal, right drain terminal and source
terminal of BDT respectively. This coplanar structure will be etched into an
InGaAs 2DEG. The electrons will enter the channel from the source terminal of
BDT. The left and right input gates will be used to steer the electrons towards
left and right drain terminals respectively. The top drain will be used to
change the electron velocity. Upon collision with central deflector, electrons
will gain their momentum to move quickly towards the output drain terminals. If
successful, the project will revolutionize the performance and power efficiency
of modern memories capable of supporting exascale for next generation computing
needs.