* 1546061
* EAGER: Modeling Coupled Herd and Household Dynamics in Pastoral Systems
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2017
* Mark Moritz, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 07/31/2017
* USD 43,756.00

Anthropologists use the term "pastoralism" to refer to economies that depend on
raising livestock. Pastoralism has long been viewed as a good strategy for
people who live in less productive environments with few natural resources.
However, even pastoralists have to be concerned about balancing the number of
animals they keep with the pasture available to feed them and the labor
available to care for them. Indeed, population models show that livestock
populations have the potential to grow exponentially and oustrip the carrying
capacity of their environments. But empirical evidence indicates otherwise: in
the real world, pastoral livestock populations are relatively stable. The
question then is how is this balance achieved? Until now the most popular
explanation has been that droughts, diseases, and other disasters keep livestock
populations in check. But the research supported by this award will test an
alternative explanation: demographic dynamics -- the natural expansion and
contraction of family sizes over time -- operating at the herd and household
level may constrain the growth of livestock populations regionally. If this is
indeed the case, as this interdisciplinary research team proposes, then it has
implications for development interventions in pastoral societies. Improving
veterinary health and reducing drought vulnerability would then improve the
lives of pastoralists without necessarily threatening the natural resource base.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team will develop an agent-based model to
examine the impact of the domestic cycle of households on the demography of
family herds and ultimately on regional livestock populations. Empirical data
from previous studies will be used to parameterize the agent-based model. The
model will simulate the domestic cycle of an initial population of 100
households and the demographic processes of their family herds for 250 years (or
10 generations). The simulations will allow the researchers to examine how the
domestic cycle affects herd demography by examining the impact of changes in age
of first marriage, increase in the number of sons, or increase in polygyny
rates. In addition, the simulations will be used to examine how sensitive the
growth of regional livestock populations is to changes in the herd-size
threshold, i.e., whether a lower threshold leads to stronger growth of livestock
populations at the regional level. Findings from this research will provide
insight into livestock population dynamics in pastoral societies, in particular
the question of why these populations do not seem to increase in the absence of
major disasters like droughts and diseases.