* 1546947
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award: Long Term Environmental, Subsistence And Urbanization Interactions
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2016
* Zoe Crossland, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 12/31/2016
* USD 25,200.00

Ms. Alison Damick will undertake research on the emergence of urbanism and its
relationship to technological and environmental change during the Early Bronze
Age (c. 3200-2400 BCE) in coastal Lebanon. The development of urban societies is
critical in human history. Urbanism continues to be a current dominant
settlement trend, and involves especially intensive modes of environmental
modification and stress. The fluctuations of urban societies have often been
attributed to climate variability, the over-exploitation of agricultural and
natural resources, and the ability of humans to respond to such challenges.
Archaeology is ideally positioned to examine these processes because it traces
long-term impacts of different modes of environmental modification and resource
use over the entire course of past climate change events, and generates models
for more or less effective strategies in different contexts. This research will
produce data that is relevant to widespread contemporary concerns, (in the
United States and beyond), where a wide variety of environments, urban
infrastructures, and technologies must be mobilized to address national
strategies for coping with a changing climate. It is also relevant in areas in
which there are globally invested development interests, such as Africa or the
Middle East, where policies for engaging with often de-centralized urban systems
require models for understanding alternative urban strategies for coping with
local needs. This research investigates the ways in which urban systems of the
past in Lebanon, and their attendant environmental technologies, provide insight
into diverse strategies that allowed for settlement rejuvenation within very
small timespans. This will generate new insight into urban resilience, which has
direct implications for international development policies. This project also
directly contributes to collaborative training programs and international
comparative research by providing training opportunities for Lebanese and
international students and the first microbotanical reference collections for
the Archaeology program at AUB.

For this project, Ms. Damick will examine changes in plant use and processing
technologies over the course of early urbanization at two sites in coastal
Lebanon. The early urban settlements of Lebanon are much smaller than in
neighboring areas, and show evidence for periodic expansion and contraction
throughout their occupation history; however, they appear to have been less
vulnerable to the broader regional de-urbanization movements of the "4.2k arid
event" than the settlements of neighboring areas. This research uses a close
analysis of the microbotanical and ground stone tool evidence from Tell Fadous-
Kfarabida (TFK) in the north and Sidon in the south, to reconstruct and compare
plant production and processing over the course of urbanization in one of the
least understood areas of the Levant. Through an analysis of grinding tool use
wear and microbotanical evidence, contextualized within regional
palaeoenvironmental and site-specific occupation records, Ms. Damick will
develop a comparative model for how these small-scale early urban societies
reacted to climate variability in relation to their micro-environments and their
geo-political orientations. This research is crucial for understanding the
emergence of social complexity in the Levantine EBA, and for global comparative
approaches to environmental resource management in volatile, diverse
environments.