* 1546683
* I-Corps:  Convenient Visible and UV Laser Sources Using Nonlinear Conversion
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2015,12/31/2015
* David Shiner, University of North Texas
* Standard Grant
* Rathindra DasGupta
* 12/31/2015
* USD 50,000.00

Visible and ultra-violet (UV) lasers have a large and increasing number of
applications in science, medicine and industry. Scientific applications of the
proposed lasers would include studies of atoms and molecules of interest in
physics, chemistry and biology. The proposed lasers are well suited for Raman
spectroscopy, which is of growing importance in biology and material science. In
the biomedical area, potential applications include flow cytometry and confocal
microscopy, as well as other fluorescence applications, such as fluorescein
angiography. In engineering applications, semiconductor inspection is a growth
area, as is sensing technology based on fiber Bragg grating fabrication with UV
lasers. Laser sources produced with this team's approach can be tailored to all
of these applications.

This project provides an efficient, convenient, and relatively low cost method
of generating laser light in parts of the visible and ultraviolet (UV) spectrum
that current lasers do not provide. The approach is to use convenient and long
lasting laser sources in the near infrared (NIR) as the fundamental source,
which is then converted to twice the fundamental frequency (frequency doubler).
It is also possible to use two doublers in series to generate deep UV (DUV)
light. There are some similar products available commercially, but the proposed
system has higher efficiency, more simplicity and convenience, and a much lower
expected cost.