* 1546438
* RAPID: Ethnobotany of Northwest Alaska: Preserving Traditional Knowledge and Engaging Alaska Native Students in STEM
* GEO,OPP
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2016
* Stefanie Ickert-Bond, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Anna M. Kerttula
* 09/30/2016
* USD 24,013.00

This is a small RAPID project, co-funded with the Tribal Colleges and
Universities Program, EHR Directorate, to utilize the extensive video footage
and qualitative data collected through Elder interviews and participatory
ethnography in 2013 and 2014, for the production of a series of short topic
oriented films on the ethnobotanical knowledge of Alaska Native peoples. This
extensive ecological knowledge is at risk of loss as the pressures of
globalization affect food sources and food choices by Alaska Native peoples. The
ethnobotanical knowledge recorded through this project is one key to long-term
food security in the Arctic. In addition, the films will support the teaching of
science as interdisciplinary knowledge embedded in cultures and issues in the
real world. These methods have been shown at Tribal college programs to support
STEM learning, which increases the success of Native American Indian, Alaska
Native, and Native Hawaiian students in science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
knowledge that is embodied in the above mentioned interviews is in danger of
being lost with the passing of the current generation of Elders, and the film
series that will be produced will not only preserve this knowledge but will also
make it accessible to younger generations of Alaska Natives interested in their
heritage knowledge, to scientists interested in accessing and analyzing
ethnobotanical knowledge, and to the general public. In addition, the applicant
will engage Alaska Native students in interdisciplinary science through the
production of videos on this knowledge. Although video production is not a novel
way to engage young scientists, the participants will be working with a unique
set of interdisciplinary data of ethnobotanical information from their own
cultures. In addition, the Tribal Colleges and Universities Program (TCUPS) has
supported ethnobotony programs as a means of supporting STEM infrastructure at
Tribal Colleges. These videos will be utilized to introduce interdisciplinary
scientific methods to Tribal College students through TCUPS programs at the
Rural Colleges of Alaska and Tribal Colleges in the continental U.S. In
addition, the videos will be available to museums for the public to gain a
better understanding of Alaska Native knowledge and tradition.