* 1546420
* Joint US-UK Workshop on Hydraulic Fracturing for Oil and Gas Production
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2016
* Danny Reible, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* William Cooper
* 06/30/2016
* USD 39,590.00

1546420&lt;br/&gt;Reible&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of the project is to
organize, conduct and document a workshop focused on research needs for the safe
and environmentally appropriate implementation of hydraulic fracturing and to
help translate the lessons learned in the US to the UK. Hydraulic fracturing has
revolutionized oil and gas production in the United States but with some
negative environmental consequences. Contributing to the environmental footprint
of hydraulic fracturing for oil and gas production are the impacts of hydraulic
fracturing on water availability, concerns for potential impacts on surface and
ground water quality, increased greenhouse gas emissions during production and
use of the produced fuels, seismic activity as a result of produced water
disposal and community impacts due to rapid growth in oil and gas activity in
some areas. The workshop will explore the current state of understanding of
these challenges, and research needs and opportunities to better understand
these impacts and how to manage them.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the
workshop is to develop a coherent research framework to overcome infrastructure,
technical, and societal challenges posed by hydraulic fracturing for oil and gas
and particularly to help manage the potential consequences of expanded use of
hydraulic fracturing and increased oil and gas activity in the UK. The workshop
will draw attendees from the US and the UK to understand both current activities
and their relevance to the UK. The conflicts, opportunities and trade-offs being
experienced in the US are likely to foretell what the UK is likely to face but
critical differences are also likely and the workshop will explore both the
similarities and the differences. The workshop is expected to lead to a clear
definition of system research challenges that are critical to the economic and
social vitality of hydraulic fracturing in the US and the UK. A particular
advantage of the timing of this workshop is the ability to build upon almost a
decade of experiences in the US and identify the remaining scientific and
technological challenges to minimizing the environmental footprint of hydraulic
fracturing. A goal of the workshop is to catalyze the formation of academic-
government partnerships that are able to address these research challenges. The
workshop will culminate in white papers that define and analyze scientific,
technical and socio-economic research gaps needed for innovating the
environmentally sustainable application of hydraulic fracturing for oil and gas
development both in the US and the UK. Particular attention is directed to
understanding the potential impacts on urban and high density rural areas that
have previously faced little oil and gas development and the unique
environmental consequences that might be posed by such development. Also of
particular interest is under-represented groups that may perceive little direct
benefit of hydraulic fracturing and a disproportionate cost and environmental
impact.