* 1546752
* EAGER: Exploiting a myopic opponent in imperfect-information games: Toward medical applications
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2016
* Tuomas Sandholm, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Weng-keen Wong
* 08/31/2016
* USD 100,000.00

Living organisms adapt to challenges through evolution and adaptation. These
survival mechanisms have proven to be a key difficulty in developing therapies,
since the challenged organisms develop resistance. It would be desirable to be
able to harness evolution and adaptation for therapeutic and technological
goals. For example, through a sequence of appropriate manipulations, could we
get a heterogeneous population of cancer cells to evolve to benign ones? Or,
could we steer the evolution of the population to a state where we can destroy
it? Could we evolve bacteria that eat toxins from the environment? The PI
proposes this to be done using computational game theory approaches. Biological
opponents have a distinct weakness that can be exploited: evolution and
adaptation is myopic - it does not look ahead in the game tree. The PI proposes
to develop techniques for exploiting opponents that cannot look ahead in
imperfect-information games. This project will set the stage for opponent-
exploitation approaches to battling diseases in a broad range of context by
computationally exploiting the diseases' myopic evolution/adaptation. This
applies to basically an unlimited number of diseases (at the population,
individual, and drug design levels), to synthetic biology (without inserting
foreign genetic material), and to asking fundamental questions in our ability to
steer evolution/adaptation. The work thus has the potential to pave the way for
exceptionally broad impact. The proposed work has significant educational impact
as well, beyond training and mentoring a PhD student working on this project.
The PI will incorporate some of the most important results from the proposed
research into his PhD-level courses Advanced AI and Foundations of Electronic
Marketplaces. He also proposes to give talks and tutorials on these
topics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Living organisms adapt to challenges through
evolution and adaptation. These survival mechanisms have proven to be a key
difficulty in developing therapies, since the challenged organisms develop
resistance. It would be desirable to be able to harness evolution and adaptation
for therapeutic and technological goals. For example, through a sequence of
appropriate manipulations, could we get a heterogeneous population of cancer
cells to evolve to benign ones? Or, could we steer the evolution of the
population to a state where we can destroy it? Could we evolve bacteria that eat
toxins from the environment? The PI proposes this to be done using computational
game theory approaches. Biological opponents have a distinct weakness that can
be exploited: evolution and adaptation is myopic - it does not look ahead in the
game tree. The PI proposes to develop techniques for exploiting opponents that
cannot look ahead in imperfect-information games. The proposed work has three
intellectual foci. First, extending an IJCAI-15 paper by Kroer and Sandholm to
handle the setting where the myopic opponent's node evaluation is not known
exactly, but rather with uncertainty. Second, developing game abstraction
techniques that leverage the opponent's myopia. Third, developing game
representations that are tractable in settings where the opponent is a
population (e.g., of cells) rather than an individual.