* 1546720
* I-Corps L:  STEM-Packs - Supporting STEM Learning Through Literature
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2016
* Gabriela Rose, Allegheny Intermediate Unit
* Standard Grant
* Karen Crosby
* 07/31/2016
* USD 50,000.00

Through the NSF Innovation Corps for Learning Program (I-Corps L), this project
will develop ways to increase the scale and impact of Summer Reading Club
resources called STEM Packs that integrate STEM content into reading club
themes. STEM Packs are resources containing materials and professional
development modules for incorporating Science, Technology, Engineering, and
Mathematics into annually conducted Summer Reading Clubs in libraries. The
project takes advantage of already nationally established and themed Summer
Reading Club programming, and its popularity, as an ideal resource introduction
target. The STEM Packs are stackable for multi-session use by a library staff
that, in general, does not have the requisite knowledge in STEM content or
pedagogy to develop its own tools for effective engagement with young patrons.
Children's librarians and their volunteers who conduct Summer Reading Club are
often proficient and entertaining storytellers, or have access to storytellers,
but they require capacity-building and resources to embed STEM content into
reading development. This project will increase the impact of STEM Packs by
developing ways of sustaining wider use of these materials on a national basis.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;A STEM Pack is comprised of one piece of children's
literature and accompanying STEM inquiry-based learning activities that directly
connect to the theme and main ideas featured in the children's literature and to
the Next Generation Science Standards (NGSS)/Common Core State Standards (CCSS).
STEM Packs are designed: (1) to incorporate STEM learning with reading and
storytelling practices already in place for Summer Reading Club, primarily for
pre-Kindergarten to 8th grade level; (2) to lead to stackable STEM Packs, which
provide just-in time resources for librarians, volunteers, and parents to
support students in connecting fiction and non-fiction literature to learning
STEM concepts; (3) to continue a pilot foundation integrating Next Generation
Science Standards and Common Core State Standards in Mathematics and English
Language Arts into summer reading; (4) to serve to scale to statewide and
national scope; (5) to help bridge the three-month gap between scholastic or
formal-learning semesters, and to accomplish this in a way that is consistent
with uniform standards for learning for all children. A further objective is to
widely elevate the role of library in community to the role of partnership with
schools: to show how the informal educational function of the library can be
elevated to become part of a whole-year scholastic learning experience.