* 1546858
* Research-PGR Orphan Genes: An Untapped Genetic Reservoir of Novel Traits Driving Evolutionary Adaptation and Crop Improvement
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2022
* Eve Wurtele, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Gerald Schoenknecht
* 07/31/2022
* USD 2,175,310.00

Genes confer the primary traits that are passed on from generation to generation
in plants and animals. Where, when and how new genes arise are far-reaching
biological questions with practical implications. If scientists could identify
emergent genes that confer new traits, the breeding potential for crops could be
greatly expanded. During the quest for understanding where new genes come from,
it is now known that genes can arise anew from regions of the genome where there
were none previously. These so-called "orphan genes" may be key ways that
species can evolve and adapt to challenging environments through the expression
of new traits. To uncover orphan genes, this project taps into the sequenced
genomes of maize, a major crop of worldwide importance, and Brassica, another
model crop. Both species have major genomic resources available for orphan gene
discovery. The research will identify orphan genes and evaluate traits possibly
conferred by the genes in maize lines adapted to particular conditions.
Candidate orphan genes that influence agronomically important traits will be
selected and functionally analyzed. Computational tools will be developed to
mine the sequence datasets and the resulting data will be integrated into
community databases. At all stages, students will be trained in computational
and genomic science. To reach high school students and early undergraduate
students, new computer games modules are being developed and tested with the
intention of increasing an understanding of the function and potential of orphan
genes. A long-term outcome is that researchers and society will be able to
design new solutions to improving crops through harnessing orphan genes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The premise that new genes can arise from non-genic DNA
sequences is borne out from massive DNA and RNA sequencing data. This concept
sharply contrasts with the long-accepted view that novel gene functions
primarily arise from a slow process of accumulated mutations and rearrangements
of already-established genes. A hypothesis is that a major role of orphan genes
is to regulate the defense and metabolic responses that enable evolutionary
adaptation to new environments. This research will identify orphan genes of
major agronomic species, focusing first on maize and Brassica. These results
will inform a systematic analysis of orphan genes at the level of subspecies,
thus categorizing orphan genes in the context of the adaptation and selection
that has occurred as the result of human intervention for improved agronomic
traits. Based on the resultant data, specific orphan genes will be selected for
experimental functional analysis. Data will be integrated into community
databases, and code will be available to the public. New computer game modules
will be targeted to high school and early undergraduate students. The goal is to
develop data and computational tools that facilitate predictive understanding of
the function of orphan genes in driving evolutionary adaptation, to harness
these resources for improving crops, and to disseminate the information to
researchers and students. These capabilities will empower researchers to explore
the significance of recently-emerged orphan genes, and transform fundamental
knowledge into innovative solutions that improve crop traits.