* 1546972
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award: The Effect of War On The Transformation of Social Hierarchies
* SBE,BCS
* 11/15/2015,10/31/2017
* Cynthia Robin, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 10/31/2017
* USD 25,200.00

How do stable political, economic and social patterns (social order) form? Mr.
Christopher Hernandez (Northwestern University), under the guidance of Dr.
Cynthia Robin (Northwestern University), will direct an investigation into this
central question in the social sciences by analyzing the material remains of the
ancient Maya site of Tzunun, Chiapas, Mexico. He will test if warfare or at
least the threat of war influences the development and transformation of social
orders, particularly with respect to the growth of socioeconomic inequality and
hierarchy. Archaeologists are particularly suited for the study of social order
because the archaeological record is primarily composed of trends in human
activity that span decades, centuries and even millennia. Bringing this long-
term archaeological perspective, Hernandez and an international group of
colleagues will investigate if and how warfare plays a role in the development
and transformation of social orders with clear socioeconomic inequality and
ample hierarchy. This project also provides economic support and training in the
sciences for the local Maya community that is attempting to develop a
sustainable tourist economy built around the preservation of the jungle
ecosystem and Maya ancestral remains of the Selva Lacandona UNESCO
biosphere.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Archaeologists and other social scientists have
long debated the relationship between warfare and socioeconomic order. Some
argue that material gain is the primary cause of war. Others argue war is a
destructive act that is detrimental to trade and other forms of economic
activity. To establish if warfare promotes the development and institution of
socioeconomic inequalities, Mr. Hernandez and colleagues will examine
fortifications and refuse from residential mounds at Tzunun. Tzunun is a
fortified site built on a peninsula with rugged terrain that contains 65
residential mounds. Initial investigations revealed evidence for two separate
periods of occupation, the Preclassic (2000 BC-AD 200) and Postclassic/Colonial
periods (AD 900/1000-1821). This chronology is important because during the
Preclassic the Maya and other Mesoamerican peoples developed complex societies
with ample socioeconomic inequality. Hernandez?s survey of Tzunun suggests the
site's high-status inhabitants lived in higher, more defensible locations
because residential mound size increases as one ascends the site. Because Tzunun
was inhabited both when complex societies with institutions of socioeconomic
inequality first developed in the Americas (Preclassic period), and in the
bellicose Postclassic and Colonial periods, this research can examine the extent
to which warfare initially affected the development of social order or grew in
importance later in time. The excavation of refuse pits from residences of
varying sizes will be used to establish the material wealth of Tzunun?s
residents. Analyzing the distribution of material wealth according to residence
size will establish if topographic elevation was an important factor in the
design of Tzunun and its inhabitant?s social order. If a hierarchy of
residential location was coeval with the construction of the site's
fortifications, it would mean status differentiation among the Maya was strongly
tied to warfare, with war likely being a catalyst for the growth of
socioeconomic inequality and hierarchy.