* 1546693
* I-Corps:  RoboSense - Artificial Tactile Sensors for Prosthetic Applications
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2015,12/31/2016
* Jae-Won Choi, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* lydia mcclure
* 12/31/2016
* USD 50,000.00

Artificial tactile skins play a critical role in 'sense of touch' for upper limb
prosthetics. In general, the prostheses in upper limb amputees lack in holding
an object correctly due to insufficient sensing information. This dearth of
control causes amputees to often drop grasped objects since it is hard to
recognize precisely how the object is grasped. Recent surveys show that amputees
desire automatic control of grasping objects to assist prevention of slip.
However, the control of detection and prevention of grasped objects from
slipping is a challenge, which is a major pain point in the prosthetic hands.
Most of current commercial upper-limb prosthetics are not smart, that is they
lack sensory components, although they are quite expensive. The suggested
artificial tactile sensors will have a huge market impact as they will provide
more ergonomic and aesthetic hands with higher functionality. This will allow
amputees greater physical and psychological satisfaction. The lower cost of the
sensors will reduce the price of prosthetic hands and more individuals with
upper limb loss will be able overcome the associated trauma, resume gainful
employment and lead a more fulfilling social life.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
stretchable multi-layer tactile sensor is suggested with a new developed
pressure/temperature-sensitive polymer composite and hybrid 3D printing process.
The suggested sensor can detect not only normal and shear forces, but
temperature of objects. This sensor has been developed by 3D printing of a skin-
like rubber material, bottom stretchable electrodes, pressure/temperature-
sensitive polymer composite, top stretchable electrodes and skin material. Since
the suggested sensors can be fully customized in size and shape using 3D
printing, they can fit to desired prosthetic hands. This sensor can provide the
amputee with enough sensing information for the high-functionality manipulation
of the upper limb prosthetics. Intellectual merits include advancement of 3D
printing technologies for artificial tactile sensors and application of the
suggested sensors to 'smart' upper limb prosthetics.