* 1546079
* BIGDATA: IA: Query-by-example for Big astronomical Data
* CSE,IIS
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2018
* Lior Shamir, Lawrence Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 12/31/2018
* USD 115,435.00

While the most significant projects in modern observational astrophysics
generate very large data sets, the computational methodology lags behind, and
has trouble effectively analyzing these data. Although current and future
astronomical surveys will produce the world's largest public databases, the
methods to turn these data into scientific discoveries do not yet exist. This
project will develop an automatic query-by-example system for classifying
galaxies by their similarities to other galaxies, using unsupervised machine
learning techniques. This capability does not currently exist and it can
substantially enhance the experience and discovery power of digital sky surveys.
The project has an educational component, focusing in particular on
undergraduate research for under-represented minority students.

Existing, and especially planned, surveys can image billions of galaxies, making
the ability to study rare galaxies through computer analysis absolutely
essential. These uncommon objects are critical for understanding the most
fundamental questions about the early, present, and future universe, as they
carry crucial information on the history of the interactions of objects, their
formation, and their evolution. The system to be developed will take an image of
a certain (normally peculiar) galaxy, identified by the researcher as being of
interest, and will search through millions of galaxies to find the visually most
similar galaxies to the query galaxy. Because studying unusual galaxies and
making scientific conclusions about their nature requires a certain population
from which to derive properties that can be compared to other systems, this
capability and the resulting listings will greatly increase the ability to make
discoveries from sky surveys, optimizing the scientific return of these
important and expensive research instruments.

This project connects with existing efforts to attract under-represented
minorities, adding more advanced research training in the later years of their
undergraduate degree. Studies like this always include opportunities for public
outreach, and the team expects to contribute to the forming big data hub in
their area.