* 1546682
* EAGER: A Dynamical Systems Approach to Modeling and Controlling Responsive Demand  in Electric Power Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2018
* Panganamala Kumar, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Anil Pahwa
* 07/31/2018
* USD 297,465.00

This project envisions a novel framework that will enable power grid operators
to close the loop around flexible demand. The researchers will introduce and
test a transfer function dynamical systems view of responsive demand, where the
response can be to price or other variables that can influence demand response,
such as temperature. The project will provide a fresh perspective on modeling
the dynamical response of consumer behavior subject to incentives and other
influence variables, as well insights into how independent system operators can
incorporate demand response fully into consideration. Once successful, this
initiative could unlock the collective flexibility untapped in today's demand
response markets. The exploratory research is likely to have a transformative
impact on the systematic modeling, analysis, and control of tens of millions of
access points in the future grid. It will benefit future grid operators and
Energy Management Systems (EMS) in characterizing responsive customers. The team
will continue its collaboration with the local grid operator, and will present
research findings to Electric Reliability Council of Texas (ERCOT) through site
visits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will also address quantification of
uncertainty associated with aggregating many price-based demand responses. This
modeling approach will enable system operators and load serving entities to
consider load flexibility in a manner similar to how generators are currently
modeled. Thereby it makes possible a holistic closure of loops simultaneously
around generation and demand. The intellectual merit of this project is three-
fold. First, it offers a unifying dynamical systems approach to modeling both
demand as well as supply in the smart grid. While most generators are well
characterized by first principles, responsive demand (including demand that is
responsive to price) has not been similarly modeled in a manner that reflects
the salient feature of electricity consumption. Modeling both genrators and
demand response as dynamical systems makes possible a holistic treatment of
electricity generation and consumption. Second, this project investigates the
aggregated uncertainty associated with responsive demand. This difficult problem
will address both the spatial and temporal correlations associated with
different demands. Third, a novel optimal contract design for load serving
entities will be investigated, to elicit a desirable level of demand response.
This early-stage research puts forward an ambitious and potentially highly
rewarding plan for modeling and control of responsive demand from a transfer
function perspective.