* 1546251
* BIGDATA: Collaborative Research: IA: F: Fractured Subsurface Characterization Using High Performance Computing and Guided by Big Data
* CSE,IIS
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2018
* Sanjay Srinivasan, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 12/31/2018
* USD 346,000.00

Natural fractures act as major heterogeneities in the subsurface that controls
flow and transport of subsurface fluids and chemical species. Their importance
cannot be underestimated, because their transmissivity may result in undesired
migration during geologic sequestration of CO2, they strongly control heat
recovery from geothermal reservoirs, and they may lead to induced seismicity due
to fluid injection into the subsurface. Advanced computational methods are
critical to design subsurface processes in fractured media for successful
environmental and energy applications. This project will address the following
key BIG data and computer science challenges: (1) Computation of seismic wave
propagation in fractured media; (2) BIG DATA analytics for inferring fracture
characteristics; (3) High Performance Computation of flow and transport in
fractured media; and (4) Integration of data from disparate sources for risk
assessment and decision-making. This will enable design of technologies for
addressing key societal issues such as safe energy extraction from the surface,
long-term sequestration of large volumes of greenhouse gases, and safe storage
of nuclear waste. The project will provide interdisciplinary training for a team
of graduate students and postdoctoral fellows. Outreach to high schools teachers
and minorities through a planned workshop will inspire interest in environmental
green-engineering, mathematics, and computational science. Numerous applications
will benefit from this research, including Computer and Information Science and
Engineering (CISE), Geosciences (GEO), and Mathematical and Physical Sciences
(MPS).

The proposed research will emphasize high performance computation (HPC)
approaches for characterizing fractures using large subsurface seismic data
sets, BIG data analytics for extraction of fracture related information from
seismic inversion results and long-duration dynamic data, and advanced
computational approaches for modeling flow, transport, and geomechanics in
fractured subsurface systems. The specific objectives are to: Develop an
efficient forward modeling algorithm for seismic wave propagation in fractured
media using efficient computational schemes. Compute flow and transport in
fractured media using an efficient computational scheme implemented on GPUs such
as mimetic finite differences. Perform efficient multiphysics simulation of flow
and geomechanics in fractured media. Integrate information from time-lapse
seismic inversion and flow/transport simulation using novel statistical schemes.
Joint inversion of seismic and fluid flow data and uncertainty quantification
using efficient computational schemes. Develop and deploy a scalable hybrid-
staging based substrate that can support targeted workflows using staging-based
in-situ/in-transit approaches. Computational simulation is critical to design
subsurface processes for successful environmental and energy applications.
Project URL: http://csm.ices.utexas.edu/current-projects/