* 1546792
* RESEARCH-PGR: Understanding Recombination in Maize
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2022
* Shahryar Kianian, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 08/31/2022
* USD 4,044,895.00

Meiotic recombination is a process in which two parental chromosomes, one from
the father and the other one from the mother, exchange parts to give rise to the
next generation. This process creates new genetic variation in the progeny,
which facilitates adaptation to new environments and purges detrimental
mutations from genomes. Thus, meiotic recombination is one of the main forces
behind evolution. In addition, it is utilized as an unparalleled instrument of
plant and animal breeding. In stark contrast to its importance, surprisingly
little is known about mechanisms controlling recombination, particularly in
plants. Mechanisms of recombination appear to be different in each major group
of eukaryotes and also highly dependent on genome size and complexity.
Recombination events are not evenly distributed throughout the genome but
predominantly take place at distinct sites called recombination "hotspots". This
project seeks to understand why and how specific sites in the genome become
recombination hotspots in maize. In addition to contributing significant new
insight into an important biological process, the information generated will be
useful to breeders who are continuously looking for new ways to increase
recombination for more efficient breeding of crop plants. With regard to
outreach and training, the project will develop a Science Undergraduate Minority
Mentoring Internship and Training (SUMMIT) program which will provide yearly
10-week research training internships for minority undergraduate students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to illuminate the mechanisms
controlling distribution of recombination events in maize. This work capitalizes
on the recent success in generating a high-resolution map of double-strand-
breaks (DSBs), which initiate meiotic recombination, and a high-resolution map
of crossover (COs) in maize. The plan is to elucidate why recombination takes
place in specific sites in the genome and understand how the locations of these
sites are affected by genetic and epigenetic factors. The molecular mechanisms
of hotspot recognition will be unraveled by searching for proteins interacting
with the newly discovered DNA sequence motif present at recombination hotspots,
examining the role of DNA and histone methylation on hotspot activity, and
investigating the link between DSB hotspot presence and chromatin openness. In
addition, mechanisms that prevent formation of COs in heterochromatin will be
elucidated. This work will further the understanding of how recombination is
controlled in plants and how it affects the structure of large and complex plant
genomes. All project outcomes will be made accessible to the public. Data
generated in this project will be made available to the public through the
project website (www.rec-hotspots.org) and through the appropriate long-term
repositories such as MaizeGDB and the NCBI's SRA. Genetic resources will be made
available through the Maize Genetics Cooperation Stock Center.