* 1546727
* ECA-PGR: Dissecting Natural Mechanisms for Genome Content Variation and the Impact on Phenotypic Variation
* BIO,IOS
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2023
* Marna Yandeau-Nelson, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Gerald Schoenknecht
* 09/30/2023
* USD 2,198,800.00

The nature of a plant or animal is defined in part by the DNA content in its
genome. One might expect that this important role of imparting information is
preserved in genomes over generations. In fact, genomes are known to be unstable
and the constituent gene and non-gene content can change over time; genes can be
copied, lost, or altered slightly, and such variation has significant impact on
the appearance and function of an individual. As an example, the change in gene
content in a corn plant can affect its growth or important agronomic traits,
such as drought resistance, seed size or yield. The variation in gene content in
individuals is puzzling to scientists and clearly beneficial to breeders: How
and when does gene content change? What impact does it have on the traits, or
phenotype, of the plant? And can the process be harnessed to identify new traits
for agricultural improvement? This research project uses corn, or maize, as a
model crop to answer these questions. The research is possible because the maize
genome is remarkably variable in closely related lines, and there are extensive
genetic resources that can be used to test how, when and why genome content
changes. The project will identify signatures of genome change and will
associate these changes to new traits. In the process, new participants will be
trained from many educational levels. Specific efforts will focus on attracting
young girls and women to scientific careers. Students and teachers will engage
in a type of authentic research in plant genomics that has clear connections to
outcomes in agriculture. Mentoring and training opportunities for female
scientists will also be collated and disseminated through databases and public
web portals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using maize as a model system, this project
will systematically characterize the extent of genome content variation among a
panel of diverse genotypes, identify the genetic mechanisms responsible for this
variation in genome content through genomic signatures, and measure the impact
on phenotypic variation. The research plan integrates genomics, metabolomics,
quantitative genetics, and statistical genetics to further our understanding of
genome content variation and the role mechanistic origin plays in phenotypic
outcomes. Specifically, this project will 1) identify genome content variation
between maize inbred lines using a combination of de novo genome assemblies and
exome capture using a combination of short- and long-read sequencing
technologies, 2) identify mechanistic signatures that elucidate the origin of
genome content variation on a genome-wide scale, 3) implement Genome Wide
Association Studies to identify genome content variation associated with
quantitative, qualitative, essential, and dispensable phenotypic and chemotypic
(surface lipid profiles and kernel content) classes of traits in a diverse panel
of maize inbred lines, and 4) use statistical genetic approaches to determine if
there is a relationship between the mechanisms that create genome content
variation and phenotypic outcomes. The project also provides mentoring and
training opportunities in new tools and technologies in metabolomics, genomics,
and statistical genetics for high school, undergraduate and graduate students,
postdoctoral associates, and faculty at primarily undergraduate institutions.