* 1546113
* BIGDATA: F: DeepWalking Graphs for Feature Extraction
* CSE,IIS
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2020
* Steven Skiena, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 12/31/2020
* USD 731,260.00

The sparsity of large networks makes it difficult to efficiently extract
features for machine learning algorithms. Recent work on network embeddings
(DeepWalk) has revealed how neural language modeling can be applied to a very
general class of graph analysis problems in data mining and information
retrieval. This project will improve training algorithms and data representation
for large-scale networks, creating better, more powerful graph embeddings for
weighted and attributed networks. It will also enable meaningful comparison of
the relative performance of network connectivity features vs. more text-oriented
features. It is possible that there might be more usable information in links
than in the readable content itself.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
develop these methods in several new directions, including extensions to new
graph classes and speed/scale enhancements. The original DeepWalk induced latent
representations only from unweighted, undirected, and connected graphs. But
there is considerable interest in applying it to more general graphs arising in
data analysis. Doing the right thing on such natural networks as bipartite and
disconnected graphs presents surprisingly subtle issues of theoretical and
practical significance. This project will also explore several ideas to increase
training performance of network embeddings, including more efficient gradient
updates and improved graph sampling methods and particularly the power of self-
avoiding random walks to oversample otherwise rare nodes. This project seeks to
extend the effective range of DeepWalk by several orders of magnitude, from the
10 million vertex graphs we routinely handle today to web-scale networks on
billions of nodes. The broader impacts of this work are far reaching across data
mining and information retrieval, including user profiling/demographic
inference, online advertising, and fraud detection. The software and data
resources developed under this research project will be released as open source.
They will be directly applicable to the biomedical and social sciences, and
serve as both an educational and scholarly resource. For further information,
see the project website at http://www.cs.stonybrook.edu/~skiena/deepwalking.