* 1546734
* I-Corps L:  SENSE IT - The Student Enabled Network of Sensors for the Environment using Innovative Technology
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2016
* Liesl Hotaling, Eidos Education
* Standard Grant
* Karen Crosby
* 07/31/2016
* USD 50,000.00

Through the NSF Innovations Corps for Learning Program (I-Corps L), this project
will develop ways to increase the scale and impact of an instructional system to
help teachers and students to create and use sensors to measure water quality.
Sensors surround us and increasingly add information and guidance to our lives;
however, many people are not aware of this or specifically how sensors work. The
Student Enabled Network of Sensors for the Environment using Innovative
Technology (SENSE IT) program provides an opportunity for teachers and students
to learn core science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) knowledge
through building, testing, programming, and deploying their own water quality
sensor networks. There are other STEM programs that focus on the use of sensors;
however, SENSE IT is distinctive in that the instruction covers design concepts,
construction, calibration, and programming of the sensor as well as deployment
and use. The project prepares and motivates young people for the future STEM
workforce by providing: 1) a motivating, meaningful, and hands-on scenario for
learning a wide range of STEM topics, 2) an engaging link between biological,
physical, and social sciences, and 3) a cutting-edge example of science and
engineering research, delivered directly into the classroom. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The I-Corps for Learning project will increase the accessibly and
widespread use of the existing SENSE IT program. The project will address the
manufacturing and distribution of sensor kits (temperature, conductivity,
turbidity, and depth) to provide easy access to the required materials to
construct the sensors. Additional effort will involve providing access to the
online curriculum and online professional development to provide teachers with
the subject matter expertise to successfully lead students through the sensor
construction, calibration, and deployment process. With the implementation of
the Next Generation Science Standards (NGSS) infusing engineering into science
classes and increasingly popular Maker and other DIY movements across the
country, SENSE IT will serve as a model for fully integrated STEM experiences
addressing NGSS with interchangeable technology resources. If successful, a
fully virtual professional development format will reach teachers who cannot
travel or cannot get leave time from school, representing a expansion of
available professional development programs. Through these accomplishments,
SENSE IT will create a lower cost, and more widely accessible, hands-on STEM
educational experience, contributing to the democratization of 21st century STEM
education opportunities and expanding the number of students interested in and
prepared for STEM related careers.