* 1546073
* ACM SIGSPATIAL 2015 Conference: Student Activities and U.S.-Based Students Support
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2016
* Mohamed Ali, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 07/31/2016
* USD 29,696.00

This grant partially supports student activities at the 23th ACM SIGSPATIAL 2015
Conference, held in Seattle, WA, USA, November 3-6, 2015
(http://sigspatial2015.sigspatial.org). The ACM SIGSPATIAL GIS conference was
originated in 1993 and has established itself as the world's premier conference
to foster research in the areas of Spatial Data and Analysis and Geographic
Information Systems (GIS). The conference provides a forum for original research
contributions covering all aspects of GIS. The total number of ACM SIGSPATIAL
participants in the past has been in excess of 300 participants, with a majority
of the participants from the U.S., followed by Europe and Asia. The support will
enable participation of 25 - 30 U.S.-based graduate and undergraduate students
in the 23th ACM SIGSPATIAL 2015 Conference and foster intellectual stimulation
of young minds to pursue advanced research and development activities in an area
with significant technical and societal impact. Specific student activities
include spatial data competition "2015 ACM SIGSPATAL Cup", Ph.D. Symposium along
with a review and mentoring committee for each Ph.D. student, presentation and
discussion of students' work and mentoring. The ACM SIGSPATIAL Cup winners are
invited to publish their work in the main conference proceedings. The Ph.D.
Symposium student papers will be published in separate Ph.D. Symposium
proceedings. In addition, the students greatly benefit from attending conference
sessions featuring current state-of-the-art results in the area of geospatial
systems and applications, and potentially making connections for research
collaborations and research mentoring. A strong representation of U.S.-based
students at ACM SIGSPATIAL GIS is useful in maintaining U.S. competitiveness in
the important research areas crucial for U.S. infrastructures and applications
that critically depend on geo-referenced information. Applications of spatial
and geographical information contribute to a wide-array of societal contexts:
improving the lives of ordinary citizens through advanced transportation
applications, increasing the security of the nation through better intelligence
gathering using geospatial knowledge, and developing applications that will have
a positive impact on the global environment. Educating and training the next
generation of scientists, engineers, and practitioners in the area of spatial
and geographical information systems will have a significant impact and will
enhance the continuation of the competitive edge of the United States in this
important area.

ACM SIGSPATIAL GIS 2015 Conference brings together researchers, students, and
professionals interested in research, development, and deployment of solutions
to spatial information handling and spatial knowledge extraction problems,
including conceptual, design, and implementation issues ranging from
applications, user interfaces, and visualization to storage management and
indexing issues. Spatial data and applications pose novel research challenges in
a wide variety of sub-areas, which include (but are not limited to), spatial
information acquisition, modeling, data structures and algorithms, analysis,
querying and integration, human-computer interaction and visualization, and
systems and architectures. From these sub-areas deep research questions emerge
that are motivated by a broad range of applications (e.g., emergency and crisis
management, environmental monitoring, global positioning and location detection,
geosciences, location-based and mobile services, navigation and route planning).
The meeting is fostering interdisciplinary discussions and research in all
aspects of GIS. The conference seeks to continuously advance the state of-the-
art in spatial data management and spatial data analysis and broaden its impact.