* 1546793
* International Workshop on Computational Network Biology: Modeling, Analysis, and Control (CNB-MAC 2015)
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2015,12/31/2015
* Tamer Kahveci, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 12/31/2015
* USD 7,500.00

The 2nd Workshop on Computational Network Biology: Modeling, Analysis, and
Control (CNB-MAC 2015) will be held in conjunction with the 6th ACM
International Conference on Bioinformatics, Computational Biology and Health
Informatics (ACM-BCB 2015), which will be a continuation of the first CNB-MAC
workshop, hosted by ACM-BCB 2014. The workshop will attract researchers from
multiple disciplines of engineering, computer science, statistics, biology, and
chemistry. The partnership with ACM-BCB 2015 will help increase the awareness of
the importance of rigorous mathematical modeling for accurate and reproducible
results on deriving biology knowledge in computational biology in the big data
era. CNB-MAC 2015 will offer both a keynote presentation and a tutorial along
this direction to provide future research directions for participating graduate
students and post-doctoral researchers. One of the important missions of the
workshop is to foster education and development of the next-generation
scientists, especially women and minority, in computational network biology.
CNB-MAC 2015 will provide travel awards to encourage graduate students to
participate and submit papers. Specifically, 20-30% of the awards will be
allocated to encourage women and minority students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Next
generation high-throughput profiling technologies have enabled more systematic
and comprehensive studies of living systems. Network models play crucial roles
in understanding the complex interactions that govern biological systems, and
their interactions with external environment. The main emphasis of CNB-MAC 2015
will be on rigorous mathematical or computational approaches in studying
biological networks, analyzing large-scale OMICS data, and investigating
mathematical models for human-microbiome-environment interactions. Complementary
to the focus on informatics tools and learning algorithms for big data in ACM-
BCB 2015 and other workshops, CNB-MAC 2015 aims to provide a synergistic
scientific forum for presenting recent advances in computational network biology
that involve modeling, analysis, and control of biological systems under
different conditions, and systematic analysis of large-scale OMICS data.