* 1546622
* Collaborative Research: Rapid Response to the Mw 7.9 Earthquake of April 25, 2015 in Nepal
* GEO,EAR
* 06/15/2015,12/31/2016
* Abhijit Ghosh, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Luciana Astiz
* 12/31/2016
* USD 15,894.00

This project is a rapid action to deploy a temporary seismological network
following the Mw 7.9 earthquake of April 25, 2015 in Nepal. Data collected
during the project will be made openly available to the seismological community
one month after the array is uninstalled. This data collection impacts the
Himalayan region known for its great seismological hazard. Aftershock deployment
in the area of the 2015 earthquake will enable seismologists to conduct
research, which will increase our understanding of the behavior of the Main
Himalayan Thrust, a major underground fault responsible of this and other
historical destructive earthquakes in the Himalayan region.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project 25 seismic stations will be deployed in
the greater epicentral region of the April 25, 2015 earthquake, and in western
Nepal where a long-standing gap has accumulated about 10 m of deficit of slip
since it last ruptured in 1505. These data will be useful in particular to
determine a well-constrained source model of the 2015 earthquake, define the
geometry of the Main Himalayan thrust, and analyze the relationship between
post-seismic deformation and aftershocks. This deployment will be closely
coordinated with another rapid deployment by US universities with 20 additional
seismic stations that will increase the size of the monitoring network.