* 1546867
* ECA-PGR: Somatic Genetic and Epigenetic Variations in Long-lived Perennial Trees and their Interactions with the Environment
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2022
* Jeremy Schmutz, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 08/31/2022
* USD 2,787,632.00

Long-lived woody trees are rooted in place and must cope with environments that
change daily and over long timescales. With no where to go, trees are remarkably
resilient to these environmental assaults; but how is this accomplished? What
features of the genome confer the ability to thrive in these ever-changing
environments? One hypothesis is that that random changes in DNA accumulate
throughout the lifespan of trees and this provides potential new ways to adapt.
Another possibility is that a sudden change occurs in how a gene that confers an
adaptive trait is expressed. This project tests these hypotheses using long-
lived poplar trees as an ideal study system. Due to their fast growth, poplars
are used as short-rotation woody biomass crops for composites, pulp and
biofuels. Poplars can also be propagated sexually by seeds, or asexually by stem
cuttings, so genomic changes and inheritance patterns can be studied in progeny
from variously aged trees. This project investigates how poplar genes respond to
changing environments and determines if newly formed gene expression states are
inherited after stem cutting. Undergraduate students will work directly with
researchers and graduate students by participating in summer research projects
in poplar genomics. As a keystone ecological species, poplars are broadly
distributed in the Northern Hemisphere and are associated with significant
ecosystem services; therefore, understanding the genomic response to the
environment will provide powerful tools for expanding the genetic potential of
this important tree species. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project aims to
characterize the genomes and epigenomes of two ~300-year old Populus trichocarpa
trees to understand the proportion of tree genomes that are subjected to
environmentally-induced and spontaneous genetic and epigenetic variation. One
key aspect is the ability to collect tissues from five ontogenetic sectors of
each tree spaced ~25 years apart, which represent distinct times since
divergence from the original germ line. It is expected that certain genes from
different ontogenetic sectors may respond differently to the present-day
environments due to prior exposure to environments experienced by one
ontogenetic sector of the tree and not by another. These experiments will enable
an assessment of the timescale on which cellular memory can persist in the
absence of sexual reproduction. To address if sexual reproduction serves as a
mechanism to reprogram epigenomes to the original germ line status, maternal-
specific epigenomes will be evaluated in seedlings collected from two different
ontogenetic sectors of a female tree. Lastly, controlled greenhouse experiments
will be used to understand if poplar trees can be primed by acute stresses for
similar future environments by clonal propagation. Research from this proposal
will lead to a better understanding of how plants interact with the environment
and how they use cellular memory to cope with changing environments.