* 1546491
* I-Corps:  Gut Microbiome Analytic Service
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2015,12/31/2016
*  Krista Smith, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* lydia mcclure
* 12/31/2016
* USD 50,000.00

The microorganisms that reside in our intestine form a complex ecosystem called
the Gut Microbiome. A balanced gut microbiome is important for overall health
and wellbeing. Research confirms that the gut microbiome plays an important role
in various biochemical activities in the human body and an imbalance in these
activities can result in discomfort and sometimes lead to disease processes.
Although the importance of gut microbiome in health has been acknowledged, the
available technology has not been sufficient to perform comprehensive gut
microbiome monitoring in a cost effective fashion. However, recent advancements
in next-generation sequencing technologies now allow for the entire microbiome
from samples, such as fecal, to be sequenced (called metagenomics)
inexpensively. Rapid analysis of the large amount of metagenomic data, a major
bottleneck, has been resolved by this I-Corps team though the development of a
novel algorithm and accompanying software (called Cenuscope) that can provide a
gut microbiome analysis as a service (sequencing metagenomes from fecal samples)
to individuals with rapid turnaround. This I-Corps team proposes to develop a
rapid and reliable gut microbiome monitoring product, GutFeeling and an
associated GutFeeling KnowledgeBase (GutFeelingKB), which will allow the
proposed team to provide detailed reports to customers and also suggest dietary
changes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The advent of low cost metagenome sequencing
technologies has the potential to revolutionize our understanding of human
microbiomes and their role in human health and disease pathogenesis, as well as
provide unprecedented value in diagnostics and therapeutics. But these
technologies result in terabytes of data and information that is difficult to
process, analyze and track in a clinical setting. Greater access to the
corresponding analytical and data integration capability is required by the
medical and research communities in order to achieve significant progress in
patient care through the use of genomic data. Analysis software, such as
CensuScope, plays an indispensable role in analyzing the components of the
metagenomic data in less than 15 minutes (compared to hours or days for existing
tools) and further predicting functional attributes. The team's goal is to
develop a rapid and reliable gut microbiome monitoring product, GutFeeling and
an associated GutFeeling KnowledgeBase (GutFeelingKB). The proposed approach is
to provide a customer report which will contain information regarding the
organisms present in a person's gut, evaluation of their baseline healthy range,
and visual representation displaying regular activity and comparison of their
microbiome with other healthy individuals. The team will establish a
KnowledgeBase (GutFeelingKB) of microbial abundance information from publicly
available datasets supplemented with data obtained from clients over time and
use this as a method to evaluate a person's gut microbiome. The team will then
overlay this profile with microbial abundance profiles from people having
similar dietary habits for example. Development of such comparison mechanisms
will eventually allow to offer recommendations for lifestyle and diet changes
for customers to improve their overall wellbeing, aid in weight loss, or provide
solutions to serious health issues (e.g. autoimmune diseases, food allergies,
chronic stomach pains).