* 1546351
* BIGDATA: Collaborative Research: IA: Quantifying Plankton Diversity with Taxonomy and Attribute Based Classifiers of Underwater Microscope Images
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2021
* Jules Jaffe, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Blood
* 09/30/2021
* USD 916,113.00

Plankton play an essential role in the global ecosystem, forming the base of
marine food webs, linking the atmosphere to the deep ocean, and regulating a
myriad of ecologically and climatologically important processes. Despite their
importance, however, the technology to assess abundances and distributions of
plankton has been limited. Changes in abundances of individual species are
particularly poorly resolved; this includes the harmful algal blooms that have
profound economic, societal, and ecosystem effects in many coastal systems.
Traditional tools such as nets and bottles can destroy fragile organisms during
sampling. Underwater microscopes, on the other hand, allow observation of the
organisms undisturbed, and in their natural setting. New underwater microscopes
are generating many thousands of high-resolution images of individual plankton
each day. Before these images can be used for scientific analyses, the imaged
organisms must be identified and classified. However, the vast number of images
generated by such microscopes has led to a serious bottleneck: identification
and classification of the images takes an impossibly long time for individuals
to accomplish. Fortunately, advances in computer vision science have shown great
promise in accurately performing such classification tasks. The main goal of
this award is to explore and develop computer vision approaches for plankton
image classification. A team of instrumentation specialists, an ocean ecologist,
and a computer scientist, including two graduate students and one post doctoral
student, will formulate, implement, and test methods to advance the goal of
efficient and accurate automated plankton image classification. The advances
made in this award will enable both improved classification algorithms in
computer science, and vast new data streams for plankton ecology.

Plankton form the base of marine food webs, link the atmosphere to the deep
ocean, and regulate global biogeochemical cycles. Plankton are often studied
either through bulk measures, or by manual enumeration of individual taxa. Novel
underwater microscope systems such as the Scripps Plankton Camera System (SPCS)
are generating tens of thousands of images of individual plankton daily.
However, without accurate annotation of the images, the potential science is
limited. This project will explore the use of many-layer, deep Convolutional
Neural Nets (CNN) as automated computer recognition methods; these techniques
hold promise for classifying the nearly one trillion underwater microscope
images that have been collected by a variety of research groups around the
globe. The primary source of images will be a pair of microscopes that have been
operating for 2 years from the Scripps Inst. of Oceanography's pier, yielding
200 million regions of interest. The project will build a large data base of
training sets using a novel approach: a bench-top imaging system that is capable
of rapidly producing thousands of annotated images showing organisms in all
orientations and configurations identical to that in the field. Based on these
automatically collected training sets, and hand annotation of in situ images
from experts, a deep (many layer) CNN will embed taxonomic and attribute
constraints, and will be used to classify the organisms imaged. With success,
this massive, growing, taxonomically classified dataset will enable
unprecedented, transformative, taxon-specific explorations of the dynamics of
the planktonic ecosystem on time scales from hours to decades.