* 1546650
* EAGER: Product Properties Through Coupling Between Spin Crossover and Ferroic Phases
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2017
* John Wiley, University of New Orleans
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 08/31/2017
* USD 160,000.00

Our modern world relies more and more on mobile technologies capable of
providing information access anywhere, anytime and to everyone. In the process
of generation, transfer, retrieval and storage of information, one relies on
materials that can sense the action of various stimuli which can then be
converted into electric or magnetic signals. Furthermore, the mobility of the
devices demands an increased miniaturization and multifunctionality where one
device component can do more than one task. Such technological advancements are
possible only with novel combinations of individual material properties so that
is able to respond to a large variety of stimuli, such as electric, magnetic,
thermal and photonic excitation and provides a no of degrees of freedom in the
design of sensors, actuators and transducers. The proposed research is to prove
the concept of a novel functional composite material that can respond to
thermal, optical, electrical and magnetic stimuli. The findings gained from this
project will contribute to the basic understanding of nanoscale physical
phenomena, providing insights into the multifunctional composite materials, and
would lead to a new generation of novel devices. The success of this project
will impact nanotechnology education by exposing graduate students, especially
minorities, to novel composites for multifunctional device applications. Overall
this research plan will impact basic and applied nanoscience, contribute to the
training of new scientists, and promote science education among underrepresented
groups.

New composite material comprising spin crossover and ferroic phases is a highly
transformative approach that has not been previously considered by any research
group. The proposed research is a high-risk and high payoff involving an
interdisciplinary perspective covering novel materials and device engineering,
molecular magnetism, and materials chemistry. The proposed novel composite
material will provide an enhancement of direct or converse magnetoelectric
coupling, and more importantly will respond to thermal and photonic stimuli.
Thus, in view of the large volume change associated with the spin transition in
a spin crossover coupled with magnetostrictive or piezoelectric materials, one
can achieve a significant magnetoelectric coefficient. To achieve a maximum
coupling between the spin crossover and ferroic phase, the core-shell will be
piezoelectric or magnetostrictive phase on a core of spin crossover phase. A
combination of liquid deposition and template based methods will be used to
fabricate ferroic nanoshells. The spin crossover phase will then be synthesized
and integrated into the ferroic shells. This 1-1 type geometry provides a
maximum interfacial coupling between the two phases while having access to the
large ferroelastic constituent of spin crossover. This opens a new efficient
path for multifunctionality where, magnetization, polarization and strain can be
changed simultaneously by light, temperature and applied magnetic and electric
fields.