* 1546797
* Sbe-Rcuk: Radiocarbon Dating And Chronological Modelling
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2015,09/30/2021
* Ian Hodder, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 09/30/2021
* USD 153,881.00

Dr Ian Hodder, of Stanford University, along with Dr Alex Bayliss of the
University of Stirling in the UK, will undertake collaborative research in order
to build for the first time a detailed chronology for early societal
development. Archaeologists have access to data that allow exploration of the
broad sweep of human development from small mobile bands to settled towns and
cities. But for early prehistoric time periods archaeological chronologies have
wide margins of error so that only general trends can be documented. New
developments in the statistical analysis of radiocarbon dates are allowing
radical new insights so that more detailed chronologies can be built. In this
way a historical scale of resolution can be applied to deep prehistory. By tying
events down to quarter-century resolution at 9000 years ago, the researchers
will be able to examine in more detail the causes that led to important
evolutionary changes such as the formation of the first large "mega-sites", the
domestication of cattle and the introduction of pottery. The results will
transform understanding of the processes that led to settled agricultural life
and early urban development. The project will be centered on a UNESCO World
Heritage Site in the Middle East that is attracting increasing global visitor
numbers due to the sustained efforts of project members and the government of
Turkey. The initiatives include ambitious educational programs and a wide range
of outreach activities so that the results of the research can be widely
disseminated and discussed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Establishing a detailed
calendar chronology for a 1000-year period 9000 years ago, will allow study (a)
of the pace of change for new innovations such as pottery, milking,
domestication of cattle. Researchers will be able to explore whether change
comes as a constant, imperceptible stream or as a series of abrupt, punctuated
revolutions. The impact of climatic change on societal development during this
time period can also be examined and contrasted to other cases. A more detailed
chronology will also allow insight into (b) the organization of society because
the degree of contemporaneity of adjacent buildings and other structures can be
assessed. Finally, it will be possible (c) to explore aspects of religion and
ritual. Researchers will be able to study whether in these distant prehistoric
times people had a sense of "history" in the sense that they kept and handed
down important heirlooms, including animal and human heads, from generation to
generation. The research will be based on excavated material from Çatalhöyük in
central Turkey. The site was first excavated in the 1960s, and new excavations
have continued since 1993. The site has gained renown for its size (13 ha), its
well-preserved mud-brick architecture, for its dramatic wall paintings and
relief sculpture, and for its 20 m of Neolithic deposits covering over 1000
years. The project will provide precise dating by using Bayesian statistical
modelling to combine a series of 650 radiocarbon dates with the detailed
stratigraphic record of the modern excavations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
was made possible by the SBE-RCUK Lead Agency Agreement.