* 1546890
* RESEARCH-PGR: Genomic mechanisms of domesticating a Y chromosome in papaya
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2023
* Ray Ming, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Gerald Schoenknecht
* 07/31/2023
* USD 2,165,997.00

Many plants have male and female floral parts housed on the same plant. Papaya
plants, on the other hand, are gender-distinct: papaya plants may be male or
female or so-called hermadrodites, which are plants that both male and female
parts in the same flowers. Wild papayas are male and female only, and cultivated
papayas are mostly hermaphrodite, which was selected from sex reversed male
papaya about 4,000 years ago in Central America. Understanding how this rare
gender biology is controlled, and whether hermaphroditism could be harnessed for
control of flowering, would greatly benefit agriculture of papaya. It is
currently known that the difference among these trees is due to different Y
chromosomes: females have two X chromosomes, males have an X and Y and
hermaphrodites an X and modified Yh. There is also evidence that hermaphrodite
chromosome may have evolved during the earliest days of domestication of papaya
in Central America. The project will identify what factors and genome-wide
changes are occurring in the plants with varying chromosome types. Once
identified, plants could be engineered to produce hermaphrodites with no X
chromosome, hence no segregation of types. This material will expedite the
identification of the factors that control the formation of male flowers, the
target for sex reversal from male back to hermaphrodite. Undergraduate students
will be trained to gain hands-on research experience while working with this
important crop and developing breeding tools. The project will display
information for growers on informative videos about papaya biology and ways to
control flowering. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Papaya sex chromosomes are
the first trio (Y, Yh, and X) to be sequenced. The unique set of three sex
chromosomes and abundant genomic and biological resources allow us to
investigate the reversion from male to hermaphrodite, a rare event during the
early stage of sex chromosome evolution. Our goal is to understand the genomic
and evolutionary mechanisms governing the domestication of the Yh chromosome.
The first aim is to establish the molecular basis for papaya YY lethality gene
and restore fertility of YhYh hermaphrodite and YhY male genotypes for
functional analysis of Yh-specific genes. A strong candidate gene has been
identified and is being tested for function by being transformed into
hermaphrodite plants. Once viable YhYh hermaphrodites are generated, the 40
mutations on Y chromosome affecting flower morphology and pollen fertility will
be identified through fine mapping. The second aim is to identify the sex
determination gene suppressing carpel development in male flowers and the
mutation event leading to the sex reversal from male back to hermaphrodite. The
project is focusing on 12 sex reversal mutants generated for identification of
the sex determination gene suppressing carpel development in male flowers, and
will conduct map based gene cloning once the YYh fertility is restored.
Comparative analysis of gene expression between YY and Yh Yh genotypes will
reveal differentially expressed genes and gene networks controlled by the sex
determination gene. The target genes and genomic resources generated will lead
to selection of new papaya varieties without segregation of sex types and with
improved productivity