* 1546036
* EAGER: Cybermanufacturing: Enabling Production as a Service (PaaS)
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2018
* Dawn Tilbury, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 09/30/2018
* USD 250,000.00

Production as a service (PaaS) defines a new paradigm in manufacturing that will
allow designers of new products to query existing manufacturing facilities and
receive information about fabrication capabilities and production availability.
The access to information such as part cost, part quality, and production time
will help new products to be prototyped and scaled-up quickly, while also
allowing existing manufacturing facilities to benefit from underutilized
equipment and labor. The PaaS framework will include both a front-end query
interface for the users and a back-end analysis component. The interface will be
designed to connect users with small-, mid-, and large-sized manufacturing
facilities, while the scheduling and routing algorithms will provide the
flexibility and security protocols needed to guarantee operational and
production safety across the range of facilities. Manufacturers that utilize the
PaaS framework will reap the potential of meeting customer needs in terms of
cost, quality, on-time delivery, while being reactive to changing market forces.
With 12 percent of the GDP represented by the manufacturing industry, the
manufacturing operational improvements that will result from this EArly-concept
Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) project have the potential to make a
significant impact in the national bottom line. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aim of
the PaaS platform is to enable distributed manufacturing plant locations to
efficiently coordinate both within one plant location as well as across plant
locations to realize a flexible service interface for supporting production
management. The intellectual merit of this research lies in the extensions that
will be created to the existing science and technology in service-oriented
architectures to enable distributed production, while preserving proprietary
information of the manufacturing systems. The key software abstraction that
enables this innovation comes from the extension to the well-known APIs to
capture the sophisticated query logic and diverse production requirements to
meet user needs. Routing and scheduling decisions will be optimized by
leveraging a global view of the current state of all of the components in the
manufacturing facilities. To demonstrate scalability and ensure privacy
guarantees across multiple facilities, hierarchical abstraction will be used to
hide low-level details and proprietary information. The PaaS framework will
transform the way manufacturing companies interact with the emerging high-value
market; providing the architecture to drive innovation and enable small-, mid-,
and large-scale manufacturing companies across the U.S. to compete for new
product business on an even playing field.