* 1546825
* RESEARCH-PGR: Deciphering the link between RNA directed DNA methylation and reproduction in Brassicaceae
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2022
* Rebecca Mosher, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Schoenknecht
* 08/31/2022
* USD 2,309,969.00

Seeds are the primary source of calories for humans and livestock, and thus one
of the most critical aspects of agricultural productivity is seed development.
Even small changes in seed development can have profound impacts on productivity
with cascading repercussions through the entire food chain. This proposal
addresses the role of DNA methylation, a chemical mark placed on DNA, in the
development of seeds, particularly those marks that impact seed set, size, and
viability. We have recently uncovered three mutations of a DNA methylation
pathway in the important oil crop Brassica rapa. Each mutation has severe and
specific defects in seed production. Using advanced DNA sequencing technologies,
we will identify the genetic, molecular, and genomic consequences of these
mutations. These findings will help understand the internal mechanisms that
regulate seed development. This project will also provide training opportunities
for multiple graduate and undergraduate students. This training will develop
their expertise in cutting-edge techniques such as genome editing and high-
throughput sequencing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work builds on several key
observations that link small-RNA directed DNA methylation (RdDM) with proper
seed development, likely through establishment and maintenance of: 1) genomic
imprinting (parent-of-origin bias in allele expression), and/or 2) genome
balance (preferential expression from a dominant subgenome following whole
genome duplication). This project will first explore the transcriptional and
developmental consequences of RdDM in seed development by profiling small RNAs,
transcriptomes, and epigenomes of RNA-directed DNA methylation mutants in
Brassica rapa, each of which dramatically reduces seed set. In addition, we will
investigate links between genomic imprinting and genome dominance in B. rapa.
Finally, we will test the hypothesis that RdDM influences seed set by altering
genomic imprinting and/or genome dominance by generating cognate mutations in
other members of the Brassicaceae family. Results from this study will provide a
better understanding of both imprinting and genome dominance that can be
translated to closely related species in the family Brassicaceae, including the
seed crop B. napus.