* 1546635
* Collaborative Research: Understanding the crustal link between the Columbia River flood basalts and lithospheric foundering.
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2021
* Robert Clayton, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Dennis Geist
* 03/31/2021
* USD 227,565.00

The Earth?s largest volcanic events are the rare flood-basalt eruptions that
occur once every about 40 million years, on average. Some of these events appear
to have caused major extinctions, and in net, the erupted lavas cover a
significant portion of the Earth; they also represent the beginning of hotspots
such as Yellowstone. The most recent and best-exposed flood basalt event erupted
about 16 million years ago from eastern Oregon. This is the target of our study.
The fundamental driving mechanism for flood basalt eruptions occurs below the
lithospheric plate, and the event has a major effect on modifying the plate.
Yet, we do not understand the fundamentals of these events. It our case, there
is strong evidence that large pieces of the affected lithosphere foundered and
sank into the asthenosphere, and that the distribution of the foundering
lithosphere controlled the location and distribution of volcanism. Our study
will use seismic imaging methods to image the structures created and modified by
this event, both in the crust and in the underlying lithosphere and
asthenosphere, with the specific goals of finding the primary magma chamber(s)
and resolving their shape.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We will deploy about 60
seismometers in a line extending north 150 km from the center of the main
eruptive center in northeast Oregon into southwest Washington, out of the
eruptive area. We will use seismic waves that propagate up from distant
earthquakes that occur around the world. The two primary techniques to be
employed involve (1) the conversion of P waves to S waves that occurs when the
wave hits an interface (such as the boundaries of the now-frozen magma
chamber(s) we are studying), and (2) the time advance (or delay) that occurs for
each ray as it passes through the region of interest. These delays are used to
make a tomographic image of the major volumes of Earth that have been created by
the flood basalt event.