* 1546976
* Cell and Matrix Mechanobiology: Current State and Future Directions; University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign; October 26-28, 2015
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2017
* Taher Saif, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* David Fyhrie
* 06/30/2017
* USD 49,240.00

The goals of the workshop, Cell and Matrix Mechanobiology: Current State and
Future Directions; University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign; October 26-28,
2015; are to (1) clearly define the important barriers to progress in
understanding how living cells feel and change their mechanical environment, (2)
to discuss and define possible experiments and computer programs that are the
tools needed to understand how mechanical sensation creates changes in cell
activity, migration and tissue growth, (3) to explore the potential societal
impact from developing new engineering technologies that artificially mimic the
ability of cells to sense mechanical loading and adapt material microstructure,
and, finally, (4) to create a research roadmap to guide the field so that the
important goals can be achieved.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Considerable experimental
evidence acquired during the last three decades has now established that
extracellular biophysical cues, such as forces and matrix stiffness, have a
profound influence on a wide range of cell behaviors such as growth, motility,
differentiation, apoptosis, gene expression, adhesion and signal transduction.
More recently, it has been appreciated that cells not only respond to these cues
from the matrix, but also remodel the matrix and hence influence the subsequent
cues. This dynamic reciprocity gives rise to emergent properties of the
cell/matrix system, and both components co-evolve with time. This is
particularly prevalent in embryogenesis, development and tumor growth. The
precise role of mechanics in determining this reciprocity remains elusive. World
experts in the field attending the workshop will develop a roadmap and white
paper for members of the community and the National Science Foundation to help
guide future research to maximize the effectiveness of investigations in the new
and potentially highly important research field.