* 1546725
* EAGER:  The Use of Institutional Data to Identify Predictors of STEM Degree Completion
* SBE,SMA
* 08/15/2015,02/29/2016
* Margaret Blume-Kohout, New Mexico Consortium
* Standard Grant
* Maryann Feldman
* 02/29/2016
* USD 49,827.00

Abstract: Hispanics are now the largest minority group enrolling at four-year
colleges and universities; however, degree completion rates remain lower than
among non-Hispanic White and Asian Americans. Student persistence and success in
pursuit of undergraduate degrees in science, technology, engineering and
mathematics (STEM) fields are not well-predicted simply by prior academic
preparation and test scores, and furthermore, those experiences or qualities
which enhance retention may differ both across racial or ethnic groups, and
across disciplines. This study develops highly detailed institutional data from
a large Hispanic-Serving public university with a substantial population of
historically underrepresented minorities. These data have potential to detect
possible differences by race/ethnicity in the relative importance of various
factors in student intentions, retention, and completion of STEM degree
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This pilot project explores the potential for
using existing, large-scale institutional data at the university level to
identify factors that may contribute to greater participation of
underrepresented minorities in STEM fields. Large-scale analytic datasets
including such diverse data on pre-college preparation, financial aid, course
enrollments and completions, and demographics of students and faculty are rare.
This project will extract, combine, and recode student- and course-related
information from multiple data sources to produce new longitudinal, student-
level analytic data files, permitting examination of how student
characteristics, course preparation and sequencing, and instructional
environments interact to facilitate STEM degree completion. Exploratory
descriptive analyses utilizing the new analytic files will assess feasibility
and appropriateness of applying more sophisticated econometric modeling and
simulation-based approaches, towards identifying and evaluating policy
interventions to increase participation of underrepresented minorities in the
STEM workforce. &lt;br/&gt;