* 1546921
* INSPIRE: An Evolutionary Paradigm in Design and Engineering of Bio-Adhesives from Bio-mass
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Elham Fini, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 07/31/2019
* USD 913,801.00

This INSPIRE project is jointly funded by the CMMI and CBET Divisions in the ENG
Directorate, OISE, and the Office of Integrative Activities. This INSPIRE
research studies the processes needed to produce bio-adhesives from bio-mass
(micro-algae, woody biomass, and animal manure) while simultaneously integrating
environmental sustainability metrics into the design process to ensure superior
mechanical properties. Considering the significant shortage of asphalt, the most
accessible market for such bio-adhesives is envisioned to be asphalt market. It
should be noted that the price of liquid asphalt, the adhesive which bonds stone
particles together within a pavement structure, has increased dramatically
within the last decade as its supplies have been shrinking significantly.
Accordingly, bio-based construction adhesives which are being developed in EU
and US could be a solution to reduce dependence of road construction industry on
the liquid asphalt resources. In addition, production of bio-adhesives as
proposed in this INSPIRE project can be a means of sequestering carbon from bio-
mass waste which will be otherwise released back to the atmosphere as bio-mass
gradually decays. Therefore, in contrast to natural decay of woody bio-mass
which is typically considered to be carbon neutral, the bio-adhesive process is
carbon negative because more than 60% of carbon from bio-mass will be trapped in
the bio-adhesive. The project benefits from experience of international partners
in France and the U.K., which will further enable U.S. scholars and students to
be globally engaged to expedite knowledge development and promote diversity in
the national workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Bio-adhesives will be produced from
an array of molecular species found in aforementioned bio-mass resources while
simultaneously integrating environmental sustainability metrics as well as
health and safety aspects. A thermochemical liquefaction process will be used,
followed by solvent extraction, filtration and vacuum distillation to extract an
array of molecular structures from micro-algae, woody bio-mass, and swine
manure. Density functional theory and molecular dynamics simulations along with
multi-scale experimental characterization will be used to identify how each
specific extracted compound interacts with fused aromatic rings in asphalt. This
will be reflected in alteration of their stacking via promotion of charge
transfer as well as change of electron distribution in the core of the aromatic
rings when exposed to specific functional groups derived from bio-mass. This
will help understand the underlying interaction mechanisms which control macro
level material behavior to facilitate design of bio-adhesives. Selected
molecular species will be then assembled and co-polymerized to form bio-
adhesives with specific physiochemical and morphological properties for use in
asphalt.