* 1546631
* RAPID Collaborative Research:  Landslides caused by the April 2015 Nepal earthquakes, from immediate hazard to tectonic driver
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2017
* Marin Clark, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Richard Yuretich
* 06/30/2017
* USD 52,655.00

A non-technical description of the project, which explains the project's
significance and importance&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Landslides are a continual
threat in many mountainous regions of the world and the danger is increased in
areas prone to large earthquakes. In spite of this association, knowledge
concerning the extent to which seismic events can trigger landslides is
rudimentary. This RAPID project will use satellite images to analyze the
distribution of landslides following the large earthquake and aftershocks in
Nepal of April, 2015. Field work will also be conducted by the research team to
document the volume of material that has moved, evaluate the threat for
subsequent remobilization of the landslides, and provide the evidence needed to
more accurately predict the hazard level in other landslide-prone
regions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A technical description of the
project&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This RAPID project will (1) develop landslide maps
from high resolution satellite imagery along the Himalaya and explore efforts to
build high resolution Digital Elevation Models from before and after the
earthquake; (2) characterize landslide geometries through field measurements and
photogrammetric analysis, making it possible to rigorously determine landslide
volumes; (3) develop and implement a sediment routing model to identify and
monitor sediment transport; and (4) collect and analyze samples for baseline
geochemical indexes that promise insight into erosion and sediment transport,
with a priority on detrital cosmogenic beryllium isotopes and uranium-
thorium/helium ratios, together with complementary efforts to monitor changes in
river solute chemistry. Students will be actively engaged in all aspects of the
research.