* 1546724
* I-Corps L:  Interactive Educational Tools for STEM Students to Increase the Understanding of Energy Conversion Devices
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2016
* Nina Orlovskaya, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Karen Crosby
* 07/31/2016
* USD 50,000.00

Through the NSF Innovation Corps for Learning Program (I-Corps L), this project
will develop ways to increase the scale and impact of educational software for
teaching and learning about fuel cells. Fuel cells are very efficient energy
conversion devices which could significantly improve the use of clean energy
sources. Interactive educational modules were designed, developed, and tested in
earlier work at the University of Central Florida. These modules are optimized
to educate and train a broad audience which includes K-12, undergraduate and
graduate students, as well as engineering professionals to become familiar and
better understand the principles of operation of fuel cells. The goal of the
proposed scaling and sustaining of educational innovation efforts is to receive
and use the support provided by I-Corps Learning program to accelerate the
transition of the developed interactive educational software into emerging
learning tools; and to increase the impact of this work among different
educational institutions and industrial entities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed efforts and development of the software disposition pathways will be
built on previously developed educational modules. These modules were tested in
a variety of settings including introductory engineering courses, undergraduate
engineering thermodynamics and a advance fuel cell systems course. In the
I-Corps program, additional end users and potential adopters will be sought
among both education entities, such as high schools, charter schools, community
colleges, four year undergraduate institutions, as well as universities across
the country. With the help of the proposed I-Corps project the educational
software will receive additional review and a path that could potentially lead
to more widespread adoption will be formulated. Given the important role fuel
cells are already playing in global energy systems, the project has the
potential to help US students to be well-informed about the opportunities
presented by this technology.