* 1547178
* INSPIRE: The RAVE Revolution for Children with Minimal Language Experience During Sensitive Periods of Brain and Language Development
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2019
* David Traum, Gallaudet University
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 09/30/2019
* USD 1,150,000.00

This Integrated NSF Support Promoting Interdisciplinary Research and Education
(INSPIRE) project "The RAVE Revolution for Children with Minimal Language
Experience During Sensitive Periods of Brain and Language Development" is
jointly funded by Robust Intelligence and Cyber-Human Systems Programs of the
Computer and Information Science and Engineering Directorate; the Developmental
and Learning Sciences Program, and the Science of Learning Centers Program of
the Directorate for Social, Behavioral &amp; Economic Sciences; the Office of
International Science and Engineering; and the Office of Integrated Activities.
The interdisciplinary team expands the boundaries of traditionally separate
disciplines by uniting synergistically to explore a transformative learning tool
to reduce the devastating impact of minimal language experience on children.
Children's dramatically reduced language experience has been shown to have a
deleterious impact on learning language, reading, and achieving normal cognitive
functions across life,a problem facing many children in the nation (e.g.,
children from low SES backgrounds; late-exposed bilingual children). Deaf babies
are at particular risk, as beyond minimal language experience, many receive no
accessible language experience in early life. The Robot AVatar thermal-Enhanced
learning tool, or RAVE, is placed near a baby's high-chair and makes available
multiple core components of sign language, with speech options, in first-time
socially interactive ways, and, crucially, during critical periods of human
brain and behavior development. Exploration of this revolutionary learning tool
involves scientists spanning four disciplines (Developmental Cognitive
Neuroscience, Virtual Human Science, Robotics, and Applied
Psychophysiology/Biomedical Engineering), provides science answers about how all
babies discover core components of language, resolves previously insoluble
problems in the four sciences, and is propelled by the shared objective to
enhance early learning gains for populations that would otherwise be at a
lifelong disadvantage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Of particular novelty, fNIRS brain
imaging provides first-time discovery of babies' sensitivities to multiple
rhythmic components underlying language vital to healthy language learning. This
forms the basis for creating rhythmic patterns at the core of nursery rhymes and
conversational samples in sign language (through Motion Capture) and speech.
Thermal IR imaging+eye tracking identifies when deaf babies who cannot yet
produce language are in a peaked arousal state and ready to learn. This triggers
the robot+virtual human to start, cease, or solicit interaction based on the
baby's social engagement. When the baby's gaze locks with the robot, the robot
initiates gaze direction to virtual humans, initiating joint attention and
socially-contingent conversation in human artificial agent interaction. This
triggers an interfaced screen where virtual humans provide rhythmic nursery
rhymes and conversations in sign language, with speech options. Together, the
RAVE team explores a new aid to children with minimal or no language input;
provides the nation with a competitive science and technological edge; and,
trains under-represented groups in STEM, students in interdisciplinary science,
and young deaf scientists in the advancement of science with transformative
translational significance for all society.