* 1547998
* I-Corps:  RAPID (Radiopharmaceutical Imaging and Dosimetry)
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2015,12/31/2017
* George Sgouros, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 12/31/2017
* USD 50,000.00

Radiopharmaceutical therapy is a type of cancer therapy that delivers short-
range radiation specifically to a tumor or to tumor cells distributed in the
body as metastases without delivering too much radiation to normal tissue. This
type of treatment is an alternative to chemotherapy and it has worked well in
patients with lymphoma and was recently FDA approved for patients with late-
stage, metastatic prostate cancer. By imaging the radiation emitted by the
radiopharmaceutical, it is possible to measure how much radiation goes to tumors
and to normal tissue. This information can be used to adjust the dose given so
that the patients are not under (not enough tumor radiation to kill the tumor)
or overdosed (too much radiation to normal tissue that leads to side effects).
Such an individualized dosing approach requires that a test dose be administered
first and that patient images of the radiopharmaceutical in the body be
collected and then used to calculate the radiation dose to the tumor and to
different organs. The radiation dose information for the test dose can then be
used to administer a larger therapy dose so that the best possible treatment is
given to each patient. This "treatment planning" process requires sophisticated
data analysis that the proposed team has developed over many years. This type of
analysis is not easily available and radiopharmaceutical treatment has often
been given without the individualized dosing described above. This team hopes to
establish a commercial service that will provide the analysis required to
deliver radiopharmaceutical therapy to patients without over- or under-dosing
them. The proposed Radiopharmaceutical Imaging and Dosimetry (RAPID) service
will ultimately benefit cancer patients by making available a treatment that
targets metastatic cancer and that in many cases is more effective and has fewer
side effects than chemotherapy.

This I-Corps team proposes to commercialize a start-up (RadioPharmaceutical
Imaging and Dosimetry - RAPID) for expert quantitative imaging/dosimetry
services towards radiopharmaceutical therapy development/commercialization.
Radiopharmaceutical therapy (RPT) is an emerging cancer treatment that delivers
radiation directly to tumors. Clinicaltrials.gov lists > 100 trials
investigating this modality; > 20 pharmaceutical companies are working in RPT,
including Roche/Genentech, and Bayer/Algeta. The recent FDA approval of 223Ra
(Xofigotm) for resistant prostate cancer highlights the potential of RPT. FDA
approval of RPT requires tumor and organ dose estimates. European regulations
mandate personalized dosimetry. There are no commercial resources to provide
these calculations. Pharmaceutical companies have contracted the Sgouros
(Radiopharmaceutical-Dosimetry) lab (RDL) for dosimetry of RPT agents under
development. RDL has also been contacted by numerous institutions running trials
of such agents. The Frey lab has licensed quantitative imaging software to GE.
There is future potential for combining RPT therapy with external beam radiation
therapy or other RPT agents, and the RDL has developed technology for rationally
combining these modalities. This team has formulated specific hypotheses
regarding likely clients and the value proposition for RAPID and propose to test
them via the I-Corps program. Specifically, members of the team will travel to
company sites and conduct face to face interviews with previously identified
potential clients to ask them questions that will allow us to test the
assumptions that we have made regarding value proposition and potential client
base. Potential clients will be interviewed based on personal contacts of the
team members that have been acquired over many years of doing
radiopharmaceutical therapy imaging and dosimetry research.