* 1547461
* EARS: Utilizing Diverse Spectrum Bands in Cellular Networks - A Unified Information Learning and  Decision Making Approach
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2019
* Xin Liu, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Sprintson
* 12/31/2019
* USD 353,831.00

Driven by the skyrocketing demand for high data-rate mobile services and enabled
by regulatory and technology advances, cellular service providers are augmenting
or in the processing of augmenting their own licensed spectrum with a variety of
supplemental bands, including unlicensed bands, lightly-licensed bands,
secondary bands, and high frequency bands. This project studies how to
effectively utilize such bands, in particular, how to learn the service
availability and quality on different spectrum bands, and how to effectively use
these bands under budget constraints. To address this challenge, the researchers
propose a joint information learning and decision making framework with context
and under budget. This mathematical framework connects two important yet mostly
independently studied research areas, information learning and optimal decision
making. The investigation provides important insights in understanding,
designing, and analyzing joint information learning and decision making
algorithms. In addition, because the generality and importance of such problems,
the proposed approaches can be applied in other areas, such as wireless network
control, crowd-sourcing, and online-ad allocation.

While an intuitive approach, it is challenging to design the joint learning and
decision algorithms and to analyze their performance because budget constraints
introduce coupling among contexts and across time; and the information learning
and decision making are closely coupled and jointly evolving processes. This
project consists of three main thrusts: 1) General framework: The researchers
strive for not only the fundamental understanding of joint learning and
decision, but also algorithms with practical simplicity and theoretical
performance guarantees. Such algorithms enable efficient supplemental spectrum
utilization in cellular networks; 2) Sparsity and Structure: Context
information, such as time, location, and application type, provides useful
information in selecting the appropriate supplemental bands. However, the
learning curve (cost) increases as the number of context-action pairs increases.
The researchers develop algorithms that can accelerate the learning by
exploiting the domain knowledge, system structure, and compressing techniques;
and 3) Practical Issues: When considering the dynamic spectrum accessing in real
wireless networks, practical issues arise. In particular, the researchers study
non-stationary systems where the system statistics vary over time, and warm-
start systems where certain prior information is available.