* 1547509
* Workshop: FIA Investigator meeting June 1-2, 2015
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2016
* David Clark, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 07/31/2016
* USD 49,433.00

This award supports a Future Internet Architecture (FIA) principal investigator
meeting in June, 2015. This meeting focuses on security within the individual
architectures of each project, future systems research topics, and a meeting for
students from the various FIA projects to discuss their specific research
projects.

Intellectual Merit: The discussion of security issues is intended to summarize
and explore security design choices within each of the funded FIA network
designs. The results of this workshop should serve to better understand the
implications of security issues, and to improve communication and understanding
between the design teams.

Broader Impacts: The broader goal of the NSF FIA program is enhancing the
relevance and impact of the NSF program of network research, intellectual
enrichment of the network research community, and the contribution of new
concepts and thought leadership to the future of the Internet. The program, and
the workshops in particular, are a means to train a cohort of academic network
researchers in the practice of long-range architectural thinking. The program
has the potential to contribute to a future Internet that is materially more
secure, robust, economically viable, and fit for the needs of society than the
Internet of today. The results of this workshop, which will be posted on the FIA
website http://www.nets-fia.net/ for public dissemination, will be a
contribution to this broader goal.