* 1547789
* I-Corp:  Advancing Diagnostic Skills Training in Undergraduate Technology and Engineering Curriculum
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2017
* Yuetong Lin, Indiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Junhong Chen
* 07/31/2017
* USD 50,000.00

Through the NSF Innovation Corps for Learning Program, (I-Corps L), this project
will develop ways to achieve more widespread use of a teaching method proven to
improve the diagnostic skills of engineering and technology students throughout
the US. Diagnostic skill is one of the key competencies to be cultivated in many
undergraduate technology or engineering curricular. As engineering/technology
education shifting towards more outcome-based, learner-centered practice,
developing effective teaching material to provide students with appropriate
conceptual understanding and needed factual knowledge of technical diagnosis has
become a critical task. Under prior support from the National Science Foundation
a team of Indiana State University (ISU) faculty have developed a diagnostic
skills training software for undergraduate technology and engineering students.
Preliminary data collected from multiple technology programs at several
institutions has shown that software enhances student learning on diagnostic
thinking and skills. The features and flexible configuration of the software
make it ideal for other STEM disciplines where diagnostic training is highly
sought. With the support of I-Corps L, the project team will develop the means
to promote widespread adoption, adaptation, and utilization of this promising
practice. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Engineers and technicians have long used
decision-trees or trouble-shooting guides to assist the diagnostic process while
identifying problems in technical systems. The idea of using interactive
training strategies centered around the creation and use of visual maps to
develop diagnostic thinking beyond the use of decision-trees or trial-and-error
is grounded in the ineffectiveness of these traditional means to solve problems.
The interactive experimental setting adopted by this project uses both content
knowledge and process knowledge to prompt learners to create visual (concept)
maps of a diagnostic strategy, which helps learners develop a more agile habit
of mind when considering solutions to problems in complex technical systems.
This training strategy is designed and evaluated to determine its usefulness in
supplementing existing courses, work-based students or interns, and essentially
to help fill the gap between engineering and technology schools and the
technical workplace.