* 1547450
* WiFO: Hybrid WiFi-FSO Network for WLAN Femtocells
* CSE,CNS
* 02/01/2016,01/31/2021
* Arun Natarajan, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Alhussein Abouzeid
* 01/31/2021
* USD 749,805.00

Wireless technologies have changed every aspect of human life from family life
and social interaction to ways of conducting business, and even doing science.
As the number of wireless devices grows, these devices will ultimately compete
for the same limited resource: radio frequency (RF) spectrum. Recent advances in
free space optical (FSO) technology promise a complementary approach to increase
wireless capacity. However, such high data rates are currently achievable only
with point-to-point transmissions and are not well integrated with existing WiFi
systems. This drawback severely limits the mobility of the free space optical
wireless devices. This research develops a hybrid indoor WiFi-FSO (WiFO) network
that can provide orders of magnitude improvement in bandwidth over the existing
WiFi networks while supporting seamless mobility. The proliferation of WiFO
deployments will make bandwidth-intensive applications possible in crowded areas
such as airport terminals, classrooms, conference centers where the existing
WiFi network fails. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;WiFO uses Vertical-Cavity Surface-
Emiting Laser (VCSELs) to create an invisible cone of light about 1.5 meter
squares in which the data can be received at Gbps per VCSELs. To work around the
issue of a small area of effect, the project creates a hybrid system that can
switch between an array of VCSEL transmitters installed on a ceiling, and the
existing WiFi system. To that end, the researchers study novel WiFO architecture
and mobility protocols that allow wireless devices to seamlessly operate in
WiFi, FSO, or both modes simultaneously, in order to significantly increase the
system bandwidth while maintaining high mobility. They project develops state-
of-the-art circuits and algorithms for jointly optimizing simultaneous
transmission of data over the WiFi and FSO channels. The algorithms will take
advantage of the latest advances in coding, modulation, and flow control. For
real world validation, the researchers implement and deploy a WiFO system based
on which, practical issues and lessons will be learnt and passed on to other
researchers.