* 1547029
* Workshop: Relevance for Policy: Aligning the Science of Science and Innovation Policy to the needs of the policy community
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2016
* David Hart, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Maryann Feldman
* 08/31/2016
* USD 98,736.00

In 2005, Presidential Science Adviser John Marburger catalyzed the development
of a new field of research, the Science of Science and Innovation Policy
(SciSIP). This project will enhance the benefits of SciSIP research by providing
a clearer understanding of the needs of science and innovation policy
practitioners. This project will raise awareness of SciSIP research among
practitioners, elicit the needs and priorities of practitioners to focus future
research, and explore mechanisms for collaboration between SciSIP researchers
and practitioners over the long run. The research agenda that flows from this
project will strengthen science and innovation policy, advancing this field of
social science research and improving effective decision-making about the
nation?s science and innovation system.

This research project elicits, specifies, and analyzes the needs and priorities
of the users of the results of research on the Science of Science and Innovation
Policy, such as policy analysts, advisers, and managers who work closely with
senior decision-makers in U.S. science, technology, and innovation policy. By
bringing together existing and potential consumers of science policy research,
the project seeks to discover how the SciSIP portfolio might be improved. The
project also considers institutional designs and strategies for incorporating
user demand into the SciSIP agenda on an ongoing basis. This conference
strengthens collaboration between SciSIP researchers and policy practitioners in
research design and development of decision-support tools