* 1547263
* Accomplishment Based Renewal: Transforming the paleointensity experiment and application to the paleointensity database
* GEO,EAR
* 02/15/2017,01/31/2021
* Lisa Tauxe, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Continuing Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 01/31/2021
* USD 432,852.00

The geomagnetic field has been dropping rapidly over the past century
(8%)leaving some worried that it could collapse into what is known as a
'transitional state' with a strength of ~10% of the present field. Such an event
would pose severe danger to the planet's electrical grid and satellites
requiring some advanced planning. The likelihood of this happening is presently
unknown as human measurements of the magnetic field strength span only the last
~150 years and fundamental questions regarding the average field strength of the
geomagnetic field and its variation through time remain despite decades of
effort. This project will serve to support the research of several students
(both undergraduate and graduate), one of whom is an under-represented minority
female. In addition, it will provide funding for a female computer programmer to
continue efforts on improving the software supporting online materials including
a textbook and a complete software package (PmagPy) that integrates smoothly
with the MagIC database, (http://earthref.org/MAGIC/books/Tauxe/Essentials and
http://earthref.org/PmagPy/cookbook respectively).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
signal of an axial geomagnetic dipole, whereby the field strength doubles from
the equator to the poles, is readily apparent in the present field but no such
clear dipolar signal exists in the paleointensity database from the last five
million years. There are several possible explanations for this troubling
failure: 1) combining data from different ages with possibly different average
intensities leads to an inappropriate comparison of field states, 2) there is a
depression of field strength at high latitude, perhaps reflecting the role of
the 'tangent cylinder' or 3) there is noise and/or bias introduced by poor
selection criteria or poor experimental design. The latter is a likely
explanation as published data from the 1960 flow on Hawaii display the entire
range of intensity values observed on the Earth's surface today, yet they should
all have one distinct value. The PI has developed new experimental methods,
better field strategies and a new approach to data selection that will allow the
team to obtain accurate estimates of the ancient field strength to improve our
understanding of the intensity behavior in Earth's past. The PI plans a
comprehensive field campaign to collect samples targeting the most promising
material for paleointensity study. These will be analyzed using the most robust
experimental protocol and subjected to rigorous selection criteria proven to
reject inaccurate results, leading to both accurate and precise paleointensity
estimates. The PI will also complete a long term aging experiment of thermal
remanence to investigate the contribution of bias (and&lt;br/&gt;noise) of non-
single domain material in the database, with an eye toward improving the
experiment and data selection procedures leading to higher accuracy in
paleointensity estimates.