* 1547772
* CIF:  Student Travel Support for the North American School on Information Theory
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2016
* Massimo Franceschetti, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* John Cozzens
* 07/31/2016
* USD 10,000.00

The IEEE North American School for Information Theory (NASIT) is an annual event
of the IEEE Information Theory Society, and this will be its eighth edition.
NASIT is hosted by different institutions each year, with the intent of
increasing the geographic diversity of the participants. The 2015 School for
Information Theory (NASIT ?15) will be held at University of California, San
Diego (UC San Diego) in La Jolla, California, from August 10 to August 13, 2015.
The School provides a supportive environment where foundations for learning and
long-term future scientific collaborations are established. The School delivers
interactive education for graduate students in the mathematical, engineering,
and computer sciences. It presents students the opportunity to meet with and
learn from senior researchers from academia and industry who present long format
tutorials. Student and post-doc participants present their own research results
in poster sessions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Student attendance at recent schools
has varied from 110 to 180 student participants. This proposal requests support
for the expenses of school participants from the United States such as graduate
students and postdocs. These participants would be individuals who would benefit
from attending the school ? learning from senior colleagues, presenting their
own research in poster sessions, and expanding their network with their
community ? but who lack funds and would not be able to attend without travel
support.