* 1547057
* I-Corps L:  Implementing Systemic Change around Equity in Mathematics
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2015,10/31/2016
* Eden Badertscher, Education Development Center
* Standard Grant
* Karen Crosby
* 10/31/2016
* USD 50,000.00

Through the NSF Innovation Corps for Learning Program, (I-Corps L), this project
will develop ways to increase the scale and impact of a professional development
program that helps teachers to improve the mathematics skills of students from
disadvantaged backgrounds. Children from certain economic backgrounds face
greater challenges in graduating from school than just passing classes and
earning good grades. To address this problem, the Designing for Equity by
Thinking in and about Mathematics or "DEbT-M" program provides a meaningful
solution to helping teachers and schools connect with marginalized student
populations. DEbT-M helps teachers build the unique understandings and skills to
support disadvantaged students in their classrooms. Students from urban settings
in particular face challenges navigating educational systems that typically
disadvantage and inhibit them from coming to see themselves as capable and
successful students of mathematics. DEbT-M focuses on creating successful
professional communities around mathematics teachers so they can reach and
assist their struggling student to succeed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professional
development programs can improve the skills of individual educators. However
professional development alone has been insufficient in helping K-12 districts
solve systemic problems. Systemic and organizational issues such as racial
equity, meeting needs of special populations, and overcoming educational
obstacles associated with poverty require more complex levels of change. The
DEbT-M innovation provides a systematic approach to identifying, creating
awareness of, and progressively impacting these organizational and teaching
challenges in collaboration with target urban districts. The DEbT-M project, has
built a foundational experience for district teams that supports districts in
uncovering systemic inequity and identifying key leverage areas within their
systems. With this knowledge, districts have been shown to be able to act in
conjunction with follow-up that emphasizes collaboration to tackle identified
issues. Joint definition of measures of success and assessment of impact and
change are also essential to the DEbT-M process. Through I-Corps L, the
Educational Development Center (EDC) will work to expand the benefits of DebT-M
to a greater number of K-12 teachers and develop methods to sustain the program
in a self-supporting manner.