* 1547064
* Collaborative Research: Rheology of asthenosphere in the Kuril-Kamchatka subduction zone from postseismic GPS observations after great earthquakes
* GEO,EAR
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2018
* Jeffrey Freymueller, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 05/31/2018
* USD 30,713.00

The project relates to the region of the Kuril subduction zone in the northwest
Pacific Ocean subject to disastrous earthquakes. In 2006?2007, a doublet of
great (MW &gt; 8) earthquakes partly ruptured one of the most conspicuous gaps
in subduction-zone seismic activity. An immediate focus of this project is to
acquire post-earthquake GPS measurement spanning the time period 2007?2016.
These data will allow scientists to better understand the long-term earthquake
cycle and will be important for understanding seismic hazards here and in other
similar settings. This project will continue and strengthen collaboration
between US universities and institutions of the Russian Academy of Sciences. The
data provided by the project will be available for use by the broad scientific
community. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The complete 10-year-long data set is required
to address fundamental problems: How much of the strain built up from subduction
of the Pacific plate beneath the North American plate (the Sea of Okhotsk) has
been released in the 2006 and 2007 Kuril earthquakes coseismically and
postseismically? Is it possible to explain postseismic surface deformation at
the Kuril-Kamchatka subduction zone with the linear viscous mantle or is a
stress-dependent rheology required? These problems are especially important
after the giant 2011 MW 9.0 Tohoku (Japan) earthquake, which made the scientists
question the validity of precursors of imminent large earthquakes: location of
seismic gaps (spatial gaps in seismic activity) and location of asperities
(patches of high frictional locking at a subduction interface). Observations of
postseismic deformation of this length are rare and can significantly improve
understanding of the rheology of the mantle. Preliminary results of the 3-D
modeling of viscoelastic relaxation now include the effect of slab geometry for
linear and nonlinear mantle rheologies with a focus on matching station
velocities observed five years and later. The proposed work will extend the
modeling efforts based on a significantly increased interval of the data
(&gt;20% longer). This relatively late stage data is critical in testing the
hypothesis of non-linear rheology.