* 1547830
* CREST Center for Interface Design and Engineered Assembly of Low-Dimensional Systems (IDEALS)
* EDU,EES
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2023
* Maria Tamargo, CUNY City College
* Continuing Grant
* Luis Cubano
* 03/31/2023
* USD 5,199,996.00

Center for Interface Design and Engineered Assembly of Low-Dimensional Systems
(IDEALS)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With National Science Foundation support, CUNY
City College, will establish the Center for Interface Design and Engineered
Assembly of Low-dimensional Systems (IDEALS). The Center will address the
national need for accelerating the pace of discovery and deployment of advanced
materials to address critical needs and grand challenges, such as clean energy,
national security, and human welfare. The goal of the Center is to design and
discover materials with new and enhanced functionalities to further technology,
energy and health applications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Twenty two researchers
from Chemistry, Physics, and Chemical, Biomedical and Electrical Engineering
departments from partner institutions will employ experimental, analytical and
numerical modelling tools to design and discover complex novel materials with
new and enhanced functionalities, and integrate education and research to
enhance both enterprises within the Center. Along with the research goals, the
Center will enhance the educational experience of students, and use proven and
innovative approaches to recruit and retain students from underrepresented
groups in order to produce a diverse workforce of materials science and
engineering leaders trained for careers in academia or industry, including high-
tech manufacturing jobs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Center research efforts are
organized into three interdisciplinary and cross-pollinating subprojects: (1)
Low-Dimensional Functional Materials and Nano-Heterostructures (2) Bio-inspired
Re-Configurable Materials; and (3) Novel Materials Probes and Design Formalism.
Synergy among the three subprojects stems from their thematic overlap and
complementarity. Similarities in approaches of material synthesis,
characterization and theoretical/computational methods also serve to ensure that
links will be forged, leading to new discoveries. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two
frontier materials systems will be investigated in the Center: crystalline
layered materials and engineered superlattices and aggregated bio-molecular or
hybrid materials. A suite of sophisticated tools and theoretical approaches will
be developed and deployed to investigate the materials and explore their
functionality and potential applications in areas as diverse as energy
generation, sensing, quantum computing, and medical diagnosis and treatment of
cancer.