* 1547759
* RAPID:  Psychological and Social Resilience in Post-Earthquake Nepal
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2016
* Steven Folmar, Wake Forest University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 06/30/2016
* USD 24,998.00

This RAPID project addresses critical questions of how people respond to
disasters and subsequent relief efforts. Disasters strike unexpectedly, anywhere
in the world, and are not possible to avoid. The study of disasters in one part
of the world contributes to understanding how they unfold and how people respond
to them elsewhere because of the broad similarities they share. Although
disaster research has grown considerably, there is still much to learn by
collecting information quickly and efficiently, before it is lost. For example,
does access to resources or resourcefulness play a great role in disaster
resiliency? This project will provide information of great value that will guide
future response to disasters of all types in the U.S. and abroad.

Dr. Steven J. Folmar of Wake Forest University will explore disaster response
and mental-health resiliency in Nepal following the April 25 and subsequent
earthquakes. The main goal of this project is to determine how disaster victims
respond to crises, tracing the pathways by which some people experience
emotional trauma while others demonstrate resilience. The investigator will
conduct research on people from different sectors of society, in urban and rural
communities in Lamjung District, Nepal that have experienced varying degrees of
destruction caused by the April earthquake. The investigator will collect data
from 1) direct observation of relief efforts, 2) interviewing 100 individuals
recounting their earthquake and post-disaster experience, and 3) surveying
mental health status among 300 youth and comparing current measures of their
mental health with measures taken from them during a previous study. Since, with
the passing of time, critical data on how disaster recovery is experienced by
victims are lost, it is imperative to gather data as soon as feasible. Regarding
intellectual merit, collecting empirical information during, not after, the
period of recovery equips the investigator to develop theory that directly
reflects first-hand information from survivors, which is rare in disaster
research. In terms of broader societal impacts, results from this project will
help inform global disaster relief efforts, enhance the resilience of survivors
and contribute to the development of much-needed mental health response efforts
through the sharing of findings with NGOs and the Government of Nepal at the
time they are needed most. Lastly, it will provide training for researchers to
conduct similar studies.