* 1547543
* AGU Chapman Conference on Slow Slip Phenomena
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2016
* Pranoti Asher, American Geophysical Union
* Standard Grant
* Luciana Astiz
* 07/31/2016
* USD 20,000.00

The phenomena of slow slip, which includes slow slip events (SSE) and tectonic
tremor (TT), have now been observed in nearly every subduction zone with dense
geodetic and seismic networks and along some major crustal faults. Slow slip
processes are now viewed by the seismological community as a crucial aspect of
fault mechanics. Documents such as Seismological Grand Challenges in
Understanding Earth?s Dynamic Systems and science plans for GeoPRISMS and
EarthScope all point to the importance of studying slow slip. Previous
conferences dedicated to slow slip have primarily focused on the Japan and
Cascadia subduction zones. However new detailed studies in subduction zones in
Alaska, Costa Rica, Mexico, New Zealand and fault zones such as the San Andreas
and on faults beneath the Hawaiian volcano complex are providing additional
observations. This Chapman Conference proposes to examine these phenomena
globally and promote discussion and interaction by bringing together scientists
working on Slow Slip in all places where they are observed.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The slow slip community is now beginning to move beyond just
observational studies, as many new datasets and modeling studies in the last few
years have begun to shed light on the physical processes that produce slow slip.
These recent efforts towards understanding process make this workshop even very
timely. The conference will focus on the following topics:1) Observations of
slow slip phenomena, 2) Fault structure and physical conditions where slow
earthquakes are observed, 3) Slow earthquakes and their relationship to large
earthquakes and seismic hazard, 4) Models and laboratory experiments, 5)
Improving observational methods for the analysis of slow slip phenomena. The
meeting will occur over 3 days. Its format will include oral presentations and
posters. Participation in the conference will be open to anyone with an active
interest in slow slip/slow earthquake processes. We will invite key speakers to
provide the observations and structure from each subduction zone, as well as
modeling, and laboratory experiments.