* 1547867
* EAGER:  Cybermanufacturing: Pervasive Cyber-enabled Manufacturing
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* V. Jorge Leon, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 08/31/2018
* USD 100,000.00

Manufacturing is typically a capital and skill intensive industry. However, with
advances in manufacturing technologies and cyber infrastructure, the barrier to
entry into manufacturing has been significantly reduced. Today, it is possible
for a company to establish a manufacturing facility with machine tools and 3D
printers, conduct business through Internet, and supply parts to customers
across the country and around the world. By extension, it is possible to form a
vision of a pervasive, cyber-enabled manufacturing environment which links
providers and customers of manufacturing technologies, services, and products.
The participants are geographically dispersed, but are connected by the cyber
infrastructure. To explore and enable this concept, the objective of the project
is to increase the understanding of the mechanisms and technologies needed for
creating an innovative cyber-enabled manufacturing system. This EArly-concept
Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) project will create and test a platform
for trading manufacturing activities online. The developed cyber-enabled system
will allow entities of different sizes to participate, collaborate, and compete.
The results of the work can promote grassroots manufacturing and potentially
lead to a widespread manufacturing industry thriving in rural small towns and
inner cities across America.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This EAGER project will study
two critical enablers for building a pervasive cyber-enabled manufacturing
system - a system that can be perceived as the eBay of manufacturing. The tasks
involve analysis and synthesis of manufacturing and cyberspace knowledge. The
research team will investigate, design, prototype, and test a scalable online
platform to match supply and demand of manufacturing products and services. As
the suppliers of manufacturing activities have different capabilities,
capacities, and costs and the customers have different technical requirements
and budget constraints, efficient and effective online dynamic matching
algorithms, based on a combinatorial auction approach, will be designed to
facilitate online job transactions. The second focus of the project is to
design, develop, and evaluate robust plug-and-play machine controller and
manufacturing process instructions. To connect users through plug-and-play, a
web-based depository will be created for transmitting (drop-off and pick-up)
part design and manufacturing information. The model-based approach will be
applied to understand and improve the robustness of plug-and-play 3D printing
and machining. Simulation of online transactions will be conducted to test the
reliability and scalability of the prototype system.