* 1547757
* CREST: Center for Biological Signature and Sensing
* EDU,EES
* 04/01/2016,09/30/2021
* Brian Nelms, Fisk University
* Continuing Grant
* Victor Santiago
* 09/30/2021
* USD 5,000,000.00

Center for Biological Signature and Sensing&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With National
Science Foundation support, Fisk University, will establish the Center for
Biological Signature and Sensing. The Center will conduct collaborative
interdisciplinary research in the area of biological, chemical, and nuclear
sensors for biological applications. The overarching theme is the development of
novel biosensors to address a variety of biological testing needs. Center
efforts are organized into three research subprojects that engage
multidisciplinary teams of natural scientists partnering with mathematicians and
computer scientists to develop or adapt new tools to solve high profile
biological problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dopaminergic neurons are found
throughout the animal kingdom and are responsible for fundamental biological
functions such as motor control, cognitive function, and behavior. Little is
known about the modulation and transcriptional regulation of these signaling
components. Subproject 1 researchers will test the hypothesis that the approach
of combined transcriptional network analysis, microfluidics tools for sensing
changes in response to added stimuli or genetic variation, and mathematical/
computational modeling will result in gaining valuable new knowledge and pose
new research questions towards a better understanding of dopaminergic neuron
function.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Manganese is essential for numerous biological
processes as a cofactor, structural stabilizer of protein structure, and
messenger of signal transduction. By integrating biochemistry, polymer
synthesis, and microfluidics, Subproject 2 researchers will develop a sensor to
reveal the fundamental role of manganese in essential cellular processes and
optimize this sensor for monitoring heavy metals in the
environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Traditional nuclear sensing devices employed
in biological applications rely on detection technologies that are still
performed with large, awkward scintillator and photomultiplier tube-based
instrumentation. Subproject 3 will integrate nuclear, polymer chemistry,
computation, and mathematical optimization to develop and utilize novel
radiation sensors for biological applications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Center
for Biological Signature and Sensing will serve as a research and education
venue for transitioning under-represented minority Community College students to
a four-year degree program at Fisk University with experiential learning that
sustains participation as STEM majors and in STEM careers. Mentoring together
with innovative learning modules, will assure a successful pathway of under-
represented minority talent moving from Community College through the Ph.D, and
thus serve as a model for national replication.