* 1547777
* RAPID/Collaborative Research: Investigation of False Positive Liquefaction Triggering Predictions from the Canterbury Earthquake Sequence
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2017
* Brady Cox, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 07/31/2017
* USD 182,481.00

In 2010-2011, the city of Christchurch, New Zealand was devastated by a series
of powerful earthquakes. These events induced severe soil liquefaction damage in
nearly one third of the city area, with some sites liquefying six or more times.
Ultimately, soil liquefaction damage was blamed for approximately 50% of the
direct economic losses from the earthquakes (i.e., approximately $20B of the
$40B total). In the aftermath of the earthquakes, an unprecedented, open-access
subsurface database, called the Canterbury Geotechnical Database (CGD), has been
compiled in order to determine which areas of the city are susceptible (or not
susceptible) to soil liquefaction. The CGD currently contains about 18,000 cone
penetration test (CPT) soundings from the greater Christchurch area, which allow
for detailed spatial comparisons between observed land performances in each
earthquake (i.e., liquefaction-induced damage or a lack thereof) and CPT-based
retrospective-predictions of liquefaction triggering. After using this extensive
CPT database to estimate liquefaction triggering/susceptibility across the city,
the following observations have been made: (1) The CPT has proven to be a great
screening tool for assessing the potential for liquefaction
triggering/manifestations. With relatively few exceptions, if a site was
observed to have liquefied in one of the earthquakes the CPT-based methods are
retrospectively-predicting triggering of liquefaction, and (2) The CPT-based
methods tend to predict liquefaction triggering/susceptibility in some fairly
large areas throughout Christchurch where liquefaction-induced damage was not
observed. Therefore, the CPT-based methods are producing quite a few false
positive retrospective-predictions. While the apparent over-prediction of
liquefaction severity poses unique challenges to the citizens of Christchurch
regarding future building efforts, this problem is likely not unique to
Christchurch soils, and therefore may be driving overly-conservative (i.e.,
overly-expensive) liquefaction design in similar soils in the United States and
world-wide. As such, it is an engineering problem with international
consequences. Further studies are rapidly needed in order to determine if a
rational adjustment can be implemented in current CPT-based procedures to
minimize false positives. This Rapid-Response Research (RAPID) collaborative
project will also serve to strengthen international research collaborations
between the U.S. and New Zealand, and will provide U.S. graduate students with
rewarding international travel experiences that will serve to balance their
technical education and expose them to the globally-connected problems that
still exist in earthquake engineering. In short, the broader impacts of this
work stretch far beyond the borders of New Zealand, and will impact seismic
hazard practices in the U.S. and abroad.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Preliminary shear
wave velocity (Vs) and compression wave velocity (Vp) data collected at a number
of false positive sites in Christchurch, New Zealand via direct-push crosshole
testing has revealed that the top several meters of soil generally has higher
than expected Vs values and/or lower than expected Vp values below the ground
water table (indicating unsaturated conditions). These preliminary findings, if
corroborated on a wide-scale, could explain the false positive liquefaction
predictions. Therefore, this research will utilize a combined CPT-Vs/Vp approach
for reconciling positive liquefaction triggering predictions with negative land
damage observations. We plan to conduct the following tests at approximately 30
additional sites in order to investigate this issue: (1) direct-push crosshole,
(2) seismic CPT, and (3) continuous sampling via Sonic drilling. We believe this
work will lead to the development of high-quality case histories that can be
used to refine current CPT-based liquefaction triggering procedures in order to
minimize overly-expensive false positive predictions. While this research can
presently only be conducted in New Zealand, due to their unfortunate set of
circumstances, the end-goal is to benefit society at-large through increased
resiliency, sustainability, and affordability of our civil infrastructure in
regards to seismic design considerations.