* 1547999
* EAGER: Collaborative Research: Algorithmic design principles for programmed DNA nanocages
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Mark Bathe, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 07/31/2019
* USD 155,000.00

3D printing has revolutionized the ability to fabricate complex solid objects at
the macroscopic scale using simple Computer-Aided Design (CAD) files as input.
In this process, the user specifies the solid object using simple geometric
primitives or surface-based meshes. Recent applications of this revolutionary
technology include printing limb prosthetics and implants and tissue engineering
scaffolds, as well as rapid prototyping of products in industries ranging from
apparel and eyeware to automotive, aerospace, and art. A similar transformation
in automated fabrication began in the 1970s using CAD for the design of complex
electronics using very large scale integration (VLSI) to design circuits
consisting of thousands of transistors. This CAD revolution also dramatically
increased and broadened the participation of designers without detailed
technical know-how needed to design and synthesize custom electrical circuits
for diverse applications in industries ranging from mobile devices to biomedical
implants. At the nanometer-scale, programmed self-assembly of synthetic DNA
offers a similar ability to "print" complex 3D nanometer-scale objects with
precisely defined 3D structural features. While the field of structural DNA
nanotechnology is considerably younger than the preceding examples, recent
technological and scientific advances have enabled the low-cost and reproducible
synthesis of diverse structured DNA nano-objects, enabling numerous
technological innovations including casting metallic nanoparticles for photonics
and light-harvesting devices, fabricating therapeutic vectors that mimic viruses
for drug and gene delivery, and developing nanoscale sensors for biomarker
detection in disease diagnosis.

Structural DNA nanotechnology currently faces a similar bottleneck in the broad
participation of designers due to the need for automated CAD-based design
software for these nano-objects. Here, development of a next-generation CAD
framework is proposed to enable the fully automated design of structured DNA
assemblies at the nanometer scale. As a starting point, the development of a CAD
program is proposed here for the synthesis of a unique class of DNA-based
objects called DNA nanocages. DNA nanocages can be programmed to adopt nearly
arbitrary symmetries and sizes on this scale. Further, these DNA-based particles
may be functionalized chemically with proteins, RNAs, chromophores, and other
small molecules for diverse applications in biomolecular science and technology.
In addition, these nanoscale materials can be transformed into structured
inorganic materials including metals and silicon dioxide. To realize the aim of
transforming the ability to design and fabricate DNA-based nanomaterials, an
open-source software package will be developed to prescribe geometrically from
the top-down nanocage size and symmetry using a simple high-level language and
CAD environment that is distributed worldwide through the world-wide web.
Synthetic DNA sequences that self-assemble to form these CAD-specified
structures will be automatically generated for nanocage fabrication. Validation
of nanocage synthesis will be performed experimentally using high-resolution
structural and folding assays. This work forms the starting point for a new
high-level programming language to print 3D objects at the nanometer-scale using
synthetic DNA that will broadly enable the use and application of these
assemblies across diverse research and industrial applications. Future work may
extend this framework to arbitrary 2D and 3D DNA-based assemblies, as well as
molecularly functionalized DNA-assemblies that mimic, as well as extend far
beyond, nature's evolutionary designs.