* 1547730
* EAGER: Biomanufacturing: Development of a Universal Technique for Functionalizing Therapeutic Cells with Microdevices
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2018
* Yi Ren, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 12/31/2018
* USD 183,034.00

PI: Guan, Jingjiao &lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1547730&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project seeks to investigate a novel biomanufacturing technique for producing a
new class of therapeutic systems composed of a living cell combined with a man-
made miniature device. Compared to the cell and the device individually, the
system is expected to possess unprecedented therapeutic capabilities by
integrating the non-overlapped functionalities of its two components. Successful
completion of this project will prove the concept of the technique and lay a
solid foundation for further developing the system into a revolutionary therapy
for various human diseases. The project will also promote education and training
of the next-generation workforce in biomanufacturing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While
cells play a central role in the cell-based therapies, the functionalities of
the cells are limited by their biological nature. On the other hand, artificial
microdevices can offer numerous functionalities radically distinct from those of
the cells. These two sets of the functionalities can be integrated into a single
system by forming a complex composed of a cell and a microdevice. This system
holds potential to revolutionize cell-based therapies. However, current methods
for generating such complexes are only applicable to cells with certain
properties, or they are associated with serious toxicity issues. Moreover, cell-
microdevice complexes with clinically useful functionalities have not yet been
realized. The goal of this proposed research is to overcome these limitations by
developing a technique that allows microdevices to harmlessly bind to all human
therapeutic cells and using this technique to produce complexes with an ability
to target disease-related cells. The specific aims are (1) to establish the
proposed method for producing the designed cell-microdevice complexes, and (2)
to characterize and optimize the cell-microdevice complexes with respect to the
stability of the complexes, viability and functionalities of the cells in the
complexes, and the targeting ability of the complexes. Methods developed by one
of the investigators will be extended to produce the complexes. The universal
binding mechanism will be based on the hydrophobic interaction between
hydrocarbon chains and a cell membrane. An antibody will be grafted to the
microdevices to render the cell-microdevice complexes capable of targeting
cancer cells. Besides research, the investigators will carry out education and
outreach activities along with the proposed research. If successful, the project
will generate knowledge on the technique to generate the complexes and on the
properties of the complexes. It will also lay a foundation for developing the
system into a new class of cell-based therapeutics for treating various
devastating diseases and traumas such as cancer and spinal cord injury. In
addition, the proposed education and outreach activities will provide
interdisciplinary education and research training in biomanufacturing to
graduate, undergraduate, and high-school students.