* 1547432
* EARS: A Wideband Frequency-Agile Silicon Photonic mm-Wave Receiver with Automatic Jammer Suppression via Rapidly Reconfigurable Optical Notch Filters
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2019
* Christi Madsen, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 08/31/2019
* USD 625,000.00

Future multi-function radios with ultra-wide instantaneous bandwidth and rapid
dynamic tuning have great potential to enable increases in wireless broadband
communications, and co-existence of radar, radio astronomy, and sensing systems.
However, there are fundamental limitations to achieving the required level of
frequency selectivity, tuning range and speed using conventional electronic
filters within the size, weight, and power targets of radio systems with small
form factors. Radio frequency (RF) photonics technology is a promising candidate
to enable these widely tunable receivers with wide bandwidth over a broad
spectral range with rapid dynamic tuning. Silicon RF photonic filters provide
very high selectivity, multi-GHz tuning ranges, and rapid dynamic tuning for
radio systems at a chip-scale. However, lack of automatic calibration and
adjustment of the initial filter response with very high accuracy, the non-
linear effect of the photonic modulator on the receiver performance, and overall
front-end sensitivity are major drawbacks of existing silicon RF photonics
receivers. This proposal addresses these important issues by employing nano-
scale complementary metal-oxide semiconductor (CMOS) electronics, along with the
silicon photonic filtering and modulator, for automatic filter response
calibration, jammer suppression, modulator adaptive linearization, and low-noise
front-end circuitry. The receiver architectures developed in this research will
allow the realization of transformative radios with small form factors for
wireless communications, radar, and sensing
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal's research goal is to develop
novel chip-scale silicon photonic mm-wave receiver front-end architectures, with
high-performance photonic filtering and modulation implemented in a silicon-on-
insulator (SOI) optical chip intelligently controlled by a nanometer CMOS chip
to allow for rapid filter reconfiguration and jammer rejection. To accomplish
this goal, a silicon photonic mm-wave receiver with automatic jammer suppression
will be developed. Novel silicon photonic optical filters capable of rapid
electronic reconfiguration will be designed and algorithms and hardware for
optical band-definition bandpass filter tuning and dynamic notch filter
placement for jammer rejection will be developed. Novel CMOS prototypes will
include filter tuning loops, modulator drivers with adaptive linearization, and
front-end circuitry for testing with the proposed silicon photonic chips.
Applying the proposed technology into future wideband multi-function radios with
small form factors would yield large instantaneous bandwidth and rapid dynamic
filtering, currently not available in state-of-the-art integrated electronic
wideband multi-function radios. This project will include an interdisciplinary
educational program involving 6 students (3 graduate and 3 undergraduate), with
extensive faculty commitment in engaging outreach activities. These activities
include involvement in programs such as Electrical and Computer Engineering
Unplugged and The Society of Women Engineers one-week summer camps to attract
high school students, and on-going interactions with high school teachers via
the Enrichment Experiences in Engineering (E3) program. Project results will be
broadly disseminated by inclusion in the syllabi and website of a new graduate
course entitled "RF Silicon Photonics" and through publication in national and
international journals and conferences.