* 1547267
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: The evolutionary genetics of cellular and biochemical adaptation in Drosophila
* BIO,DEB
* 08/14/2014,03/31/2017
* Kristi Montooth, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 03/31/2017
* USD 20,274.00

DISSERTATION RESEARCH: The evolutionary genetics of cellular and biochemical
adaptation in Drosophila.

PI: Kristi L. Montooth Co-PI: Brandon S. Cooper

Abstract:

Organisms experience variable environments in both space and time. Variation in
factors like temperature and toxic compounds can cause natural selection that
results in adaptation to local conditions. At the mechanistic level, these
adaptations involve changes in physiological and cellular processes in response
to the environment. This research will use techniques from molecular biology,
analytical chemistry, genetics and physiology to evaluate the impact of
environmental temperature on cell membranes, and of environmental toxicity
(e.g., ethanol) on the activities of three enzymes in the ethanol detoxification
pathway. Specifically, the research aims to test the prediction that variable
temperature environments favor the evolution of cell membrane remodeling, and
that efficient detoxification of ethanol depends on interactions between the
three enzymes in this pathway. These data will then be used to construct new
evolutionary models that help predict the responses of organisms to changing
environments.

This project will provide opportunities for undergraduate students from groups
underrepresented in the sciences to participate in the research. Outreach to
elementary school children at a disadvantaged school, where only 70% passed the
state proficiency test for science, will increase scientific literacy. The co-PI
collaborates with the local elementary school teachers, providing experiences
for the students in basic science and teaching the process of scientific
inquiry. Projects will be developed enabling teachers to improve science
education at their school. Because this research evaluates the evolution of
organismal responses to changing temperatures, the results will also enable the
PI and co-PI to provide a better understanding of how organisms respond and
adapt to changing environments. Further, the populations of flies collected and
constructed will be made available to the scientific community.