* 1547099
* CICI: Secure Data Architecture: Ensuring Data Integrity at the Beginning of the Scientific Workflow; A Mini-ScienceDMZ for Instruments
* CSE,OAC
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2018
* Steven Wallace, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 12/31/2018
* USD 488,514.00

Modern scientific instruments such as telescopes, electron microscopes, and DNA
sequencers, capture and process data using on-board computers. These on-board
computers transform what the instrument "sees" into digital data. In the case of
a telescope, the onboard computer converts the lens' focused image into a
digital jpeg file. Like most computers, these instruments are vulnerable to
network-based attacks, which risk compromising data and harming the instrument.
When an instrument is compromised via a network attack, the science it supports
grinds to a halt. To ensure that researchers can maintain the control and
integrity of their instruments and data, this project develops a device that
works with the instruments' on-board computers to prevent unauthorized access
and manipulation of data. The device serves as both a firewall for the
instrument and as a data transfer system that ensures data collected by
instrument is not altered. Technology developed through this project will have
broader applications like protecting medical devices, industrial machines, and
aircraft.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project designs, develops, and tests the
deployment of a small device that functions as a firewall, large file transfer
facility, and network performance monitor. The device consists of a small, low-
power box positioned between the instrument and the campus network. Firewall
policies are configurable by the researcher (or their designate) via a cloud-
based portal. The file transfer facility will transfer large data files over
long distances, while maintaining reliable performance. This facility will also
digitally sign files, so data integrity can be verified throughout the science
workflow. In turn, the network performance monitor will interface with
associated online systems, so performance bottlenecks can be easily identified.
Ultimately, this architecture and implementation will ensure optimal data
processing while safeguarding the integrity of the instrument and its data
throughout the scientific workflow.