* 1547434
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH:  Testing proposed rapid true polar wander in the Neoproterozoic Zavkhan Volcanics of Mongolia and the Banxi Group of South China
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2021
* Nicholas Swanson-Hysell, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 05/31/2021
* USD 286,310.00

Through geological time, Earth's crustal plates have moved through two distinct
mechanisms. The first is the motion of Earth's plates relative to one another
due to convection of the underlying mantle and the force balance on the plate -
we call this "plate tectonics". The second mechanism is motion of all of the
plates together due to shifting mass anomalies within the Earth and associated
rotational imbalance, which can cause reorientation relative to Earth's spin
axis. This reorientation motion is referred to as true polar wander, and the
rate at it proceeds is dependent on the viscosity of Earth's interior, which is
poorly constrained both today and through Earth History. This research targets a
particular interval of time around 800 million years ago when it has been
proposed that true polar wander was much faster than usual -fast enough that
parts of Earth's surface may have moved the distance of the length of football
field in around 100 years. The PIs seek to track ancient plate movement in
Mongolia and China to test this hypothesis using rocks of this age. They will do
so using the magnetic directions preserved in the ancient rocks combined with
U/Pb radiogenic isotope dates to precisely determine their age. These data will
be used constrain both the rate that plates were moving and the relative
movement of different plates in order to determine if the motion is consistent
with rapid true polar wander. The results will inform Earth Scientists about the
drivers of apparent plate motion at this time and the past position of the
continents. The data also have the potential to place constraints on the
viscosity of Earth's interior through time.

It has been proposed that large-scale, oscillatory true polar wander (TPW)
occurred at ca. 800 Ma, associated with a carbon isotope interval known as the
Bitter Springs Stage. Recent advances have led to a temporally quantified
framework for the Bitter Springs Stage that enables this TPW hypothesis to be
tested in non-carbonate-bearing lithologies, such as successions of extrusive
volcanics. This project seeks to test the hypothesis through the development of
new paleomagnetic and geochronological data from Mongolia and South China. The
goal of the research is to robustly quantify Earth's rotational stability
through this critical period of Earth history and allow for rates of TPW to be
constrained. The Bitter Springs TPW hypothesis has become a central component of
models for how continents aggregate into supercontinents, for fundamental
inferences into the viscosity of Earth's mantle and the stabilizing effect of
the remanent bulge and excess ellipticity, and for the planetary context of
Neoproterozoic environmental change. Furthermore, the hypothesis of rapid TPW at
ca. 800 Ma has become a significant component of models for the configuration of
the supercontinent Rodinia. This project seeks to constrain the rate of pole
movement during this interval through the development of new geochronological
and paleomagnetic data from the Zavkhan Volcanics of Mongolia and the Banxi
Group of South China in robust stratigraphic context. Importantly, these
successions contain: (1) abundant volcanic rocks containing zircon from which
high-precision U-Pb chemical abrasion-ion dilution-thermal mass spectrometry
(CA-ID-TIMS) dates can be obtained and (2) paleomagnetic confidence tests
indicating preservation of primary magnetization. Three years of field work,
paleomagnetic analysis, and the development of CA-ID-TIMS U-Pb dates will focus
on producing high quality pole paths for the Zavkhan Terrane of Mongolia and the
South China craton from ca. 820 to 750 Ma. Such paths can be used to further
test whether rapid oscillatory TPW occurred through this interval and, if so, at
what rates. Testing and constraining this hypothesis is necessary for progress
on the co-evolution of the solid earth and the surface through the time period
and determining whether there were time periods in the Precambrian where it can
be robustly shown that rates of TPW were higher than those resolved in the
Phanerozoic. The broader impacts of the proposed research are four-fold: (1) the
training and development of a UC Berkeley graduate student; (2) engagement of
undergraduate students in basic research; (3) cultural exchange with Mongolian
students in the field and in both of the PIs labs and (4) effective
communication of a set of Earth systems history learning goals to K-12
communities through the construction of an educational display module in
conjunction with the Harvard Museum of Natural History (HMNH). This educational
exhibit will be focused on the geological record of Asia and will include: (1)
large rock samples that can be touched; (2) photographs from field expeditions;
(3) educational displays about geochronology and paleomagnetism; and (4) a video
explaining the geophysical techniques used in this study. Following display in
the Earth Science exhibit galleries at HMNH, the exhibit module will travel for
display in the Earth and Planetary Science Department at UC Berkeley and then to
the Mongolia University for Science and Technology in Ulaanbaatar. This work
includes extensive international collaboration, and is co-funded by the Office
of International Science and Engineering.