* 1547129
* The 42nd Intl Symp. on Compound Semiconductors 27th Intl Conf. on Indium Phosphide and Related Materials June 28- July 2, 2015; University of California, Santa Barbara
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2015,12/31/2015
* Umesh Mishra, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 12/31/2015
* USD 10,050.00

The 42nd International Symposium on Compound Semiconductors - 27th International
Conference on Indium Phosphide and Related Materials (ISCS/IPRM 2015: Compound
Semiconductor Week) covers the field of III-V, II-VI, and IV-IV semiconductors.
It addresses III-V and II-VI compound semiconductors as well as SiGe, SiC, and
related alloys and has opened up to novel materials such as oxide
semiconductors, organic semiconductors and aspects of heterogeneous integration,
e.g. of compound semiconductors with Si-based technology. The ISCS series was
started in 1966 under the name of "International Symposium on GaAs and Related
Compounds" and the current name and co-location with IPRM reflects the
broadening of the conference scope due to the wide variety of compound
semiconductors vital for modern electronic and optoelectronic devices. This
Symposium is expected to have attendance of approximately 300 including
attendees from Americas, Europe and Asia. All types of research institutions
(academia, government research institutes and industrial laboratories) will be
represented. The support funds will be used towards conference proceedings,
subsidizing registration fees for students and invited speakers. The timing of
this workshop is perfect for this generation of students to learn how the new
science and technology of semiconductors is developing. These lessons will be
useful beyond semiconductor research, as these students will be able to apply
them to any future new materials and technologies that they will encounter
during their career.