* 1547932
* I-Corps Sites:  LSU Emerging Technology Preparation (LA EMTEC Prep) Program
* TIP,TI
* 01/15/2016,12/31/2023
* Andrew Maas, Louisiana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2023
* USD 449,899.00

This project, from Louisiana State University (LSU), creates an Innovation Corps
Site (I-Corps Site)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NSF Innovation Corps (I-Corps) Sites
are NSF-funded entities established at universities whose purpose is to nurture
and support multiple, local teams to transition their technology concepts into
the marketplace. Sites provide infrastructure, advice, resources, networking
opportunities, training and modest funding to enable groups to transition their
work into the marketplace or into becoming I-Corps Team applicants.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;I-Corps Sites also strengthen innovation locally and
regionally and contribute to the National Innovation Network of mentors,
researchers, entrepreneurs and investors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Louisiana State
University's (LSU) I-Corps Site nurtures and supports multiple, local teams of
faculty, students, and the LSU community that are transitioning their ideas,
devices, processes or other intellectual activities into the marketplace.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The LSU Emerging Technology Preparation (LA EMTEC Prep)
program provides training, education, and mentorship to LSU faculty, students,
and the community through a six to eight week training program focused on
Intellectual Property, the Business Model Canvas, Basics of Licensing and
Technology Transfer, Small Business Innovation Research Grants, I-Corps Teams,
and other funding mechanisms, Customer Discover and Hypothesis Validation, and
Early Stage funding for Research Intensive Companies. Projects can originate
from student work, funded or unfunded research at LSU, institutional, or
industrial projects. The LA EMTEC Prep program makes LSU technology more
competitive in funding programs, as well as increasing the number of new start-
up businesses, licensing agreements, and third-party investor reviews stemming
from LSU based innovations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The LA EMTEC Prep program
improves commercialization outcomes for LSU technologies by encouraging
researchers (including Post-Doctoral scholar, graduate student, undergraduate,
or professional staff) to tackle marketability questions early in their research
process and pivot their research accordingly, by training LSU researchers and
students on commercialization principles, and by better preparing all parties at
LSU to succeed in I-Corps Teams and other intensive assessment programs. Over
time, LSU's participation in I-Corps Sites will (1) stimulate the translation of
fundamental university-based research into commercially viable technologies, (2)
encourage faculty, students, and community-based industry personnel to
collaborate around early stage university technologies, and (3) enhance the
understanding of faculty, students, and community-based industry partners
through hands-on training and experiential learning in innovation and
entrepreneurship.