* 1547749
* I-Corps Sites:  University of Arizona-Tech Launch Arizona
* TIP,TI
* 01/15/2016,12/31/2022
* David Allen, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2022
* USD 409,999.00

This project creates an I-Corps Site at the University of Arizona
(UA).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NSF Innovation Corps (I-Corps) Sites are NSF-funded
entities established at universities whose purpose is to nurture and support
multiple, local teams to transition their technology concepts into the
marketplace. Sites provide infrastructure, advice, resources, networking
opportunities, training and modest funding to enable groups to transition their
work into the marketplace or into becoming I-Corps Team applicants.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;I-Corps Sites also strengthen innovation locally and
regionally and contribute to the National Innovation Network of mentors,
researchers, entrepreneurs and investors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The University of
Arizona (UA) is home to Tech Launch Arizona(TLA), a technology commercialization
unit. The TLA I-Corps Site broadens awareness and relevance with respect to
commercialization for pre-tenured faculty, postdoctoral researchers and student
entrepreneurs. This focus aligns well with UA faculty now having the import of
patent and commercialization work in their promotion and tenure cases.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The UA I-Corps Site emphasizes services for pre-tenured
faculty, students and postdoctoral researchers, all typically under-resourced in
commercialization efforts, to support their entrepreneurship. The UA program
positions financial, network and intellectual resources to pursue game-changing
innovations. Students and postdoctoral researchers are provided with the
opportunity to engage in innovative use-inspired research and have access to
resources used in assessing and developing new technologies. Program metrics and
assessment allow the further development and expansion of practices for
entrepreneurship education and commercialization and particularly the impact of
I-Teams on the inclusion of underrepresented participants from the targeted
populations. At UA, 40% of postdoctoral researchers are women. Additionally, UA
is an Emerging Hispanic-Serving Institution with a Hispanic student population
approaching 25% of total enrollment. Positioning an I-Corps Site at UA with a
focus on pre-tenured faculty, postdoctoral researchers and student entrepreneurs
strengthens entrepreneurial opportunities for women and minorities and allows
the UA to develop models that successfully engage underserved innovators.