* 1547162
* I-Corps L:  Transforming an Innovative Embedded Design Educational Training System into a Commercially Available Product.
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2015,05/31/2017
* Steve Hsiung, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Junhong Chen
* 05/31/2017
* USD 50,000.00

Through the NSF Innovation Corps for Learning Program (I-Corp L), this project
will help train teachers and faculty on the use of current technologies in
microprocessor/microcontroller related embedded system designs. The
microelectronics embedded into everyday technologies has changed daily life
dramatically. However it is challenging for educators in the field of
microelectronics and embedded systems to keep up with the fast pace of changing
technology and ensure that engineering students are learning to design with
currently-relevant microcontroller products. The project will address faculty
professional development in embedded system hardware and software. An emphasis
will be placed on implementation of delivery in a variety of formats to address
the needs of potential users. This project focuses on training faculty in
academic communities on up-to-date technologies in
microprocessor/microcontroller relevant to modern industry practice. These
efforts will enable future educated students to apply microelectronic concepts
in designing intelligent products and ehance the capabilities of the nation's
workforce. This effort will contribute to maintaining the United States'
leadership in the area of microcontroller technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
features of this embedded system educational program include system training,
control software codes, course curricula, laboratory activities, application
projects, step-by-step guides, demonstration videos, and recorded training
classes. The curriculum includes 16 different course modules ranging from
beginning to more advanced projects. Supporting materials assist users in
understanding the basic concepts and in designing applied engineering projects.
The development is based on input and feedback from faculty, students,
consultants, and industry. Project features are optimized to provide flexibility
in applications of importance to educators striving to expose students to a
variety of embedded system uses. The electronic hardware components used
emphasize durability, ease of maintenance, and upgrade compatibility. This
I-Corps L Team is composed of faculty from Old Dominion University and Ohio
Northern University as well as an industry expert from Auto-Sign Incorporated.