* 1547112
* EAGER/Cybermanufacturing: Data-driven Real-time Embodiment of Advanced Manufacturing Systems (DREAMS)
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2018
* Tarek Zohdi, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 12/31/2018
* USD 250,000.00

Advanced manufacturing systems, cyber-enabled tools equipped with intelligent
sensors and communication abilities, have become increasingly capable,
ubiquitous, and standardized to increase the productivity, quality, and
complexity of manufactured goods. Until the recent introduction of MTConnect, a
standardized protocol for extracting data from a system's sensors, this sensor
data had only been used by the machine itself for control purposes - resulting
in a lost opportunity to analyze a wealth of in-process measurements for
optimization, quality, process planning, and other improvements that could
result in more resource, energy, and cost efficient operation. The primary goal
of this EArly-concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) project is to
design and implement a scalable Data-driven Real-time Embodiment of Advanced
Manufacturing Systems (DREAMS) platform to interface with MTConnect in order to
aggregate, analyze, and provide new opportunities to interact with process data
from advanced manufacturing systems. DREAMS will be established in collaboration
with cybersecurity researchers in order to build it with security and resilience
as a requirement, rather than an afterthought, and the design will address
research questions inherent to providing distributed access and computational
abilities with facility-level security.

DREAMS will enable secure, real-time processing and conditioning of sensor and
process data from advanced manufacturing system controllers, via the MTConnect
interoperability protocol for computer numerically controlled (CNC) machine
tools. Once the DREAMS architecture is in place, a handful of pilot research
domains will be explored, including: research into how applications and
auxiliary systems guided by DREAMS could influence manufacturing education;
enhancing real-time diagnostics and prognostics with continuously-updated and
adaptive physical simulations; and how DREAMS could inform intelligent process
parameter and toolpath selection for energy and resource efficiency. Success in
this initial project would lay the foundation for a wealth of follow-on work
leveraging and enhancing the DREAMS platform, for example, in complex event
processing, real-time data analysis, and forecasting of complex scenarios
originating in workplaces and with future advanced manufacturing processes.
DREAMS can facilitate more intelligent, precise, resource-efficient, resilient,
and connected manufacturing services, and given that it will be built around the
MTConnect protocol, it will be low-cost and available to universities, large
corporations, SMEs, and entrepreneurs alike.