* 1547713
* ECA-PGR: DISSECTING THE TRANSCRIPTIONAL NETWORKS UNDERLYING PLANT WOUND SUBERIN BIOSYNTHESIS
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2021
* David Douches, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Continuing Grant
* Gerald Schoenknecht
* 07/31/2021
* USD 1,371,211.00

Part 1: Non-technical abstract: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Potato is one of the top
four staple crops in the world and the basis of a more than 4-billion-dollar
industry in the U.S. Up to 33% of U.S. potato yield is lost due to post-harvest
issues each year. The proper ?healing? or ?curing? of potatoes to fortify their
protective skin with the natural polymer suberin is critical for the storage of
potatoes. Potato tubers with non-cured bruise or wound areas are much more
susceptible to disease development and water loss. The long-term storage of
potatoes allows consumers to be supplied with fresh potatoes and potato products
(chips, French fries, etc.) year round. By analyzing the regulation of the
synthesis and deposition of suberin, this project will provide insight on the
fundamental processes underlying the potato skin healing or curing process. This
will enable the reduction of post-harvest yield losses and the development of
tools and germplasm for breeding efforts aimed at improving tuber storability.
Even a marginal reduction in post-harvest storage losses would significantly
improve economic return for potato producers and distributors. The project
includes as outreach the development of public resources for the scientific and
academic (Grades 9-12) communities, and the training of students from
underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part 2: Technical
abstract: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Suberin is produced In higher plants during
normal development and in response to stresses like wounding. Despite its nearly
ubiquitous presence, the regulation of suberin deposition remains enigmatic, yet
its better understanding has positive agricultural implications. For example, an
improvement in the proper deposition of wound suberin, which is critical for
long-term storage of potatoes (Solanum tuberosum), would result in a significant
reduction in crop loss during storage. The overall objective of this research is
to decipher the transcriptional networks that regulate suberin biosynthesis, to
enable the development of potato lines with improved wounding and storability.
The transcription factor AtMYB41, identified by PI Kosma, and additional factors
acting on suberin biosynthesis will be used as a springboard to define the
transcriptional networks that regulate suberin deposition, with an emphasis on
wound suberization. In parallel, the molecular basis of potato wound suberin
production will be investigated using comparative transcriptomic and metabolomic
analyses of potato cultivars that differ in suberization and storability. The
end goal is to manipulate loci underlying differential wound suberin production
by combining transcriptomics and SNP genotyping for targeted breeding approaches
aimed at improving tuber storability. The project includes public resources and
outreach activities for students from underserved groups.