* 1547982
* Conference Support for Young Investigators at ACCGE-20; August 2 - 7, 2015; Big Sky Montana
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2015,12/31/2015
* Laurie Gower, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Joseph A. Akkara
* 12/31/2015
* USD 3,000.00

Non-Technical: This award by the Biomaterials program in the Division of
Materials Research to University of Florida is to support postdoctoral
scientists and junior faculty members to attend a conference titled "20th
American Conference on Crystal Growth and Epitaxy (ACCGE-20)." This conference
will be held along with "17th U.S. Biennial Workshop on Organometallic Vapor
Phase Epitaxy (OMVPE-17)" and "The Second 2D Electronic Materials Symposium" at
Big Sky, Montana from August 2 to 7, 2015. The aim of the organizers is to
secure a multidisciplinary character of the meeting and cover different
scholarly directions. Biomimetic and biomaterials research provides an exciting
and broad platform for training both undergraduate and graduate students in the
materials area. It is both visually appealing to those who are not yet experts,
and deals with materials that everyone is familiar with, such as bones, teeth,
sea shells, etc. The conference will be open for graduates and undergraduate
students including broader participation of women and underrepresented minority
groups. The format of the conference will provide various opportunities to
students and junior scientists to attend state-of-art lectures of the top
scientists and meet with them, present their results, participate in discussions
and explore future networking and collaborations.

Technical: This five-day symposium has been designed to bring together
researchers from a diverse set of fields to discuss crystallization in general,
with a focus on biological and biomimetic materials. The planned sessions on
biomineralization will include state of the art characterization techniques and
computational simulations in advancing fundamental understanding of
biocrystallization processes. Specific areas of interest include classical
versus non-classical crystallization phenomena in the crystallization of
biological materials and bio-inspired/biomimetic materials. Additional areas of
interest include interactions at organic - inorganic interfaces, self-organizing
systems, novel characterization methodologies, and multiscale modeling of
crystallization within both natural and synthetic biomaterials.