* 1547866
* EAGER: The implications of interacting land use legacies and drought cycles for lake district carbon cycling
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2018
* Stuart Jones, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* John Schade
* 06/30/2018
* USD 198,657.00

Data from the past can usefully inform the future when frameworks such as models
direct which data to use and how to combine them. Predicting the consequences of
global change is particularly complex, yet of pressing concern. This project
combines long-term data collected from lakes throughout Wisconsin with a new
modeling framework to predict the amount of carbon and other nutrients stored in
lake sediments, and thus the extent to which lakes contribute to greenhouse gas
emissions and future climate. Results will improve predictions of existing
climate models by incorporating the role of lakes, which are dominant landscape
features. The research team is integrated vertically (faculty, postdoctoral
researcher, graduate, undergraduate students) allowing opportunities to provide
and receive mentoring in the scientific process at all levels. Project results
will be incorporated into three courses at the University of Notre Dame and will
engage science teachers from a high need intermediate school in South Bend,
Indiana, through the development of curricular modules.

The project focuses on lake ecosystems and two of their climate regulating
services, carbon burial and greenhouse gas emission, recognizing regional
contributions as emergent properties of burial and emission processes at local
sites. Its goal is to develop models as tools to leverage long-term data on
regional meteorology and land use in order to predict regional lake carbon
burial and greenhouse gas emissions. Model-data assimilation will be used to
address two questions: how do decadal drought cycles modify lake
biogeochemistry, and how does agricultural intensification and its legacies
alter lake responses to drought? An existing, spatially-explicit, landscape-
driven biogeochemistry model will be augmented with sub-models to identify
emergent effects of interactions between hydrology and land use that drive long-
term material loads to lakes, include temperature-dependent biogeochemical
rates, account for material exchange between lake sediments and the water
column, and run Monte Carlo simulations of the model to propagate uncertainties
in lake morphometry and biogeochemical rates. These modeling efforts will be
followed by assimilation of a thirty-year database quantifying hydrology, water
chemistry, and primary production across multiple cycles of drought and across
spatial gradients including forest and agricultural land use. After testing
specific questions with the results from model-data assimilation, the
researchers will combine retrospective and experimental modeling to predict lake
carbon biogeochemistry over the next 20 years. The research will contribute new
insights into lake contributions to regional elemental cycling and will more
generally explore how temporal variability and legacies interact to alter
ecosystem processes.