* 1547272
* CICI: Center of Excellence: Center for Trustworthy Scientific Cyberinfrastructure
* CSE,OAC
* 01/01/2016,06/30/2021
* Barton Miller, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 06/30/2021
* USD 7,829,993.00

The National Science Foundation funds over seven billion dollars of research
annually, nearly all of which relies heavily on information technology. The
digital data produced and computing systems used by that research are subject to
the same risks as other data and computing systems on the Internet. Appropriate
cybersecurity is necessary both to make today's scientific discoveries possible
and to ensure that the science is trustworthy. However, NSF science is often
necessarily performed in open, collaborative environments that span
organizational and national boundaries. These constraints limit the use of
traditional cybersecurity paradigms and technologies. Moreover, maintaining the
usability of computer systems while providing cybersecurity is critical for many
scientists who are not information technology experts. Different science domains
also have varying requirements for data confidentiality and integrity. As the
NSF Cybersecurity Center of Excellence, the Center for Trustworthy Scientific
Cyberinfrastructure (CTSC) brings together experts in cybersecurity,
knowledgeable and experienced in the scientific endeavor, who will provide the
NSF community with leadership and support necessary to tackle the unique
cybersecurity challenges in maximizing the production of trustworthy NSF
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CTSC will directly support individual NSF
cyberinfrastructure projects and Large Facilities through collaborative
engagements that address specific project needs. CTSC engagement activities
include (but are not limited to) security reviews, security architecture design,
identity and access management, and software assurance. CTSC will provide
cybersecurity situational awareness to the NSF cyberinfrastructure community
through timely advisories and notices. In collaboration with the Department of
Energy's Energy Science Network, CTSC will develop and publish an information
security threat model scoped to the particular assets and interests of the open
science community. CTSC will continue to organize the annual NSF Cybersecurity
Summit for Large Facilities and Cyberinfrastructure, providing the community
with the opportunity to share best practices, attend practical training
sessions, and collaborate on solving common challenges. CTSC will perform
outreach and dissemination of best practices via the CTSC website
(http://trustedci.org), blog posts, email lists, and online chats, as well as
providing cybersecurity training in person and via online courses.