* 1547771
* CREST Center for Renewable Energy and Advanced Materials (CREAM)
* EDU,EES
* 07/15/2016,09/30/2023
* Frances Williams, Norfolk State University
* Continuing Grant
* Luis Cubano
* 09/30/2023
* USD 5,000,000.00

Center for Renewable Energy and Advanced Materials&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With
National Science Foundation support, Norfolk State University will establish the
Center for Renewable Energy and Advanced Materials. The Center consists of an
interdisciplinary endeavor to help achieve an affordable, sustainable and clean
supply of global energy. The Center will develop advanced materials and devices
for renewable energy, such as solar, thermoelectric, battery and high-
performance low-energy-consuming devices and
sensors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Center activities are comprised of three research
thrusts (i) Renewable energy harvesting, (ii) Energy storage, and (iii) Low
energy consumption and high performance electro-optic and sensor devices.
Renewable energy harvesting efforts are devoted to the development and
fundamental study of nanostructures based energy materials such as semiconductor
nanocrystals, perovskite organic-inorganic lead iodide-based solar cells,
organic-inorganic thermoelectric materials, magnetoelectric composites and their
measurements of all physical properties, including transient and intensity decay
of time-resolved spectroscopy, and simulation and modeling in order to
understand the mechanism. These efforts will advance several major energy
applications, in particular, solar cells, thermoelectric generators, and other
optoelectronic applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Energy storage research
efforts focus on the development and computational study of nanomaterials based
Li-ion battery, supercapacitors, and bimetallic cellulose embedded energy
storage device and high-performance energy storage devices. Research on the
development of energy or power-efficient devices, will focus on biosensors, as
well as optoelectronic and energy conversion devices based on artificial
nanostructures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Center for Renewable Energy and
Advanced Materials will develop educational materials for the high school,
community college, science museum and university levels to advance understanding
of sustainable energy technologies, practices and clean energy alternatives to
shape the work force and talent pool of the future. Center activities will also
enhance the quality of training for a large number of African Americans in this
interdisciplinary area.