* 1547046
* Support for the 5th International Clumped Isotope Workshop; Saint Petersburg, Florida; January, 2016
* GEO,OCE
* 11/01/2015,10/31/2016
* Brad Rosenheim, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Candace Major
* 10/31/2016
* USD 10,000.00

Clumped isotopes are the combination of any two or more of the rare isotopes in
a molecule. In the case of carbonate rocks, the combination of 13C and 18O in
the CO2 released from carbonate during the dissolution by phosphoric acid has
been the most extensively investigated. This has revolutionized the study of the
stable isotope systematics of carbonate materials. The clumped isotope method
allows scientists, with one measurement, to obtain information about the
temperature of formation and the oxygen isotopic composition of the formation
fluid at the same time. In addition to the clumped isotopes in carbonates, there
is increasing interest in other clumped isotope systems (CH4 and O2 for
example). This interest has spurred a revolution in mass spectrometric
techniques. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Significant progress has been made at the past
four International Workshops on this topic, held in Seattle, London, Boston, and
Zurich over the past six years. These meetings allow those interested in the
analyses and applications of clumped isotopes to interact over a three to four
day period, share methods and applications, and discuss the recent innovations
in the science. The workshops have been a productive intermingling of early
career and established scientists, and have resulted in significant papers and
establishment of analytical best practices. Overall they have had significant
positive impact upon the future of the field. Despite growing interest in and
use of clumped isotopes, several problems remain to be solved. The 5th
International Clumped Isotope Workshop, to be held in January, 2016, in St.
Petersburg, Florida, will focus on coordinating inter-laboratory cross-
calibration efforts, new clumped isotope systems, recognition of non-equilibrium
clumped isotope systems, and progress in understanding clumped isotope systems
in equilibrium. Exploring these topics is essential for the further development
of clumped isotope techniques. NSF funding supports participants of ten or more
early career scientists in this workshop.