* 1547819
* EAGER: Biomanufacturing: Gene expression-based standardization of stem cells
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2018
* Eric Darling, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 08/31/2018
* USD 284,373.00

PI: Darling, Eric M. Proposal Number: 1547819

Cell-based biomanufacturing is highly dependent on its starting material: the
cell. Using poorly defined, mixed populations of cells will result in
unsatisfactory outcomes, regardless of the downstream technologies. Purification
or enrichment of high-value material, like adult stem cells, is necessary for a
broad range of existing and future therapeutic strategies. By better controlling
the composition of the source population of cells, the performance of
regenerative therapies and products is hypothesized to be more reproducible,
making biomanufacturing approaches more feasible than they are today. Current
enrichment techniques, which depend on the existence of unique combinations of
cell surface proteins, are limited by very low cell yields and significant
susceptibility to donor variability. In this work, the investigators propose to
develop and evaluate new procedures that enable the production of stem cell
populations with consistent regenerative characteristics, independent of donor.

The overall goal of this proposal is to rapidly isolate primary, mesenchymal
stem cells and enrich for subpopulations capable of regeneration using an
innovative cell separation device in conjunction with gene expression-based
enrichment. This project will be a collaboration among researchers at Brown
University, Rhode Island Hospital, and Endocellutions, Inc. To achieve this
goal, a live-cell molecular beacon will be designed that fluorescently
identifies cells capable of adipogenic gene expression. Human fat tissue will be
obtained using the Adi-Cellutions device, and cells within the solid/liquid
fractions of the isolate will be examined for their regenerative characteristics
following gene expression-based sorting. Two specific aims are included in this
proposal: 1) Investigate how gene expression-based cell sorting parameters
influence high-yield acquisition of adipogenic cells, and 2) Establish a set of
processing parameters capable of generating consistent regenerative
characteristics in isolated cell populations, independent of donor. Gene
expression-based cell enrichment is a potential, paradigm-shifting technique,
vastly expanding the potential targets researchers can investigate beyond
current, cell surface marker approaches. More practically, the methodologies
generated from this project will provide a roadmap for other investigators to
obtain more consistent populations of cells for use in basic science experiments
as well as clinical procedures. The proposed academic-industry collaboration
will result in contributions to the fields of biomedical engineering, cell and
molecular biology, and clinical medicine. Undergraduate, graduate, and medical
students will participate throughout all stages of the proposed project, and
experimental findings will be distributed through scientific communications and
educational venues at Brown University and partnering hospitals.