* 1547075
* EAGER: Cybermanufacturing: Design and analysis of a cyberphysical systems approach for custom manufacturing kiosks
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Panganamala Kumar, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/2018
* USD 300,000.00

Recent advances in computing, communication and manufacturing technologies
promise the possibility of cost-effective production of custom, high quality
components especially in medical, energy, aerospace and consumer appliance
industry. Custom manufacturing machines operating standalone in kiosks, possibly
within home supply stores, operated by a non-technical workforce may enable
broad retail customer use. A major challenge to this vision is the high cost of
quality loss in the current 3-D printing processes. Breakthrough approaches for
quality assurance, similar to what the photocopying sector has achieved, are
necessary to deploy custom manufacturing technologies as service kiosks. Unlike
in high volume manufacturing, real-time control is essential for deploying
custom manufacturing systems as a service. It is unrealistic to design and plan
a production process to realize arbitrary geometric features from a wide variety
of materials. This EArly-concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) project
explores real-time control issues at the core of a novel machine tool system for
creating custom components from sheet precursors using a sequence of cut-bend-
fold (kirigami) operations. A kirigami machine consists of a laser cutter, a
robotic arm with a forming tool, and an indexer. It offers significant
advantages over the current 3-D printing paradigms for custom manufacturing, as
sheet precursors are cheaper and easier to handle, and it takes just minutes
versus hours to create complex parts including large lightweight functional
components.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project's approach combines recent advances
in CPS, passive wireless sensing, low latency communications and digital image
correlation for real-time quality assurance. The sheet precursors will be
embedded with thermochromics particles so that as the sheet is being shaped, the
particles serve as a swarm of mobile passive sensors whose instantaneous
location and distortion are discerned using cameras to estimate the process
state (mainly temperature and deformation fields) at unprecedented granularity,
and control laws synthesized to tune process parameters and actuator motion to
mitigate quality issues. This is a departure from the currently held thoughts on
Cybermanufacturing using powder rather than sheet based process, and leverages
dynamic CPS based coordination employing novel swarm based sensors instead of
static open-loop planning. The novel passive swarm sensing is potentially a huge
advancement in disaggregating process variables. The principal investigators
will address the challenges associated with placement of cameras to capture
information from dynamic sensors, addressing issues such as occlusions, fast
prognostication of impending faults, and optimization of control actions using
uncertain image data. They are working with a local sheet forming firm to
develop a proof of concept machine. Their experiences in Morse theoretic exact
kirigami construction of complex geometries, and sheet folding mechanics will be
employed to plan kirigami operations and delineate attainable geometries.