* 1547483
* Evaluating aging and hydration effects on geomagnetic paleointensity in natural glass
* GEO,EAR
* 12/15/2015,11/30/2019
* Julie Bowles, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 11/30/2019
* USD 147,867.00

The strength and direction of Earths magnetic field varies in both time and
space. These variations are recorded in a variety of geological materials, and
by interpreting the records we learn about processes deep in Earth's liquid core
(where the field is generated); about how the Earth and our atmosphere have
evolved over geologic time; and we can use knowledge of field variations to put
age constraints on geologic formations and some archeological artifacts.
Although it is relatively easy to recover the direction of Earth's field, it is
far more difficult to recover field strength (also known as 'paleointensity').
Typically, laboratory procedures designed to recover paleointensity are only
appropriate for very small (less than a few tens of nanometers) magnetic
crystals, but these small crystals are rare in nature. Volcanic glass (such as
obsidian) is one material in which they are relatively abundant, and previous
work has demonstrated that in some cases geologically young volcanic glass
accurately records paleointensity. Glass is not a stable material, however, and
the glass structure changes over time and with the absorption of water. If the
magnetic minerals also change after the initial formation of the glass, they
most likely will not provide us with accurate paleointensity information. The
proposed work will provide an understanding of how magnetic mineralogy varies
with the age and water content of natural glasses and will allow us to evaluate
the suitability of natural volcanic glass as a paleointensity recorder over
geologic time. In addition to the impact on geoscience disciplines, natural
glasses have long been considered an analogue for nuclear waste glasses and
other hazardous waste glasses. The proposed work may contribute to our ability
to monitor incipient alteration of waste glasses via magnetic
properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
description:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although knowledge of the strength of Earth's
magnetic field through time ('paleointensity') is critical in our understanding
of field generation and evolution, paleointensity data remain sparse throughout
Earth's history. This stems partly from the fact that few natural materials have
the required fine-grained (single-domain) mineralogy and are also resistant to
alteration both in nature and during laboratory reheating. Natural volcanic
glasses, because they are quickly cooled, typically contain single-domain
titanomagnetite, and the glass serves to at least partially protect the
titanomagnetite against alteration. It has been demonstrated that young
(&lt;50-100 ka) submarine basaltic glass can reliably record the field, but it
is unclear how the magnetic mineralogy and hence magnetization might change with
age as the metastable glass structure relaxes and/or the glass becomes hydrated.
Limited studies of more silicic glass (such as obsidian) suggest that it may
also reliably record the field, but that devitrification and/or hydration will
negatively impact paleointensity estimates. While important questions have been
raised regarding the suitability of volcanic glass over geologic time, there has
been no attempt to systematically address the issues surrounding glass
relaxation, devitrification, and hydration. The objective of the proposed work
is to assess the reliability of natural volcanic glasses to recover the
intensity of Earth's magnetic field throughout geologic time.