* 1547042
* EAGER/Cybermanufacturing: Cyber-Enabled Additive Manufacturing of Advanced Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,12/31/2017
* Frank Liou, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 12/31/2017
* USD 159,758.00

Additive manufacturing (AM), a process of printing a 3-dimensional solid object
from a digital model, makes it possible to produce virtually any geometric
complexity with very little impact on cost. However, most of the current AM
technologies have not yet begun to achieve their full potential. This EArly-
concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) project will explore the
feasibility of advancing AM technologies, focusing on capacities that differ
from conventional manufacturing processes, such as the ability to create
materials with properties not generally observed in nature. These capabilities
will lead to breakthrough manufacturing technologies, such as structural
amorphous metals with much stronger and lighter products that cannot be
currently made, and repairing parts stronger than their original condition. Thus
the project will provide a transformative method to fabricate advanced
materials. The strength, hardness, and fatigue properties of fabricated
materials will also enable extremely lightweight structure design, thus
revolutionize many products in the market. Therefore, results from this research
will benefit the U.S. manufacturing industry.

This project will demonstrate the feasibility of a novel Cyber-enabled Additive
Manufacturing (CyberAM) system to transform material fabrication capability.
Using the CyberAM system, structural amorphous metals will be fabricated using a
metal AM system through well-controlled high cooling process. This project will
also advance the knowledge of cybermanufacturing, including 1) a methodology to
effectively extract process model information into a unified CyberAM
representation for real time process monitoring and control; 2) a strategy to
simplify model computation and data generation to support cyber manufacturing;
3) a learning and adaptation architecture to continuously improve process model
and database using sensor feedback; and 4) CyberAM demonstration with the
learned knowledge to make novel materials. If successful, the researchers will
be able to extend the developed knowledge to internet scale to support multiple
AM stations to fabricate advanced materials that cannot be made before.