* 1547394
* RTG: Interdisciplinary Training in Quantitative Biological Modeling
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2023
* William Kath, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 08/31/2023
* USD 2,409,659.00

This project is an interdisciplinary Research Training Grant (RTG) on
Quantitative Biological Modeling. Postdoctoral fellows, graduate students, and
undergraduates will gain experience with mathematical modeling, numerical
methods, and modern data analysis/statistical tools relevant to biological
problems. Trainees will perform individual research in an interdisciplinary
environment focusing on the mathematical modeling of current problems in
experimental and computational biology. Each trainee will benefit from having
two mentors, one from applied mathematics and one from a biological discipline.
Trainees will gain knowledge and experience beyond that of their own research
areas via regular group meetings organized around specific biological themes,
and research internships outside Northwestern University will broaden trainee
perspectives. Graduate students and postdoctoral fellows will gain pedagogical
experience through creation of new course materials in collaboration with
participating faculty. Trainees and undergraduates will also receive coaching in
written and oral communication as part of the program. A major goal of this
project is to expand the preparation of applied mathematics students and
postdoctoral fellows for interdisciplinary research in the life sciences and for
their subsequent careers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research performed as part of
this project will focus on mathematical models in fields including neuroscience,
developmental biology, evolutionary biology, and ecology. Models will encompass
state-of-the art mathematical, computational, and statistical data-analysis
methods appropriate for these application areas. New high-throughput
experimental techniques have produced a wealth of data from biological systems
in recent years, and major efforts are now underway to integrate these datasets
to understand fundamental biological mechanisms and functionality. Within an
interdisciplinary environment, trainees participating in this project will
analyze imaging, sequencing and other data to address pressing biological
questions. Co-mentorships and programmatic oversight of students by
interdisciplinary faculty, creation of new courses, and development of a new
vertical and peer teaching structure will greatly expand undergraduate,
graduate, and postdoctoral training in applied mathematics in the high impact
area of biological modeling. This will lead to a new generation of
mathematicians, cross-trained and attuned to the particular needs of the field.
The project will further connect faculty across Northwestern University and
other research institutions, strengthening research progress in the focus areas.