* 1547984
* I-Corps Sites:  New Mexico State University
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2016,07/31/2022
* Geoffrey Smith, New Mexico State University
* Continuing Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 07/31/2022
* USD 469,899.00

This project, from New Mexico State University's (NMSU) Arrowhead Center,
establishes an NSF I-Corps Site for the purpose of supporting university student
and faculty research projects as they transition to the marketplace.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NSF Innovation Corps (I-Corps) Sites are NSF-funded
entities established at universities whose purpose is to nurture and support
multiple, local teams to transition their technology concepts into the
marketplace. Sites provide infrastructure, advice, resources, networking
opportunities, training and modest funding to enable groups to transition their
work into the marketplace or into becoming I-Corps Team applicants.
&lt;br/&gt;I-Corps Sites also strengthen innovation locally and regionally and
contribute to the National Innovation Network of mentors, researchers,
entrepreneurs and investors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NMSU I-Corps Site is
housed at NMSU's economic development arm Arrowhead Center (Arrowhead). Through
the I-Corps Site, Arrowhead created Aggie I-Corps, a five-week training program
teaching Value Proposition Design and the Customer Discovery process. Aggie
I-Corps provides teams with training, resources, networking opportunities, and
seed funding to move their ventures towards the market, along with a range of
follow-on funding through local competitions, NSF I-Corps, SBIR/STTR, and
private investors. Aggie I-Corps is offered three times annually and serves a
total of 30 teams per year. Teams are identified through a competitive
application process intended to identify innovations across campus in areas
typically funded by the NSF.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A novel aspect of the Aggie
I-Corps program is the focus on Value Proposition Design as opposed to Business
Model Design, which is the subject of most I-Corps and Lean LaunchPad programs.
The purpose for the shift to Value Proposition Design is to focus on the two
most challenging segments of Business Model Canvas: Customer Segments and Value
Propositions. The core hypothesis is that dedicated training using Value
Proposition Canvas will serve as a better introduction to entrepreneurship and
the Lean LaunchPad methodology than starting with the full Business Model
Canvas. If successful, the Aggie I-Corps could serve as a model for introductory
entrepreneurship programs and future I-Corps Sites preparing teams for the
National I-Corps program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NMSU and Arrowhead have been
growing a culture of innovation and entrepreneurship on campus, particularly
through their Studio G, NMSU/Arrowhead's student business accelerator. In the
past two years, 80 new member startups were added, involving over 150 student
entrepreneurs. This rapid growth signifies a large demand for entrepreneurship
training at NMSU. Aggie I-Corps is an opportunity to build on this current
momentum and offer student entrepreneurs dedicated training and support to
pursue their own startups. Aggie I-Corps offers the initial capital for
participants to pursue their projects to the point of raising additional funding
by leveraging the training and market research gained through the program. Aggie
I-Corps positions STEM-based entrepreneurs to win follow-on funding through
local competitions, federal funding applications and private investment
solicitations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Aggie I-Corps is having a significant
impact on the improvement of the culture of entrepreneurship and innovation at
NMSU, which yields dividends beyond the training and funding of Aggie I-Corps
participants. The impact goes beyond the university and contributes to the
regional ecosystem of entrepreneurship.