* 1547903
* Collaborative Research: Towards Further Understanding of Aerosol Pollution Impacts on Tropical Cyclones
* GEO,AGS
* 02/15/2016,05/31/2019
* Robert Walko, University of Miami
* Continuing Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 05/31/2019
* USD 173,104.00

A variety of human activities result in the transportation of different types of
particles into the atmosphere. These particles, known as aerosols in the
atmospheric science community, have been shown to impact clouds and
precipitation. This project will study three different tropical cyclones to
determine whether aerosols affect the weakening or strengthening of these
storms, and whether it depends on when and where the aerosols interact with the
storm. The research is important because it will help to determine whether
aerosol impacts on tropical cyclones should be included as a priority investment
area for improving weather and climate models. The project will also contribute
to the training of the next generation of scientists through the inclusion of a
graduate student in the research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
researchers plan to address the impact of pollution aerosols on tropical cyclone
intensity. Prior observational and modeling studies have come to differing
conclusions on whether these aerosols weaken or strengthen a storm. The
researchers hypothesize that a key factor is the location in the storm where the
enhanced aerosols are introduced. The planned work will consist of joining the
GEOS-Chem atmospheric chemistry model to the Ocean-Land-Atmosphere Model (OLAM)
and performing a number of simulations on three well-observed storms: western
Pacific typhoon Nuri (2008), hurricane Sandy (2012), and hurricane Humberto
(2007). The main hypotheses of the proposal are: 1) The response of a mature
tropical cyclone to anthropogenic aerosols depends on the distribution of
aerosols within the tropical cyclone with more aerosols entering the outer
rainband region of the storm contributing to storm weakening whereas more
aerosols entering the eyewall and inner rainband region contributing to storm
intensification, 2) Anthropogenic aerosols ingested in a tropical disturbance,
or a tropical storm, have the potential to contribute to the intensification of
a storm, perhaps leading to the formation of a tropical cyclone, 3) Pollution
aerosols entering a tropical cyclone undergoing transition to a cold-core system
are unlikely to contribute substantially to storm intensity change, but are
likely to contribute to enhanced rainfall.