* 1547549
* EAGER: Collaborative Research: Comprehensive Analysis of Long Term Ecological Research Survey
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2016
* Adam Reimer, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* louis kaplan
* 07/31/2016
* USD 13,376.00

This project will analyze results from a survey completed by diverse researchers
to identify the research community's perceptions of the value of, and the need
for, long-term research. The use of a broad-based survey to assess future
research directions is novel in both ecology and evolutionary biology. Analyses
of this survey will advance fundamental research by identifying new questions
that require long-term research, opportunities that will promote more long-term
research in the future, and the barriers that prevent scientists from engaging
in long-term research projects. Findings will direct future research and funding
priorities. The project will support two early-career researchers whose
interests lie in linking fundamental research to societal needs and benefits.

A survey to assess researchers' opinions about long-term ecological research
received nearly 1,200 responses from scientists nationwide. Responses represent
the views of a large proportion of practicing researchers and scientists within
the fields of ecology and evolutionary biology, including researchers who are
not currently engaged in long-term research. Analyses of the resulting data will
stimulate and redirect long-term ecological research within these fields. The
researchers will conduct a comprehensive analysis of quantitative (ordinal and
categorical) questions and qualitative (open-ended) questions using standard
social science methods. Analyses will be primarily quantitative, including
descriptive characterization of responses and comparison of mean responses among
subgroups of respondents to test for differences. Open-ended questions used to
solicit research priorities, opportunities, and barriers will be transformed
into categorical variables using thematic coding; these variables will then be
analyzed quantitatively. Survey analysis will include both a broad
categorization of the views of the field as a whole as well as an exploration of
differences in opinions and priorities based on respondent subfield, experience,
institution type, and geographic focus.