* 1547494
* Collaborative Research: Seismic Investigation of Slab Structure and Back Arc Volcanism in the Sea of Japan Region
* GEO,EAR
* 12/15/2015,11/30/2019
* Stephen Grand, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Raterron
* 11/30/2019
* USD 271,837.00

We propose to develop a seismic image of the crust and mantle beneath Northeast
China, Korea, and Japan with unprecedented resolution. This region is
tectonically active and includes a subduction zone beneath Japan that has
produced large devastating earthquakes (for example the 2011 Tohoku event),
active volcanoes both in Japan as well as in Northeast China, and a history of
extension in Northeast China that has resulted in a sedimentary basin rich in
natural resources such as coal and oil. Current seismic images of the region
will be improved through recent increased data coverage in the region as well as
using a new numerical inversion technique that will fit seismic waveforms as
well as travel times. The ultimate goal of developing the new seismic models is
to better understand the physical processes in the deep Earth in this
complicated region and how they relate to the surface tectonic
activity.&lt;br/&gt;The inversion will utilize 3D spectral element methods to
model wave propagation. Adjoint sources will be used in combination with linear
optimization methods to invert observed waveforms for seismic velocity. Through
waveform inversion we will model triplicated waveforms as well as multipathed
seismic arrivals. This type of information has not been used in previous
tomographic imaging of the region and thus will result in far higher resolution
images than was previously attainable. We will use the crosscorrelation between
data and synthetics as an objective function rather than time delays. This is
ideal for modeling data that consist of multiple arrivals interfering within
short time windows but at the same time it is insensitive to the absolute
amplitude of the data. Although this project is essentially seismic in nature,
the resulting high resolution images will place constraints on a number of
important tectonic processes and questions such as:&lt;br/&gt;1. Can all slab
subducted beneath Japan for the past 50 Ma be accounted for as seismically fast
anomalies?&lt;br/&gt;2. Are there stagnant slabs in the deep upper mantle that
are detached from the current subducting Pacific plate? If we find segmentation
in slabs beneath eastern Asia, can they be associated with the opening of the
Japan Sea, as well as Cenozoic magmatism in NE China?&lt;br/&gt;3. Is there a
warm upwelling coming from beneath stagnant slabs feeding Changbaishan volcano?
Are there plumes rising from above the slab feeding volcanic activity in NE
China?&lt;br/&gt;4. Is there a slab gap associated with the deep seismicity gap
beneath the Japan Sea? If so, can this gap be related to the ?hole? observed in
the stagnant slabs beneath NE China?&lt;br/&gt;5. Can metastable phases be
imaged within subducting slab? Can low velocity structures likely associated
with water transport into the mantle be imaged?