* 1547817
* I-Corps Sites:  Wichita State University
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/2016,01/31/2022
* Debra Franklin, Wichita State University
* Continuing Grant
* Rebecca Shearman
* 01/31/2022
* USD 300,000.00

This project creates and I-Corps Site at Wichita State University
(WSU).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NSF Innovation Corps (I-Corps) Sites are NSF-funded
entities established at universities whose purpose is to nurture and support
multiple, local teams to transition their technology concepts into the
marketplace. Sites provide infrastructure, advice, resources, networking
opportunities, training and modest funding to enable groups to transition their
work into the marketplace or into becoming I-Corps Team applicants. I-Corps
Sites also strengthen innovation locally and regionally and contribute to the
National Innovation Network of mentors, researchers, entrepreneurs and
investors. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The WSU I-Corps Site project goals are
to:&lt;br/&gt;(1)Synchronize a synergistic research and innovation ecosystem to
more rapidly translate Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM)
research and technologies into new and existing business and
industry,&lt;br/&gt;(2)Strengthen and further develop WSU research and industry
collaborations, &lt;br/&gt;(3)Enhance the educational environment increasing
understanding of innovation and entrepreneurship, and &lt;br/&gt;(4)Leverage
STEM discoveries and innovations to increase U.S. competitiveness and create
jobs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The WSU I-Corps Site program supports entrepreneurial
students, faculty, and researchers and strategically equips them to accelerate
their ideas, research, processes and products into market-driven commercial
applications, profitable enterprises, and start-up companies, and/or toward
becoming I-Corps Team applicants. The support includes infrastructure, guidance,
resources, networking opportunities, training, and funding to enable WSU
innovators and I-Corps Site Teams to mature and commercialize their ideas and
spur the development of 21st century jobs and industries. Project outcomes
include development of investor-ready business models, direct commercialization
of technology, business start-ups, licensing agreements, and increased
applications submitted by WSU Site Teams to the NSF's I-Corps Team
Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The I-Corps Site activities expand on the
university's existing strengths, creating momentum to spur increased engagement
with student and faculty, increasing the pipeline of innovations from the
university, increasing interaction and engagement with local entrepreneurial
mentors, and promoting entrepreneurial and commercial
thinking.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Broader Impacts for this Site include
expanded development of a more diversified innovation ecosystem model that can
be applied in other geographic regions. The additional knowledge gained from
targeted entrepreneurship curriculum enables the WSU innovation ecosystem to
attract and promote student and faculty innovations and research to improve the
advanced manufacturing cluster, with particular focus on unrepresented groups
(minorities, female, lower income populations). Entrepreneurial
training/educational modules embed the entrepreneurial concepts into STEM and
other innovation activities. Societal and economic impacts include enhancing and
strengthening the Midwest innovation ecosystem, and contributing to stronger
technology-based economic development in Kansas, job creation and retention,
wealth creation, healthier work environment, student education, venture capital
investment, and business start-ups and expansions.