* 1547353
* EARS: Collaborative Research: Maximizing Spatio-Temporal Spectrum Efficiency in the Cloud
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2020
* Ian Akyildiz, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Sprintson
* 08/31/2020
* USD 449,999.00

Over the last few years wireless data traffic has drastically increased. To
encounter this trend, spatio-temporal spectrum utilization has to be
dramatically improved. Achieving this goal, however, need to address several
fundamental challenges including discovering more TV white spaces (TVWS) in
urban areas where geo-location databases generally fail, increasing spectrum
efficiency through network densification with excessive intercell interference,
and enabling the shift from one-dimensional spectrum sharing to multidimensional
infrastructure sharing. The objective of this project is to address these
important challenges by systematically exploiting the potential of the
evolutionary cloud radio access network (Cloud-RAN) architecture. The research
solutions of this project are expected to fundamentally address the spectrum
inefficiency of current closed and distributed radio access networks and to meet
the demands of fast-growing mobile traffic along with the rapidly-evolving and
diverse network applications, thus providing uniform, ubiquitous network
services for network users.

This project develops a new and holistic spectrum management framework, which
maximizes spatio-temporal spectrum efficiency through innovative cloud-augmented
spectrum mapping, cloud-based spectral resource orchestrating, and
virtualization-enabled dynamic infrastructure sharing. The project consists of
four highly interrelated thrusts: (1) an iterative Bayesian decision framework,
which coherently combines Bayesian spatial prediction and Bayesian experimental
design, which optimally selects a small number of mobile users as well as their
locations to enable metropolitan-scale geo-location databases with high spatial-
resolution and high TVWS detection accuracy; (2) utilizing such spectrum map, a
throughput-optimal joint clustering and scheduling framework is developed, which
jointly selects the clustering patterns of remote radio heads (RRHs) and the
transmission schedules of network users, such that each user has bounded average
queueing delay and the sum-rate of the formed virtual base stations (VBSs)
through RRH clustering is maximized; (3) novel wireless virtualization tools are
developed, which can abstract, slice, and instantiate multiple virtual networks
on a common wireless physical infrastructure; (4) the proposed solutions are
demonstrated with an experiment testbed based on commercial software-defined
radio frontends and high-performance servers.