* 1547025
* I-Corps L:  Recognize- an application to support visual learning
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2016
* Benjamin Watson, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Karen Crosby
* 07/31/2016
* USD 50,000.00

Through the NSF Innovation Corps for Learning Program, (I-Corps L), this project
will develop ways to help faculty to more easily utilize visual image
recognition as part of their teaching, learning and assessment strategies. Many
students are visual learners, which means they preferentially learn through
visual sources information such as pictures, graphs, diagrams, and other images.
Resources for helping faculty to effectively engage visual learners have been
limited and purely visual communication that does not include some text-based
information remains underutilized. This work will expand the use of visual quiz
software called "Recognize." Recognize creates visual quizzes and is designed
for completely non-verbal education and therapy. The approach is similar to the
audio analog of naming a snippet of music. In use, Recognize slowly reveals an
image (the visual question) which is matched to one of several other images (the
visual answer). The reveal may be performed by adding more pixels, reducing
blur, or other methods. For example, as a picture of Albert Einstein gradually
increases in resolution, science students might pick a different picture of
Einstein from among pictures of several other scientists. In our increasingly
visual society, skillful visual communication is crucial. The approach also
offers benefits in multilingual learning environments. Recognize's visual purity
has potential for improving visual learning aspects of science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics education. Moreover, because of the engaging nature
of the quiz format, students may also find learning with Recognize enjoyable
thus persisting longer in learning tasks. A key feature of Recognize is the
ability of faculty and teachers to compose visual quizzes and assignments and to
customize quiz parameters. Students have the potential of using Recognize to
create study materials for themselves or other students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Several characteristics combine to give Recognize unique
potential as a teaching and learning tool. Most importantly, while other
interactive visual quiz software applications pose visual questions, Recognize
also requires visual answers. This pictorial approach gives it special promise
for teaching the natural and behavioral sciences, and for a wide variety of
cognitive and social therapies. Further, Recognize will allow instructors to
upload, improve, critique and share visual quiz content, making it easier for
them to incorporate visuals into their teaching. Finally, Recognize is
compelling and engaging to use even outside the educational setting, offering
possible applications beyond Recognize's current educational mission. Using the
I-Corps for Learning program, approaches will be developed to enable this visual
learning tool to be more easily implemented and sustained enabling educators to
find, author, and improve visual quizzes that match their pedagogical needs.