* 1547149
* Collaborative Research: Lithospheric foundering beneath the Sierra Nevada constrained by analysis of an anomalous Pn shadow zone
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2019
* Steven Roecker, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 07/31/2019
* USD 79,835.00

Mountain ranges are supported by lower than usual densities in the outermost
parts of the Earth: that is, a lower density crust, thicker crust, or low
densities in the shallowest mantle will support elevated terrain. This project
explores how the Sierra Nevada mountains in California came to be supported by
the low density materials. Understanding of how higher density materials were
removed is still unknown to scientists. Historical observations of peculiarities
of such seismic waves originally led seismologists to the erroneous conclusion
that the Sierra Nevada had a thick crust; although we know that to not be true,
those observations still have not been explained. The researchers suggest that
this material likely remains or has been focused in the western part of the
mountain range. They will use seismic information to detect whether dense
material exists where they predict. This comparison is accomplished by expanding
software that can compute seismic waveforms in the presence of complex geologic
structures. Thus this project improves our understanding of how mountains can be
made as well as improving our seismological toolkit for exploring what happens
at the boundary between the crust and mantle in continents.

Lithospheric foundering has been invoked to explain orogenesis in a number of
regions around the globe, but in most cases the means by which lithosphere
founders remains largely unknown. The Sierra Nevada in eastern California is
often cited as one of these regions, and hypotheses for how lithosphere
foundered there range from lithospheric delamination to localized convective
instability. A key piece of evidence for discriminating between these competing
hypotheses lies in the presence or absence of certain arc-related lithologies
(a.k.a. "arclogite") and the geometry of such dense lithologies beneath the
western Sierran foothills. The presence of arclogite should result in large and
potentially abrupt changes in the thickness and wavespeed of the lower crust and
upper mantle, and these are likely to influence the passage of Pn energy across
the Sierra. Indeed, such effects can provide an explanation for a long-lived
conundrum in seismology, namely: what is the cause of a Pn shadow zone produced
by the Sierra? The specific objective of the project is to apply recently
developed full waveform inversion (FWI) techniques to evaluate trial models of
the crust and upper mantle beneath the Sierra that may be responsible for the Pn
shadow zone. One hypothesis is that arclogitic lithologies are responsible for
this zone, and hence that modeling the nature of the zone will allow
determination of their geometry and extent beneath the Sierra. This in turn will
place constraints on the roles of delamination and convective instability in
this region. The primary source of data to be analyzed was collected during the
Sierra Nevada Earthscope Project (SNEP) from May 2005 to mid-2007, supplemented
by recordings from a dense array of broadband seismometers across Yosemite
National Park (~37.8Â°N) during the summer of 2007. The analysis will combine
full waveform modeling of teleseismic receiver functions and surface waves with
local and regional (for Pn) arrivals to ensure that any model produced is
consistent with observations that are mostly likely to be sensitive to the
crust-mantle transition. This project benefits from an abundance of trial models
from prior studies in the region, and this approach will be to use these as
starting models in a formal joint inversion to examine how well they can explain
the Pn shadow zone while still being consistent with teleseismic observations.
Ultimately, the study's results will help resolve the role of "arclogite" in
lithospheric foundering and hence determine whether delamination of the
lithosphere or a convective instability can better explain lithospheric
foundering beneath the Sierra.