* 1547557
* EAGER: Collaborative Research: Tracking of KOR1 Protein Transport in Arabidopsis using Fluorescent-Timer Imaging System
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2017
* Xiaoning Qian, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Continuing Grant
* Gerald Schoenknecht
* 07/31/2017
* USD 47,535.00

In this project, methods will be developed to allow direct observation of the
movement of a protein, KORRIGAN1 (KOR1), in plant cells. KOR1 functions in the
formation of cellulose fibers, which are the primary constituents of plant cell
walls. Cellulose fiber deposition that is controlled by KOR1 influences cell
growth and biomass production. KOR1 travels from one compartment to another
inside cells before it finally reaches the cell surface where cellulose fibers
will ultimately be deposited. To visualize the dynamics of KOR1 in plant cells,
this project will apply fluorescent-timer (FT) technology, in which each KOR1
protein is labeled with a time-sensitive fluorescent tag. Because FT changes its
color over time, fluorescence images of cells expressing FT-tagged KOR1 will
allow visualization of the age and location of KOR1 inside of the cells. This
will reveal the route of KOR1 transport through the plant cell. By observing how
KOR1 transport changes under different biological circumstances, these studies
will reveal how certain factors influence the paths that proteins travel within
cells. This is a novel research tool/approach in plant biology that can change
the way the scientists view proteins in any plant cell.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
plants, distribution of KOR1 among different subcellular domains, such as trans-
Golgi network (TGN), plasmamembrane (PM), tonoplast (TP), as well as the cell
plate in case of the dividing cells, is scrupulously maintained. Dysfunction of
KOR1 is often associated with increased targeting to TP. This project aims to
visualize the dynamics of KOR1 transport beyond analysis of endpoint locations.
Two transport processes relevant to KOR1 biology will be studied. First,
transport route/kinetics and a redirection mechanism of de-novo-synthesized KOR1
will be analyzed by tracking the age of KOR1 after induction of protein
expression. Next, KOR1 age information will be used to dissect the multiple
targeting routes of KOR1 to the cell plate during cell division. These systems
will serve as models for further dissection of various factors that
quantitatively affect KOR1 transport. The interdisciplinary team will optimize
FT technology for plant cell biology as a whole fluorescence analysis package,
including FT with characterized in planta maturation time, compatible
fluorescent subcellular markers, and automated image-processing pipelines. The
experimental platform established in this project will serve as the basis for
further investigation of multiple factors that affect KOR1 transport, including
protein N-glycosylation pathways and interactions with cellulose synthase
complex.