* 1547328
* Collaborative Research: Enhancing Access to Radio Spectrum for Real-time Monitoring and Control
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Randall Berry, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Jon Williams
* 08/31/2019
* USD 337,016.00

This EARS (Enhancing Access to the Radio Spectrum) program was founded in
response to the 2010 Presidential Memorandum on Unleashing the Wireless
Broadband Revolution mandated by Congress as part of the National Broadband
Plan. It was referenced in 2010 State of the Union and later on the Middle Class
Tax Relief and Job Creation Act of 2012 (More than 1/3 of the bill deals with
radio spectrum), the PCAST 2012 Report [President's Council of Advisors on
Science and Technology] (which calls for vastly increased use of spectrum
sharing) and the 2013 Presidential memo (Expanding America's Leadership in
Wireless Innovation). The aim of this program is to identify bold new concepts
with the potential to contribute to significant improvements in the efficiency
of radio spectrum utilization, protection of passive sensing services, and in
the ability for traditionally underserved Americans to benefit from current and
future wireless-enabled goods and services. The impact is large on the economics
of the Nation as seen on the last FCC bidding of 65MHz of the spectrum for over
$45 billion early in 2015. It will enable access to science, engineering,
industry, civilian and military users of the RF spectrum.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will analyze the magnitude of spectrum
scarcity as it relates to the optimization of spectrum utilization. The cellular
industry has been asking for more spectrum for mobile broadband by calling it a
"Supply" to support higher "Demand" of mobile data services. Higher amount of
spectrum can surely support data-centric services more efficiently. However,
other variables of Wireless Broadband Eco-systems can lower the burden on
existing cellular infrastructure and they can collectively play a role of
"substitute" for more spectrum. The PI's preliminary model (based on System
Dynamics techniques) already showed that the need for more spectrum could be
lowered by making efficient use of existing network infrastructure (e.g. Wi-Fi
Offloading). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To make the existing model comprehensive and
future-proof, they plan to expand it by adding economic parameters like auction
data and recently emerged technical parameters like Spectrum Re-farming, Small
Cells, and LTE deployment in unlicensed bands. This research will also
incorporate economic studies and drivers to better understand the efficiency at
which the new spectrum is being utilized by cellular operators and how it
affects their plans to deploy data offloading techniques on unlicensed
frequencies. The proposed project is not limited to "research" activities but it
includes "development" phase as well; the research part will allow them to
define the mathematical relationships among the technical and economic variables
and the development part will produce a working and interactive model of mobile
broadband eco-system to demonstrate the effects of various technical and
economic variables on spectrum allocation. The project outcome not only will
test the Spectrum Scarcity hypotheses but will also provide future projections
for spectrum utilization and will trigger recommendations to government and
regulatory bodies for sufficient allocation of spectrum.