* 1547015
* EARS: Efficient Spectrum Allocation Auctions in Secondary Markets with Dynamic Random Supply and Demand
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2019
* Thomas Jeitschko, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Ann Von Lehmen
* 09/30/2019
* USD 516,000.00

The increasing spectrum demand from wireless applications cannot be satisfied
with existing fixed spectrum allocation techniques. To provide dynamic spectrum
access, auction based spectrum trading has received considerable attention. In
spectrum trading, licensed users rent their unused spectrum to unlicensed users
in exchange for money. The availability of unused spectrum depends on the usage
pattern of licensed users and varies over time, frequency, and spatial domain.
Unlicensed users can bid for this spectrum according to their needs which again
vary by time and location. Thus, the auction scenario has to deal with the
dynamic user demand and dynamic spectrum supply. Existing research on spectrum
trading consider either a static auction environment or at most one side of the
dynamics of the auction environment. Therefore, for improving spectrum
unitization, it is critical to consider an auction scenario where bidders with
heterogeneous demand arrive dynamically and bid for dynamically available
spectrum units.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project studies a dynamic auction
framework and undertakes the development of auction rules and regulations
designed to achieve an efficient spectrum allocation. The study consists of four
major components. (1) Developing the dynamic auction framework with dynamic
arrival of users with variable lifetime and dynamic spectrum supply. (2)
Tackling the design challenges associated with the diversity in demand and
supply in terms of units and duration and devising a truthful auction mechanism.
(3) Designing a generic auction framework to fit the auction rules and
regulations and define the communication method using a secure communication
protocol. (4) Developing a testbed to implement, experiment and validate the
auction framework. This research will enhance radio spectrum sharing and
utilization, providing more spectrum opportunities for existing and new
applications. This project provides interdisciplinary research opportunities for
graduate students working on the proposed research. This project incorporates
research results into courses and to recruit students from underrepresented
backgrounds.