* 1547234
* Improved estimation of free oscillation splitting coefficients using a combination of autoregressive estimation and the neighborhood algorithm
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2018
* T. Guy Masters, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Continuing Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 12/31/2018
* USD 180,000.00

Plate tectonics is the outward expression of the mantle circulation that allows
the Earth to get rid of its heat. This convective flow is driven by lateral
variations in density induced by changes in temperature and/or composition
throughout the mantle. The goal of seismic tomography is to image these lateral
variations and it has been quite successful in imaging variations in seismic
velocities. Imaging variations in density is much more challenging. One way to
do this is to use the splitting and coupling of "free oscillations" of the Earth
excited by large earthquakes. Such oscillations are analogous to the tones of a
bell after it has been struck. Here the PI proposes a novel way to analyze such
oscillations of the Earth that will result in better 3D models of the structure
of the mantle and so shed light on the forces driving plate tectonics. The
construction of 3D models of the Earth also improves our ability to accurately
model the propagation of seismic waves. This has many societal implications
including an improved ability to estimate seismic hazard, and to monitor a
nuclear test ban treaty.

In global seismic tomography, the goal is to image the 3D structure of the
Earth in both the mantle and inner core. Currently, images of 3D shear velocity
in the mantle are quite robust but images of compressional velocity (or, better
yet, bulk sound speed) are less so, and images of 3D density structure still
remain controversial. One thing that is clear though is that there is no simple
scaling between these parameters in the mantle implying laterally and depth
varying causes of the observed anomalies. 3D density structure is not only
important for discriminating between possible physical causes of anomalies
inside the Earth, but it is this that drives convective flow and so has
consequences for determining dynamic topography and the geoid. One of the few
ways to get at 3D density structure from a seismic point of view is through the
study of free-oscillation splitting and coupling. Here the PI team proposes a
modification to the autoregressive technique (AR) by combining it with the
Neighborhood Algorithm (NA). The main advantage of the resulting algorithm is
that it is not sensitive to the source (which can often be complicated for the
large events used in free-oscillation work) but allows direct control over the
form of solution so that its robustness can be assessed. The method will be
applied to an expanded dataset of 3-component recordings from all major
earthquakes in the last 20+ years to study both (effectively) uncoupled
multiplets and coupled multiplets so giving constraints on both odd and even
structure. The free oscillation structure coefficients so determined will be
combined with other types of seismic data to give a more reliable determination
of the long-wavelength 3D density structure in the Earth, as well as
significantly improving our knowledge of long-wavelength elastic and anelastic
structure throughout the Earth.