* 1547047
* I-Corps:  Engineering biomass crops for increased yield
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2015,12/31/2015
* Samuel Hazen, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* lydia mcclure
* 12/31/2015
* USD 50,000.00

Although the U.S. now leads the world in oil and natural gas production,
Americans continue to consume the most and import more petroleum-based fossil
fuels than other countries. This reliance on oil has major sociopolitical and
environmental effects, i.e., fluctuating gasoline prices, political instability
in certain regions, and anthropogenic climate change. Due to these issues, the
threat to U.S. national security is high. Thus, there is an urgent need to
utilize renewable energies from sources produced here in the U.S. Plant biomass,
the most abundant renewable material on Earth, serves as an attractive
alternative to petroleum fuels. To meet U.S. energy needs, dedicated biomass
energy crops such as sorghum, switchgrass, and miscanthus, must be improved. One
approach is to genetically engineer these plants to produce traits leading to
higher yields of liquid fuels. This I-Corps team has developed gene technologies
that result in higher yielding biomass energy crops well suited for biofuel
production. These technologies are ready for commercialization and the goal of
this project is to help bring these products to market. Ultimately, this project
will help to lessen U.S. dependence on petroleum fuels, cut foreign oil imports,
reduce greenhouse gas emissions associated with oil production and consumption
and strengthen U.S. national security by helping to establish an alternative
resource for U.S. energy needs.

Globally, the need for renewable energy made from non-food plant biomass is
increasing. Plant lignocellulosic biomass serves is an attractive alternative to
the current corn grain and sugarcane feedstocks. Plant cell walls are composed
of energy-rich polysaccharide polymers that can be saccharified to produce
biofuels and many other bio-based products. This team proposes to test the
commercial viability of its technologies through customer-based interviews for
analyses of the U.S. biomass feedstock market. The team's goal is to meet with
representatives from agricultural biotechnology firms to discuss their needs and
discover how our technologies could help meet them. In addition, the team will
gain better insight into the biofuels 'value chain' (from feedstock to fuel) to
determine the best 'go-to-market' strategy for our gene technologies.
Ultimately, the data collected from these interviews will be used to develop a
business model towards commercialization of research.