* 1547798
* CREST:   Center for Aquatic Chemistry and the Environment
* EDU,EES
* 04/15/2016,03/31/2023
* Rene Price, Florida International University
* Continuing Grant
* Luis Cubano
* 03/31/2023
* USD 5,480,149.00

Center for Aquatic Chemistry and the Environment&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With
National Science Foundation support, Florida International University will
establish the Center for Aquatic Chemistry and the Environment. Human-derived
environmental contaminants consist of antibiotics and pharmaceuticals, mercury,
black carbon, and fossil fuels. These stressors are recognized as having
significant effects on ecosystems and biota as well as on human wellbeing. It is
critical to understand the biogeochemical processes that govern the fate of
these compounds and their impacts on the ecosystem. Center for Aquatic Chemistry
and the Environment research will address the sources, transport, transformation
and ecosystem responses to contaminants, pollutants and other natural stressors,
under changing land-use and environmental conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Center for Aquatic Chemistry and the Environment will generate significant new
knowledge regarding contaminants and pollutants in aquatic environments, as well
as produce innovative methodologies for detecting and assessing contaminant
quantities and impacts, including the use of molecular detection techniques. The
proposed research will advance current efforts on the biological effects,
transport, transformation and distribution of contaminants in the environment
into new collaborative research areas that investigate the sources and transport
of contaminants and pollutants in aquatic systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Center articulates three research subprojects organized around environmental
chemistry, biogeochemistry, ecology and data synthesis and modeling as they
pertain to regional water resources. The first subproject will advance the
effectiveness of approaches for the analysis of traditional pollutants, develop
methodologies for the characterization and quantification of previously unknown
contaminants and extend the applicability of molecular biology methodologies to
assess environmental stressors to aquatic organisms across land-use boundaries.
The second subproject uses new sensing techniques to determine biogeochemical
cycles including contaminant sources, storage, transport and transformations.
The third research subproject develops data analytic methods to enable synthesis
across large, complex data sets to allow holistic effects assessment for
understanding South Florida's aquatic ecosystem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Center
for Aquatic Chemistry and the Environment will establish innovative
opportunities for students to experience authentic and socially relevant
environmental research and foster their development as future STEM
professionals.