* 1547862
* Collaborative Research: Bronze and Iron Age prehistory on the margins of the Eurasian Steppe: Modeling Interactions between Climate and Ancient Herders and Farmers
* SBE,BCS
* 04/16/2015,05/31/2016
* Claudia Chang, New York University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 05/31/2016
* USD 20,892.00

With National Science Foundation support, Drs. Irina Panyushkina and Claudia
Chang will conduct research to examine how climate, landscapes and prehistoric
societies have interacted in Central Asia. This project involves expert
collaborators and partnerships in the fields of archaeology, dendrochronology,
paleoclimatology, palynology, ecology and hydrogeology in order to examine past
climate changes and social transformations throughout a 2000-year prehistory of
southern Kazakhstan. The research will generate new field-based datasets for
modeling population dynamics, land use patterns in the grassland plains and
forested mountains. The goal is to determine human response to climatic and
environmental changes beginning at the transition from the Middle Bronze Age to
the Late Bronze Age (ca. 1600 to 900 BC) and through the Iron Age (ca. 800 BC to
AD 500).

The research is important because it will test the direct impact of climate
change on ancient societies and cultures of the Eurasian Steppe. It will broaden
perspectives on the nature of climate-human interactions which influenced the
social evolution of the subsequent civilizations and led to the development of
the modern world.

Archaeological data from Semirechye (the mountain zone of the Aral Basin)
suggest that during the Late Bronze Age, small, dispersed populations of mobile
pastoralists occupied the upland valleys and mountains near critical pasture and
water resources. Later, in the first millennia BC, these marginal upland regions
led to the formation of two distinct types of settlement: larger, aggregated
populations of agro-pastoralists who utilized the fertile, arable land of
alluvial fans and smaller, dispersed populations of transhumant pastoralists who
relocated to high elevations. By ca. 100 AD, population density and storage
capacity at villages was comparable to that of early sedentary farming villages
in other world regions. A marked reduction in the number of Iron Age sites took
place after AD 200 probably a result of out-migration or conflict. The research
will interrelate the archaeological datasets with sophisticated reconstructions
of climate variability. These integrated data shall provide key insights into
the adaptive responses of ancient populations to climate and environmental
changes.

This multi-disciplinary project includes: (1) archaeological survey and site
testing; (2) geophysical settlement surveys using a magnetometer; (3) C14
wiggle-match and tree-ring dating; (4) multi-scale climate and environment
reconstructions from tree-ring and pollen proxies, and corresponding ice-cores.
The assembled lines of evidence will be used to estimate the impact of climate
change on population size and landscape productivity in this region.
Furthermore, it will document the social and economic factors within Iron Age
society that led to possible environmental stress such as the depletion of water
sources, wood fuel and soil fertility.

The broader impacts include 1) graduate students' field and state-of-art
training in the management and interpretation of large and complex data sets,
and 2) strong international collaborations between the archaeological and
environmental science communities of US, UK, Kazakhstan, Germany, Hungary and
Russia.