* 1547443
* Collaborative Research: Radio Frequency Interference Aware Radio Astronomy Systems
* MPS,AST
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2020
* Fredrick Jenet, The University of Texas Rio Grande Valley
* Standard Grant
* Jon Williams
* 12/31/2020
* USD 334,969.00

This EARS (Enhancing Access to the Radio Spectrum) program was founded in
response to the 2010 Presidential Memorandum on Unleashing the Wireless
Broadband Revolution mandated by Congress as part of the National Broadband
Plan. It was referenced in 2010 State of the Union and later on the Middle Class
Tax Relief and Job Creation Act of 2012 (More than 1/3 of the bill deals with
radio spectrum), the PCAST 2012 Report [President's Council of Advisors on
Science and Technology] (which calls for vastly increased use of spectrum
sharing) and the 2013 Presidential memo (Expanding America's Leadership in
Wireless Innovation). The aim of this program is to identify bold new concepts
with the potential to contribute to significant improvements in the efficiency
of radio spectrum utilization, protection of passive sensing services, and in
the ability for traditionally underserved Americans to benefit from current and
future wireless-enabled goods and services. The impact is large on the economics
of the Nation as seen on the last FCC bidding of 65MHz of the spectrum for over
$45 billion early in 2015. It will enable access to science, engineering,
industry, civilian and military users of the radio frequency (RF)
spectrum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The staggering growth of wireless communications
systems has led to an increasing demand for spectrum to support commercial
services, particularly in the frequencies below 3 GHz, where battery-powered
mobile devices such as smart phones and tablets operate most efficiently. It is
desirable for such devices to be useful for a variety of applications, and in a
variety of locations that have differing available spectrum. Currently this is
achieved, in a smart phone for example, by a collection of hardware solutions,
with one for each standard. This is complex and expensive, and such receivers
will not be sufficiently adaptable for future spectrum usage. It is desirable to
have a single hardware solution that is capable of receiving a broad spectrum
and then selecting a particular transmission from it a based on the local
spectral conditions and the application. Adaptable solutions such as this do not
currently exist due in large part to the interference that occurs when a desired
signal is weak and is crowded by a channel containing a high power signal. There
are high dynamic range receivers that tolerate such disparate signal levels, but
they are not adaptable over large bandwidths. In this project, a novel high-
dynamic range receiver topology that promises to enable the reception of a wide
instantaneous bandwidth will be explored. The topology is enabled by new signal
processing concepts and integrated circuit technologies. The research undertaken
will range from the basic theory to experimental demonstration.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Reducing the impact of radio frequency interference (RFI),
e.g., cellular, radio, TV, satellite and radar signals, and interference from
microwave ovens, is crucial for the future of radio astronomical discoveries.
When studying celestial radio signals, it is not uncommon for the scientists to
puzzle over mysterious interference. To avoid RFI, the radio astronomers select
sparsely populated areas to set up their telescopes. In some cases, the quiet
zones around the radio telescopes have to be established to limit the use of
airwares. Therefore, the technology of RFI mitigation is a critical component
needed by radio astronomy science in increasingly challenging RFI environments.
This project brings together researchers in radio astronomy, statistical array
signal processing, radio frequency instrumentation, digital signal processing,
wireless communications, and software defined radios to address these challenges
and boost the science of radio astronomy by introducing a novel framework that
provides the necessary analytical tools for modeling, analyzing, and operating
radio telescope arrays in complex RFI
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mitigating RFI in radio astronomy is an
interdisciplinary research area which combines the efforts of scientists from
various fields including electrical engineering, physics, astronomy, computer
science, and astrophysics. Opportunities created by developing RFI mitigation
techniques by the joint team of University of Texas at Dallas (UTD) and the
Center for Advanced Radio Astronomy (CARA) of the University of Texas at Rio
Grande Valley (UTRGV) researchers will have a direct impact in the number of
students participating in STEM careers. The success of this project will be
beneficial to both the commercial and the scientific communities. Recently, CARA
teamed up with SpaceX, a leading commercial manufacturer of orbital launch
vehicles, to create the Space Craft Tracking and Astronomical Research into
Gigahertz Astrophysical Transient Emission (STARGATE), a space technology
innovation center that combines higher education, research, economic
development, and commercialization. The future connections developed between
STARGATE's technology/business incubator and the Dallas Telecom Corridor will
open up new opportunities for technology transfer and better planning of
spectrum use.