* 1547618
* EAGER: Biomanufacturing: Engineered hydrogel capsules for controlled scalable cultures of pluripotent stem cells
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Prashant Kumta, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 08/31/2018
* USD 300,000.00

PI: Banerjee, Ipsita &lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
1547618&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Human pluripotent stem cells (hPSCs) possess the
unique capability of giving rise to many different cell types in the body and
hence hold great potential in transforming cell-based therapies, disease
modeling, and drug discovery. A vital step in the path to clinical translation
of hPSCs is to implement reproducible, homogenous, and scalable cell culture and
differentiation technologies. The primary challenge in scalable cultures of
hPSCs is the maintenance of high viability and proliferation without
compromising the ability of the cells to differentiate into therapeutically
relevant tissue types. The objective of this research is to design a novel
materials-based platform to achieve such scalable culture of hPSCs for
biomanufacturing. Besides scale-up, the designed system is expected to produce
homogenous aggregates of uniform size, which will significantly reduce
variability in differentiation and lead to increased fidelity in
biomanufacturing. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Currently, the ubiquitous scale-up
platform of hPSCs is based on aggregate suspension cultures which have the
potential to produce hPSCs at clinically relevant scales. Substantial challenges
still remain with this system, including low viability of initial seeding
population, spontaneous cell aggregation leading to inhomogeneous and non-
uniform aggregates, and uncontrolled and dynamic shear force on the cell
surface. These challenges can restrict scalability and introduce unwanted and
unnecessary variability on differentiation. In this work, the investigators
propose to overcome these shortcomings through the design of novel biomimetic
hydrogel capsules for scalable culture of hPSCs. Specifically, they propose to
incorporate synthetic bioactive peptides mimicking cadherin and non-cadherin
cell-cell interactions within three dimensional (3D) macroporous hydrogel
capsules, for encapsulating and propagating hPSCs. These peptide-conjugated
hydrogel capsules will be designed to mimic the cellular microenvironment by
synthetically recreating cell-cell contacts through epithelial-cadherin
(E-cadherin). Alternate peptide designs and combinations will be screened in an
alginate array platform to select for those supporting short-term viability and
proliferation. Further, macroporous capsules will be synthesized from the
designed peptide-conjugated alginate to facilitate homogeneity in hPSC
aggregates. The capsule design will also prevent coalescence of the aggregates.
hPSCs propagated in alternate capsule designs will be characterized for long-
term viability, pluripotency and scalability. Recreating cell-cell contact is
expected to significantly enhance single cell viability and clonal expansion
over current state-of-art of inhibiting Rho associated coiled coil protein
kinase (ROCK) pathway. Furthermore, hydrogel encapsulation will protect the
cells from bioreactor hydrodynamic stresses, hence removing shear-induced
variations in the culture. The proposed work encompasses biomaterials, synthetic
peptides, stem cells and bioprocessing, hence providing opportunities for
interdisciplinary training of students from different disciplines. The PI also
proposes to utilize health care relevance of this cross-disciplinary project to
involve under-represented and minority students into STEM fields.