* 1547156
* EAGER/Cybermanufacturing: CYMAN: A CYber MANufacturing and Entrepreneurship Initiative to Foster Global Manufacturing
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2021
* J. Cecil, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 08/31/2021
* USD 327,502.00

Cyber manufacturing refers to the use of the Internet and other software
technologies to accomplish collaborative manufacturing from different locations
among various organizations with different areas of expertise. This EArly-
concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) project deals with creation of
cyber manufacturing approaches and practices involving students in the US and
international universities; these students will form teams, collaborate and
suggest/develop new ideas for two categories of products: (i) physical parts or
products which can be produced by 3D printing, and (ii) "apps" for smart phones
and tablets which enable cyber manufacturing collaborations. The overall goal is
to encourage engineering students to become cyber entrepreneurs in manufacturing
and related software fields; successful ideas for physical products and software
apps will be commercialized. Assistance will be provided to students to create
new enterprises or startups. The project involves multiple disciplines and
targets both undergraduate and graduate students in various engineering fields
and computer science. The teaming activities will be accomplished in the context
of engineering courses which will also introduce students to emerging practices
and technologies and prepare them to become leaders in our IT intensive
world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A collaboration community of interdisciplinary
engineering students will be established who will interact through a Cyber-
Manufacturing Test Bed which will take advantage of the current Internet and the
Next Internet which is evolving. The Cyber-Manufacturing Test Bed will provide
the foundation to create and support apps where such cyber collaborations will
take place. The adoption of Open/shared, extensible architectures will enable
potential distributed partners to discover and respond to opportunities in an
agile manner. Technologies ranging from existing cloud based networks to
emerging Next Generation GENI based smart networks will be explored to support
this cyber community. The computing infrastructure will emphasize providing "on-
demand" access to the collaborative software resources, where remote access
protocols and simulation platforms play a vital role. With emerging software-
defined computing (SDN) and networking solutions, it will be possible to deploy
end-to-end information exchange services between various manufacturing
enterprises (including small businesses), without the support of large network
vendors and service providers. Thin-client methods will be adopted to access the
cyber tools (in manufacturing, design, simulation, etc.) to ensure secure
management of data intensive operations.