* 1547838
* EAGER: Biomanufacturing:  Cell Differentiation Bioreactor For Cardiac Tissue Engineering
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2015,05/31/2017
* Jeffrey Jacot, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Michele Grimm
* 05/31/2017
* USD 300,000.00

PI: Jacot, Jeffrey &lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
1547838&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Heart failure is the major cause of death in the
U.S., and heart defects are the major cause of death in infants. This project
will design, build and validate a device that can be used at a hospital to
create living heart tissue for repair of failing hearts and heart defects.
Clinicians would inject a patient's own cells into the device, which would then
automatically control the release of chemicals required to make living heart
muscle. In about 2 weeks, surgeons would open the device, remove the heart
muscle, and use it to restructure a failing or malformed heart. This technology
could transform the clinical approach to heart disease and heart defects, and
could produce the first regenerative cure for these
conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The implementation of novel and transformative
therapies using cardiac tissue derived from induced pluripotent stem cells
(iPSC) requires the development of new technologies that can efficiently create
heart tissue from pluripotent stem cells and ensure elimination of tumorigenic
undifferentiated cells without laboratory intervention or extensive processing.
This can be accomplished with a closed bioreactor system to create engineered
cardiac tissue from iPSC. The intellectual merit of this proposal is based on
the hypothesis that a bioreactor containing a pump, heart matrix-based hydrogel,
and nanoparticles controlling the timed release of differentiation factors can
create a 3-D contractile cardiac tissue with organization and function similar
to native tissue. To test this hypothesis, a closed-system bioreactor that pumps
media through cardiac matrix hydrogels along with silica nanoparticles that
release cardiac differentiation factors will be constructed and tested with
human iPSC. The release of factors shown to eliminate pluripotent cells will
purify the tissue and prevent the implantation of tumorigenic cells and this
will be verified through PCR and immunostaining. Finally, tissues with suturable
scaffolds will be generated and implanted into a rat model of cardiac defect
repair. The broader educational and social impacts of this proposal are
integrated with the intellectual merit and include outreach activities with
several Houston high schools though the Rice K-12 Initiative to bring increased
awareness of biotechnology, biomaterials and stem cells among high school
students and increased participation of high school students in science &amp;
engineering.