* 1547731
* Building Interdisciplinary Capacity for Understanding and Supporting Computer Supported Collaborative Learning
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Cindy Hmelo-Silver, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* John Cherniavsky
* 08/31/2018
* USD 110,122.00

Building Interdisciplinary Capacity for Understanding and Supporting Computer
Supported Collaborative Learning&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Data science techniques
have revolutionized many academic fields and led to terrific gains in the
commercial sector. They have to date been underutilized in solving critical
problems in the US educational system, particularly in understanding Science,
Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (STEM) learning and learning
environments, broadening participation in STEM, and increasing retention for
students traditionally underserved in STEM. The goals of the Directorate for
Education and Human Resources through the Critical Techniques and Technologies
for Advancing Foundations and Applications of Big Data Science &amp; Engineering
(BIGDATA) program are to advance fundamental understanding of key questions in
the field, and catalyze the use of data science in Education Research.
Collaboration has a long history of research and a solid research base. However,
the work is hampered by the difficulty of replicating or aggregating results due
to the standard research methods used in the field. The current standard
practice in collaboration research is to record student activity on audio or
video, create qualitative coding schemes, and code the data by hand. This is
labor intensive and prone to personal judgment and error. This project will
investigate the use of data mining and learning analytics to overcome this
challenge of aggregation and accuracy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main goal of the
proposal is to conduct a series of workshops to catalyze the community of
researchers investigating the effects of collaboration by introducing and
investigating the best uses of learning analytics and data mining techniques.