* 1547024
* Exploring recalcitrant N regulation of free-living nitrogen fixation in terrestrial ecosystems
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Jeffrey Norman, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 08/31/2018
* USD 168,417.00

Biological nitrogen fixation (BNF) is the conversion of atmospheric nitrogen gas
to a form that is available for uptake by plants. This process, which is carried
out by a type of microorganism known as diazatrophs, is responsible for 97% of
new N inputs into unmanaged terrestrial ecosystems. Most current research
focuses on BNF of microbes that live in symbiotic association with plant roots.
However, free-living N fixing diazatrophs are highly abundant in many soils, and
their contribution to ecosystem N cycling is not well understood. While inputs
of readily available N such as fertilizer are known to inhibit BNF, very little
is known about the relationship between BNF and recalcitrant N availability, or
availability of N that is tightly bound in the soil. This is a major knowledge
gap, because diazatrophs are very common in environments where the vast majority
of N exists in recalcitrant pools. This project will 1) screen diazatroph
species to determine the proportion that can access recalcitrant N pools, 2)
study the effects of recalcitrant N on diazatroph BNF, and 3) quantify the
relationships between BNF and degradation of recalcitrant N. Because N
availability is a major limitation for plant growth in most terrestrial
ecosystems, this project has significant implications for managing fertilization
and agricultural productivity. The project will involve undergraduate and high
school students, and the results will be integrated into an inquiry-based
learning module for teachers.

The role of recalcitrant N in regulating BNF by free-living diazatrophs is
entirely unknown. This project proposes and tests a Labile-Atmospheric-
Recalcitrant (LAR) N-acquisition strategy, a novel framework for how diazotrophs
obtain cellular nitrogen based on cost-benefit principles, with large
implications at the ecosystem scale. The project will measure N acquisition of
diazatrophs in pure culture under conditions of low labile N but high
recalcitrant N availability. These experiments will be followed by pilot
incubations in field soils to investigate links between exoenzyme activity and
BNF in natural ecosystems. The experiments will contribute to a process-level
understanding of BNF by directly characterizing the role of N fixation in the
overall N acquisition strategies of diazotrophic microbes. The results will
ultimately contribute to microbially-explicit predictive models of BNF in
terrestrial ecosystems.