* 1547921
* RAPID: Ecological, evolutionary and physiological responses of corals to a mass bleaching event in American Samoa
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2017
* Stephen Palumbi, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 06/30/2017
* USD 185,919.00

The strongest coral bleaching event in nearly 20 years began in American Samoa
in January 2015. Coral bleaching occurs when ocean water temperatures exceed a
coral's normal heat tolerance. But bleaching events usually show an unexplained
pattern - colonies next to one another can show very different levels of
bleaching - from pure white to the normal tan color of a healthy coral. The
investigators have observed this pattern among 280 corals on reefs in American
Samoa that have been studied for years. This system will be used to test four
major hypotheses about what causes some corals to bleach and some not:
differences in 1) species, 2) the temperature the corals experienced, 3) the
symbiont they harbor, and 4) the genotype of the coral host. In addition, the
investigators will return to American Samoa at regular intervals to measure the
rate of recovery of each coral colony and conduct the same tests as above for
recovery rate. The stark-white reefscapes left behind by bleaching events are
one of the most common signals of increased ocean warming. This work will take
advantage of years of prior study and the advent of a coral bleaching event to
understand the rules for survival on reefs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The reefs of
American Samoa began showing a major bleaching event starting in January 2015,
including 62 corals that have been intensively studied for coral thermal
resistance, field temperatures, and symbiont type. In April 2015 the
investigators monitored bleaching status of these and additional corals,
totaling 280 corals from four species, and uncovered marked variation in
bleaching extent within and between species and within and between reef regions.
The team will test the relative importance of microclimate to bleaching state by
examining records of approximately 50 temperature loggers in place since before
the bleaching event. They will test the influence of symbiont type and host gene
expression profiles by examining samples of 60 colonies taken at four time
points after bleaching. The investigators will also examine the full suite of
280 corals for genetic variation to estimate the relationship between bleaching
state, recovery rate and genetic polymorphism. These data will be used to test
micro-climate, symbiont, and coral genetics as determinants of bleaching and
bleaching recovery. Because the investigators have samples from these 280
colonies before bleaching mortality, this study will provide the first estimate
for the evolutionary impact of a bleaching event on coral populations.