* 1547987
* EAGER: Gaining Visibility into Supply Network Risks with Large-Scale Textual Analysis
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2019
* Jun Li, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 07/31/2019
* USD 177,030.00

Globalization and the quest for lean production have significantly increased
vulnerability of contemporary supply chains. A disruptive event in Bangkok can
stop production in Beijing, and in turn hamper product delivery in Boston. Such
events materialize in various, sometimes unexpected forms: natural disasters,
labor protests, utility outage, cyber-attacks, political shifts, and epidemic
outbreaks, to name a few. They can lead to cascading supply chain failures and
business continuity interruptions, with potentially severe near- and long-term
physical, financial, and reputational consequences. The key barrier to the
effective management of supply chain disruptions is the limited visibility into
the interconnected supply network structure and the associated risk profiles.
For example, the Department of Defense has specifically highlighted limited
visibility of supply chain structures and risks as items of high strategic risks
in 2015. This EArly-concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) project
directly addresses this challenge. It develops predictive analytics, risk
learning and mitigation strategies that can be readily deployed by firms and
organizations to increase visibility and control of their supply chain risks.
The data driven approach is particularly useful to organizations with complex
supply chains, such as multinational firms and governmental agencies, to better
measure the distribution and impact of supply network risks, and proactively
manage such risks and achieve better supply chain resilience.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;While existing theories assume perfect knowledge of supply network
structure and the associated risk profiles, this research follows a two-pronged
approach to directly account for and mitigate limited visibility. First, it
develops a series of empirical models that increase visibility into supply chain
risks and their driving factors, with a particular emphasis on network-driven
risk interdependencies. It is the first research to combine automated textual
analysis (topic coding and sentiment analysis) and high-dimensional statistical
analysis, to isolate supply risk information from large scale, qualitative data.
Specifically, the project will quantify the language of corporate disclosures
and user generated content on social media to 1) characterize risk distributions
and interdependencies, 2) quantify the impacts of these risks on both immediate
and sub-tier supply chain partners, and 3) identify early-warning factors and
develop predictive models for risk events. Second, leveraging insights gained
from the empirical results, this project develops new quantitative models on
risk learning and mitigation that address and account for limited visibility.
One class of models focuses on optimal risk learning given complete knowledge of
supply network but incomplete knowledge of risks. The other class of models
focuses on designing optimal risk mitigation strategies with general incomplete
information. The model addresses effectiveness of direct (procuring excess
inventory and multi-sourcing) versus indirect (supply contracts) mitigation
strategies in a game-theoretic framework.