* 1547236
* EAGER: Advancing Understanding of Function Modeling, Reasoning, and Thinking in Design by Mapping Behaviors to Cognitive Explanations
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2018
* Joshua Summers, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Rich Malak
* 07/31/2018
* USD 248,703.00

In engineering design, a popular representation taught in mechanical design
curricula is "functional modeling." Function has been defined as what a device
or system is intended to do or the intentional transformation from inputs to
outputs. The function is not what the product is (form), how the product does
what it does (behavior), or why the product exists (purpose). However, it does
relate to all of these, and thus allows engineers to transition between the
problem space and the solution space. Many design tools have been developed
based on functional modeling but are not yet ubiquitously found throughout
industry. Rather than suggesting new function vocabularies, tools, or methods,
this EArly-concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) project seeks to
understand how engineers think about function by studying their behaviors in
creating models. To do this, the modeling behaviors of design engineers will be
recorded, and models of cognition will be used to explain these behaviors. With
this understanding, new computational design tools can be developed in the
future. In addition, engineering design education can be enhanced by providing
students with better strategies for creating the function
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is important to understand how engineers think,
reason, and operate on function modeling elements and how these models bridge
problem definition and solution exploration. Through experimental protocol
studies, the specific modeling patterns (forward chaining, backward chaining,
nucleation) and pause patterns (pause before or after elemental instantiation)
will be analyzed. The modeling patterns will provide evidence of goal-oriented
thinking (backward chaining) or causal reasoning (forward chaining). The pause
patterns and frequencies will be used to understand relative importance of
function (action of transformation) and flow (things being transformed). Two
basic research questions will be explored: Are there modeling behavior patterns
to function modeling that are invariant of chosen representation? And can these
modeling behavior patterns be used to understand, predict, and explain cognitive
models of design activities?