* 1547350
* CICI: Secure Data Architecture: Improving the Security and Usability of Two-Factor Authentication for Cyberinfrastructure
* CSE,OAC
* 01/01/2016,06/30/2021
* Nitesh Saxena, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 06/30/2021
* USD 249,719.00

Password authentication is a critical vulnerability in cyberinfrastructure
because typical passwords are memorable and easily guessed, leaving them
vulnerable to malicious actors. One well-recognized method for strengthening the
password security is Two-Factor Authentication (TFA), in which the password is
complemented by an additional authentication factor such as a mobile phone or a
dedicated token (e.g., a USB dongle). However, current TFA mechanisms do not
offer sufficient security and usability. This project breaks new ground towards
improving both of these aspects. It designs, implements and evaluates TFA
schemes that not only protect against on-line guessing attacks, but also against
off-line dictionary attacks in case of server or mobile device compromise.
Moreover, the project aims to do so without degrading usability compared to
password-only authentication. The creation of formal security models for TFA
schemes allow for better understanding of TFA security in general. The resulting
research prototypes will be of immense value in future research on building
resilient and usable authentication services. The project integrates research
into educational activities in the form of advanced curriculum development as
well as high school and K-12 student mentoring in the area of Identity and
Access Management.

The design of new TFA protocols offers security against on-line guessing and
offline dictionary attacks. The project formally proves the security of these
protocols in a strong security model for TFA protocols that is being introduced
as an extension to well-established password-authenticated key exchange (PAKE)
models. The goal is to design the TFA protocols in a modular way, allowing for
the use of independent device and server components, and enabling the use of the
developed schemes with existing password protocols and without the need to
modify the server software. Moreover, the research involves developing and
testing TFA systems which will instantiate the proposed protocols. The goal is a
TFA systems design that utilizes automated and user-transparent data channel
between the mobile device and the client, falling back to localized wireless
radio communication only when such a channel is unavailable. Such construction
would provide high usability since the user experience of the login process
would be almost equivalent to password-only authentication. Finally, the project
involves conducting rigorous usability studies in the lab environment and field
settings to evaluate the performance, usability, and adoption potential of the
proposed approaches.