* 1547291
* EARS: Adaptive Behavioral Responses for Dynamic Spectrum Access-Based Connected Vehicle Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Elizabeth Ryder, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Murat Torlak
* 08/31/2021
* USD 312,640.00

Connected vehicle technology has the ability to provide drivers with a
significantly higher level of environmental awareness relative to the present
day. Thus, enabling reliable, seamless, and efficient wireless access to support
vehicular connectivity is core to this safety technology. This project studies
an approach that combines vehicular wireless networking with foraging theory, a
concept that is extensively employed to describe the behavior of bumblebees.
Specifically, the research will draw parallels between vehicular networks and
bumblebees foraging for nectar in order to establish a novel framework for
enhancing the performance of connected vehicles. This interdisciplinary project
will make an educational contribution via the mentorship and training of
graduate students from both Electrical &amp; Computer Engineering and the
Biological Sciences, with an emphasis on identifying qualified students from
underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order to achieve a reliable and
efficient connected vehicle networking architecture, this project studies how
dynamic spectrum access (DSA)-based vehicular networks can be combined with
foraging theory concepts. Although wireless networking research has previously
looked to the insect world for insights on real-time decision-making across
multiple communication nodes within a network in order to achieve some level of
distributed optimization, e.g., ant colony optimization, honeybee swarm
techniques, all of these approaches significantly depend on the high level of
social dependency and information exchange found in these species in order to
perform these operations. Conversely, bumblebees have been characterized as
socially sharing past and present information with other bumblebees, but are
still capable of making independent decisions, which is very similar to nodes
within a vehicular networking environment. The application of mathematical tools
used to temporally weigh the information shared between vehicular networking
nodes as well as predict conditions in the near-future, such as autoregressive
moving average (ARMA) filters and Kalman filters, have never been employed in
models used to describe bumblebee behavior. Consequently, this effort could make
an impact on biological sciences by providing mathematical tools that can be
employed during the information weighing process of bumblebees.