* 1547967
* BRAIN EAGER: Novel Targeting Strategies for Projection-specific Mapping of Neurons
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2015,02/28/2019
* Adam Kepecs, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Sridhar Raghavachari
* 02/28/2019
* USD 300,000.00

A central goal in neuroscience is to understand behavior in terms of the
activity and connectivity of specific neurons. Anatomical tracings have revealed
the mesoscale connections in the brain, but this dataset lacks functional
utility without the ability to behaviorally study neurons with specific
connections to other brain regions. Recently, a number of technological advances
have enabled these types of experiments, including re-engineered viruses to
target specific neuron types and deliver genes of interests. This methodology is
important because genetic targeting of specific neurons allows one to draw a
link between a neurons's anatomy (the regions it projects to) and its function
(the information it encodes). This project will explore the engineering of novel
tools that will significantly improve existing retrograde tracing techniques and
thereby enable mapping behavioral functions to specific neuron types. The
resulting tools will be made broadly available to the community to increase
their impact and utility.

As systems neuroscience is adopting tools from molecular biology there is an
increasing appreciation for the importance of circuit-specific technologies, for
instance targeting neuron-types defined by their projections using retrograde
viral strategies for anatomical and genetic labeling. These tools have been
critical for cell-type specific recordings using genetic activity indicators, or
control using optogenetic actuators. Nevertheless, the efficiency and variable
tropism (i.e. inability to target all cell types) of existing retrograde viruses
presents a challenge for these experimental approaches. To overcome this
challenge, two methods are proposed to generate reagents that will provide a
non-toxic profile while maximizing efficient labeling of the targeted
population. The methods will exploit well-understood molecular mechanisms for
viral internalization to overcome tropisms, as well as classic tracers improved
using a novel protein ligation technique. These reagents will be suitable for
precise and robust anatomical tracing, for induction of opto- and chemicogenetic
actuators. Therefore we expect that these improved reagents will allow for more
efficient and less variable projection-based targeting of neurons with molecular
cargo and facilitate new types of circuit-based mapping experiments.