* 1547270
* Workshop: The International Linguistics Olympiad in Blagoevgrad, Bulgaria: July 20-24, 2015.
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2016
* James Pustejovsky, Brandeis University
* Standard Grant
* William Badecker
* 06/30/2016
* USD 10,000.00

Attracting and training new students in linguistics is essential to meeting the
nation's needs for research in language and communication. This award will
provide travel support for two teams of American high school students to
participate in the 13th International Linguistics Olympiad, which will take
place in Blagoevgrad, Bulgaria, in July 20-24, 2015. More than 100 of the
world's brightest and most motivated high school students will gather for the
Linguistics Olympiad. The American teams, each comprised of four students, were
top finishers in the 8th North American Computational Linguistics Olympiad
(NACLO), held in January and March, 2015.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The International
Linguistics Olympiad provides students with a hands-on experience of the
scientific approach to linguistics and the documentation and analysis of
language. Unlike math and science Olympiads, which focus on material that
students have already mastered, linguistics Olympiads introduce new material
through logic puzzles in languages unfamiliar to the students. In the course of
solving a puzzle, the students can discover something about the grammar or
sounds of a language, its conceptual system, its associated culture, or its
historical relationship to other languages. In addition to fostering insight
into human linguistic and cultural diversity, this competition fosters meta-
linguistic reasoning that is essential for computer science, language
technologies, and indeed any career involving analytical problem-solving skills
and the ability to present a logical argument supported by data. Because it has
been the tradition of linguistics Olympiads to base half of the score on the
written explanation of the answer, the contests also encourage the ability to
clearly present a hypothesis and explain how it is supported by the data.