* 1547080
* EAGER: The Role of Engineered Systems in Adaptation of Staphylococcus aureus
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2015,10/31/2017
* Gail Brion, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 10/31/2017
* USD 71,388.00

1547080 Brion

Several common bacteria are beneficial in the human system; however, mutations
in these bacteria can result in strains that cause infectious disease. In recent
years, deaths attributable to bacterial infections from these strains exceeded
those from HIV/AIDS. In preliminary work the PI has detected high concentrations
of infectious bacterial strains in wastewater treatment plants, and she plans to
investigate whether these facilities are hot spots for the processes that foster
the mutations that create harmful bacteria. The PI will investigate the
prevalence of a particular harmful bacterium across two wastewater treatment
plants, one connected to multiple hospitals and the other collecting primarily
suburban sewage. The results of this project may guide new methods for
wastewater treatment that will reduce concentrations of harmful bacteria and
avoid the infectious diseases caused by these bacteria.

Recent findings of Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) in
wastewater suggest that our sewage collection and treatment systems may serve as
reservoirs and adaptive hot-spots for community acquired MRSA. It is possible
that wastewater systems promote conditions that facilitate horizontal gene
transfer of mobile genetic elements between Staphylococcus aureus strains and
other bacteria. An example is the conjugative plasmid for vancomycin-resistant
enterococci that has resulted in the emergence of vancomycin-resistant
Staphylococcus aureus. Preliminary data from 10 pairs of influent samples at the
plants have documented the prevalence of both Staphylococcus aureus and MRSA to
be greater in the hospital-fed system. To date, no studies have compared the
prevalence of MRSA in hospital sewer systems to that of domestic sewage without
hospital waste. The results of this research will expand our knowledge of how
engineered systems may create conditions conducive to evolution of more virulent
and environmentally robust strains of non-enteric pathogens, spurring a
rethinking of the primary purpose of sewage treatment and the control systems
engineers put into place to protect health and the environment. Results may
change the way we view and design sewage collection, treatment, and distribution
systems, track adaptation of microbes, and prevent disease transmission. In this
exploratory research the PI will apply recent advances in clinical and
ecological research to understand the potential risks associated with engineered
systems with respect to evolving pathogenic microbiota.