* 1547814
* A Climatological and Forecast Perspective on the Lower Stratospheric Environment During Synoptic Waveguide Perturbation Events
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2021
* Andrea Lang, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 06/30/2021
* USD 361,907.00

The troposphere is the domain of weather systems that affect people and
conditions on the ground, while the stratosphere is home to more slowly varying
and larger scale circulation features which lie above tropospheric weather. Yet
there is increasing awareness that the circulation in the stratosphere can
affect tropospheric weather, and a proper representation of the stratosphere is
important for numerical models used in medium-range weather forecasting.
Likewise, circulation disturbances in the troposphere are known to affect the
stratosphere, but the established theory for this influence emphasizes large and
slowly moving jet stream meanders known as planetary waves rather than the
smaller and faster synoptic waves associated with frontal weather. But recent
results suggest that certain kinds of synoptic disturbances can also affect the
stratosphere. Research conducted under this award seeks to advance understanding
of the mutual interaction between these synoptic disturbances and the
stratospheric circulation. Three types of synoptic disturbances are
investigated: blocking anticyclones (stationary high pressure systems which
induce persistent weather conditions), explosive cyclogenesis (which is
associated with severe winter snowstorms along the US eastern seaboard), and the
extratropical transition of tropical cyclones (which occurs as hurricanes
recurve out of the tropics and interact with the mid-latitude jet streams). All
of these disturbances have been shown to have a far-field influence in the
downstream direction, through their ability to perturb the waveguide associated
with the jet streams. Previous research has also suggested connections to the
stratosphere, for instance blocking anticyclones are associated with later
sudden stratospheric warmings, and several well-known cases of explosive
cyclogenesis (including the 1979 President's Day storm) were preceded by
downward wave propagation from the stratosphere. The research will be conducted
using objective criteria to identify specific instances of the three types of
disturbances, and to subdivide these into cases in which the circumpolar
stratospheric circulation is strengthening, strong, weakening, or weak. The
analysis will be conducted both using reanalysis datasets and extended-range
ensemble forecasts performed as part of the Stratospheric Network for the
Assessment of Predictability (SNAP) experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work
has broader impacts due to the potential for improvement in weather forecast
skill that can come from a better understanding of stratosphere-troposphere
interactions accompanying synoptic disturbances that are associated with severe
weather. The PI is directly engaged in SNAP, which has been organized to address
issues known in the operational medium-range forecast communities. The PI will
also create a webpage devoted to real-time diagnostics of stratosphere-
troposphere interaction. The webpage will serve as an educational tool for use
in real-time forecast discussions in a classroom setting. Beyond these broader
impacts, the project supports a full-time PhD student and provide summertime
support for an MS student, thereby promoting the next generation of scientists
in this research area.