* 1547117
* Workshops on Algebraic Geometry and Representation Theory; Fall, 2015, 2016, and 2017; Chapel Hill, NC
* MPS,DMS
* 11/01/2015,10/31/2018
* Prakash Belkale, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 10/31/2018
* USD 30,000.00

This award supports participation in workshops on algebraic geometry and
representation theory to be held in Fall 2015, 2016, and 2017 at the University
of North Carolina, Chapel Hill. These mathematical topics are subjects of
intense current work and much recent research progress. The first workshop, "New
Developments in Moduli and Geometric Invariant Theory," will be held November
20-22, 2015. The workshop website is
http://www.unc.edu/~sawon/UNCworkshop15.html. The goals of the workshops are to
support younger researchers, by providing them with opportunities to disseminate
their latest research results and interact with senior researchers, and to
strengthen ties between mathematics departments in the Southeast. Each workshop
will consist of ten talks spread over three days, allowing plenty of time for
additional discussions. Participation of graduate students and postdocs will be
encouraged. At least thirty graduate students are expected to attend each
workshop, where they will learn about the latest progress in the field.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Spaces that parameterize geometric objects and/or
solutions to algebraic equations are known as moduli spaces, and are central to
the study of algebraic geometry and representation theory. Typically they are
constructed as quotient spaces using geometric invariant theory. The structure
of these moduli spaces, and how they depend on the quotient construction, is an
important area of investigation that has recently seen the influx of
transformative new ideas: The theory of Bridgeland stability conditions and
stable complexes has advanced to the point where it is now finding applications
in the theory of moduli spaces of sheaves; the birational geometry of moduli
spaces can now be studied using variation of stability conditions; and the
effect of a wall-crossing on the derived category of a moduli space can be
measured, just as the effect of more general birational modifications on Gromov-
Witten and Donaldson-Thomas invariants can be determined in many cases. The
first workshop will bring together experts in these areas, with an emphasis on
the work of younger mathematicians. The second and third workshops will cover
other topics in algebraic geometry and representation theory, and will focus on
the most significant current developments.