* 1547305
* EARS: Collaborative Research: Full-Duplex Cognitive Radio: A New Design Paradigm for Enhancing Spectrum Usage
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2018
* Behnaam Aazhang, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* akbar sayeed
* 09/30/2018
* USD 200,000.00

With the rapid growth of demand for ever-increasing data rate, spectrum
resources have become more and more scarce. As a promising technique to increase
the efficiency of the spectrum utilization, cognitive radio (CR) technique has
the great potential to meet such a requirement by allowing unlicensed users to
coexist in licensed bands. In conventional CR systems, the spectrum sensing is
performed at the beginning of each time slot before the data transmission. This
unfortunately results in two major problems: 1) transmission time reduction due
to sensing, and 2) sensing accuracy impairment due to data transmission. To
tackle these problems, a new design for future CR is proposed by exploring the
full-duplex (FD) techniques to achieve the simultaneous spectrum sensing and
data transmission. The aim of this proposal is to transform the promising
conceptual framework into the practical wireless network design by addressing a
diverse set of transformative challenges such as protocol design and theoretical
analysis. The educational plan will provide interdisciplinary training for
graduate and undergraduate students. Active student involvement is ensured via
mentoring, research involvement, and participation in testbed development.
Outreach events targeting high school students, particularly women and minority,
will be organized. Broad dissemination is guaranteed via publications,
tutorials, workshops, and online tools.

The proposed research aims at laying the foundations of FD CR networks via an
interdisciplinary framework that synergistically marries concepts from signal
processing, wireless communications, networking, and RF hardware design to yield
several innovations: 1. With multiple input and multiple output (MIMO) FD
radios, secondary users can simultaneously sense and access the vacant spectrum,
and thus, significantly improve sensing performances and meanwhile increase data
transmission efficiency. The research issue is using MIMO to jointly considering
primary user receivers and FD self-interference. 2. Classic CR networks using
listen-before-talk, while FD enable listen-and-talk, which can significantly
improve the network performances. The research issues are to investigate the
tradeoffs. 3. The classical multiple random access protocol is based on carrier
sensing multiple access/collision avoidance (CSMA/CA), while FD enables
collision detection (CSMA/CD). The research issue is to analyze the performances
under self interference. 4. The proposed FD network protocols will be tested
using WARP boards equipped with MIMO technology.