* 1547760
* RESEARCH-PGR: Zygotic Genome Activation in Rice
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2016,12/31/2020
* Venkatesan Sundaresan, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Schoenknecht
* 12/31/2020
* USD 1,707,863.00

Fusion of the maternal and paternal gametes forms the zygote, and it marks the
initiation of a new plant from a single cell. This is a critical stage in the
life cycle of the plant. Extensive reprogramming of the pattern of gene
expression through chemical modifications of DNA and associated proteins, also
known as epigenetic processes, accompany zygote development. Previous studies
have shown that the large-scale activation of plant zygotic genes occurs earlier
than it does in animals; however, both the timing and the relative contributions
of the maternal and paternal genetic material to zygotic gene activation are not
well defined. Furthermore, a detailed characterization of the reprogramming and
activation of the zygotic genome at the earliest stages has not been performed
in a flowering plant due to the difficulties in isolating single-cell zygotes at
precise time points during early development. This project will characterize
genome-wide changes mediated by epigenetic mechanisms in zygotes from rice, an
important crop plant. This study will address the early stages of zygote
development starting at fertilization, and will utilize the latest technical
advances in the isolation and molecular analysis of single cells. Understanding
the formation of zygotes from gametes has agricultural applications for
increased seed yields, for regeneration of plants from tissue culture, and for
improved methods of breeding hybrids. The project will also provide training in
plant biology and genomics to students and faculty from Langston University, a
historically African-American institution in Oklahoma.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Rice
is an excellent model to study the mechanisms associated with genome
reprograming during zygote genome activation. Rice has one of the shortest time
from pollination to fertilization among flowering plants, a characteristic that
makes feasible the isolation of precisely-staged zygotes for analysis.
Epigenetic processes in zygotic genome activation will be elucidated by
characterization of the small RNA transcriptomes and methylomes of the male and
female gametes, and of zygotes derived from self-pollinated as well as hybrid
crosses. The aims include identification of micro RNAs targeting maternal
transcripts, short interfering RNAs targeting transposons for silencing, and
potentially novel small RNAs involved in zygotic chromatin resetting. Loci with
uniparental zygotic expression will be investigated for transmission or erasure
of methylation marks. The analysis will incorporate mutants affecting RNA-
dependent methylation pathways. The datasets will be used to generate models for
parent-of-origin expression in embryogenesis, as well as for silencing of
transposable elements and establishment of constitutive heterochromatic domains
through the germline. The project outcomes will result in the closure of major
gaps in the understanding of a fundamental transition in the life cycle of
plants.