* 1547833
* International Travel Support during 2015 for U.S.-Japan Research Collaboration on the Seismic Design and Testing of Mid-Rise Reinforced Concrete Buildings
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2016
* Jack Moehle, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 07/31/2016
* USD 22,850.00

This award will support travel to Japan during August and December 2015 for four
U.S. researchers to meet with Japanese collaborators to develop a seismic
testing program for two full-scale, ten-story reinforced concrete building
models. The building models will be tested for seismic performance on the
E-Defense shake table operated by Japan's National Research Institute for Earth
Science and Disaster Prevention (NIED). The cost for these shake table tests
will be supported by a NIED research project. By working with Japanese
researchers, the U.S. researchers will contribute to the design and testing of
the structures, and will gain access to the test data to use in subsequent
research analyses. The data will serve the U.S. national need of improving the
resilience of buildings and communities against future earthquakes. The U.S.
participants will be selected to best represent the research subject, as well as
to promote participation from underrepresented groups. This award is part of the
National Earthquake Hazards Reduction Program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
collaboration will be the second phase of a two-phase U.S.-Japan research
collaboration on the seismic performance of reinforced concrete buildings tested
on the E-Defense shake table. In 2009-2010, researchers from Japan and the U.S.
completed the first phase, which included the design, planning, seismic testing
on the E-Defense shake table, and post-test analyses of two four-story
buildings, one of conventional reinforced concrete and another of post-tensioned
concrete. The second phase of this collaboration will involve the seismic design
and testing on the E-Defense shake table of two full-scale, ten-story reinforced
concrete buildings. The first test is planned for December 2015. In preparation
for the December testing, a team of four U.S. researchers will travel to Japan
during August and December 2015 to meet with Japanese collaborators. In these
joint meetings with Japanese collaborators, the U.S. team will participate in
design and testing of the structures so as to maximize the lessons learned for
both Japan and the U.S. The test structures will have many features in common
with U.S. reinforced concrete buildings, including moment frames and rectangular
shear walls designed to withstand effects associated with inelastic response of
buildings subjected to strong earthquakes that drive the buildings to near
collapse. Seismic isolation will also be considered. The U.S. participants will
aim to gather data that can serve as the basis for future research by U.S.
investigators, including research on computational models to simulate response
of buildings to strong earthquake shaking.