* 1547167
* EAGER: Cybermanufacturing: Software/Hardware Combined Acceleration for 3D Printing in Mass Customization
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2017
* Jinhui Xu, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 09/30/2017
* USD 250,000.00

Manufacturing and production have been big contributors to improved quality and
sustainability of human life. Current market trends, such as consumer demand for
variety, short product life cycles, high product quality and low cost, have
resulted in the need for efficient, responsive, robust and sustainable
manufacturing and production paradigm. 3D printing technologies hold the merit
of affordability and customizability, while the key challenge in applying 3D
printing for mass customization in real life is how to reduce the lead time per
unit. The lead time of 3D printing a product unit comes from two sources, i.e.,
the pre-fabrication computation and manufacturing process. The pre-fabrication
computation is increasingly significant and becomes the bottleneck in the
manufacturing flow of mass customization in 3D Printing. This EArly-concept
Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) project looks to address this problem
through new computational methods with potential for two orders of magnitude
reduction in time for pre-facbrication computation.

This project aims to develop a transformative computational paradigm of 3D
printing in mass customization. The project will pursue two novel and
complementary objectives: 1) design a suite of quality-guaranteed geometric
algorithms for the scalable and time-efficient pre-fabrication computation
framework.; and 2) develop a low-complexity and efficient computing system to
facilitate and accelerate the use of these methods and algorithms in Objective1.
This new computer system focuses on domain-specific computing platforms as the
next disruptive technology for power-performance-runtime efficiency improvement.
Specifically, the team will develop accelerator-based architectures for
computing primitives of geometric algorithms. This new hardware architecture
will exploit the parallelism and customization to improve the efficiency of the
new computational paradigm in 3D printing with less delay, lower complexity and
higher computing power.