* 1547171
* EAGER: Cybermanufacturing: Advanced Modeling and Information Management in Pharmaceutical Manufacturing
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2015,06/30/2018
* Marianthi Ierapetritou, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Triantafillos Mountziaris
* 06/30/2018
* USD 284,184.00

Ierapetritou, 1547171&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall objective of this project
is to develop a data-enabled computational framework for the efficient design
and improved operation of pharmaceutical processes using advances in
cyberinfrastructure (CI). At present, product/process design in the
pharmaceutical industry is largely performed in an empirical manner relying
primarily on heuristic experimentation - hence the alarm raised by the FDA in
the Critical Path Initiative to transition toward a more Quality-by-Design (Qbd)
paradigm. For such QbD-based decision making to be practically applicable in the
pharmaceutical industry, a robust computational framework is required. The
proposed framework will allow the seamless integration of high-fidelity
simulations, experimental data and physical sensors with a runtime system that
supports the dynamic execution of model simulations, validation and refinement,
on advanced computing platforms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit
:&lt;br/&gt;Motivated by the these considerations, this work will target the
following specific aims: 1) CI enabled multi-scale process modeling of an
integrated production line; and 2) model integration within a pilot-plant
experimental facility and real-time refinement of the multi-scale model. A pilot
plant available to the PIs via the NSF-ERC on structured organic particulate
systems and will allow the validation and testing in a realistic setting. The
work should lead to several theoretical advances namely: 1) an efficient method
to develop a multi-scale model of a mixer-granulator process, and 2) strategies
to integrate developed models with physical sensors and processes, experimental
data, in combination with a robust computational framework. The proposed
approach will result in flexible solutions for decision-makers as they can
utilize the developed framework as a virtual experimental toolkit to perform
what-if-scenarios in silico to obtain optimal operating conditions, prior to
implementation in the real plant. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts
:&lt;br/&gt;Research findings can be used to enhance the profitability and
sustainability of many industries that deal with particulate processes, thus
directly impacting the US economy including food, pharmaceutical, and chemical
industries. Software prototypes and a library of solutions to problems developed
during the project will be made available for other researchers in the field to
use and improve upon. The PIs will integrate research findings into the current
undergraduate design course. This will enable seniors to not only work on
current chemical/biochemical problems but also on problems relevant to the
predominantly particulate-based industries that surround Rutgers and are
critical to the New Jersey economy. Co-PI Jha will also introduce a new elective
in ECE titled "Advanced High-Performance and Distributed Computing" and will use
research problems and findings as case-studies. The PIs will work with
industrial collaborators involved in this proposal to obtain realistic case
studies that are highly industrially relevant, thereby increasing the
employability of the graduating senior class. To encourage under represented
groups, the PIs will also work with minority societies within Rutgers, (National
Society of Black Engineers), and the Douglas Science Institute for Women, which
have established programs in place, to expose and thereafter recruit qualified
women and minority students at the graduate level.