* 1547163
* EAGER:Cybermanufacturing:Collaborative Research: A novel process data analytics framework for IoT-enabled cybermanufacturing
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2018
* Jin Wang, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Triantafillos Mountziaris
* 08/31/2018
* USD 244,942.00

Abstract Wang/He, 1547163/1547124 (Collaborative
proposal)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is general consensus that factories and
plants that are connected to the internet are more efficient, productive and
smarter than their non-connected counterparts. Next generation manufacturing
systems are expected to include the application of increasingly powerful and
low-cost computation and networked information-based technologies. Internet of
Things (IoT) devices are sensors/actuators, computers with wireless networks
that are small and easy to embed. IoT devices offer the opportunity to
instrument systems with massive numbers of sensors. With the huge amount of data
and the programmability of IoT devices, comes the opportunity to shape the data
received, to address local redundancy of information, and to improve both the
accuracy and precision of measurements locally and across a distributed
parameter system such as a reactor.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the emergence of
the IoT and ever advancing computing power and expansion of wireless networking
technologies, a new generation of networked, information-based technologies,
data analytics, and predictive modeling are providing new embedded computing
capabilities as well as access to previously unimagined potential uses of data
and information. These capabilities provide possibilities for new, radically
better ways of doing manufacturing. As noted in Advanced Manufacturing
Partnership 2.0 (AMP 2.0), if potential faults and failures are detected and
corrected while still incipient, reduction of plant downtimes of 50% in five
years and 90% in ten years may be achieved. Converting these possibilities into
reality remains challenging. In this EAGER proposal, the PIs propose a new
process data analytics framework with the aim of providing smart diagnostics and
prognostics for cybermanufacturing. As part of this effort, they also propose to
establish an IoT-enabled manufacturing technology testbed (MTT) to explore and
establish a proof-of-concept for the proposed
framework.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs propose a statistics pattern based
process monitoring (SPPM) framework as one of the potential solutions. This SPPM
will make use of the higher order statistics of process variables that have not
been utilized before to directly quantify the process nonlinearity and
nonnormality. In addition, a Bayesian-based event classification is proposed to
enable intelligent, self-adaptive modeling, a key capability of
cybermanufacturing system monitoring. By establishing an IoT enabled
manufacturing technology testbed and running designed experiments, this project
should yield a better understanding of the properties, capacities and
performances of IoT devices. If successful, this project will create one of the
first prototypes of the 3rd generation statistical process monitoring methods.
The idea of the proposed statistics pattern based data analytics is not limited
to process monitoring. It provides a modeling framework that can be applied for
process/product design and predictive maintenance by relating cybermanufacturing
Big Data to different objectives.