* 1547803
* CPS: Synergy: Collaborative Research: Hybrid Control Tools for Power Management and Optimization in Cyber-Physical Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 06/18/2015,09/30/2016
* Patrick Martin, Hampden-Sydney College
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 09/30/2016
* USD 42,774.00

This project explores balancing performance considerations and power consumption
in cyber-physical systems, through algorithms that switch among different modes
of operation (e.g., low-power/high-power, on/off, or mobile/static) in response
to environmental conditions. The main theoretical contribution is a
computational, hybrid optimal control framework that is connected to a number of
relevant target applications where physical modeling, control design, and
software architectures all constitute important components. The fundamental
research in this program advances state-of-the-art along four different
dimensions, namely (1) real-time, hybrid optimal control algorithms for power
management, (2) power-management in mobile sensor networks, (3) distributed
power-aware architectures for infrastructure management, and (4) power-
management in embedded multi-core processors.

The expected outcome, which is to enable low-power devices to be deployed in a
more effective manner, has implications on a number of application domains,
including distributed sensor and communication networks, and intelligent and
efficient buildings. The team represents both a research university (Georgia
Institute of Technology) and an undergraduate teaching university (York College
of Pennsylvania) in order to ensure that the educational components are far-
reaching and cut across traditional educational boundaries. The project involves
novel, inductive-based learning modules, where graduate students team with
undergraduate researchers.