* 1547200
* RAPID:   Analysis of the May 2015 Texas Flood with a Connectivity Framework and High Resolution Topography Data
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2015,05/31/2017
* David Mohrig, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Justin Lawrence
* 05/31/2017
* USD 22,639.00

After four years of severe drought, central Texas experienced massive flooding
on 25-26 May 2015. It is now clear that an event of this magnitude had never
been recorded before, with monthly precipitation totals reaching 20 inches at
several locations. The 25-26 May event alone contributed 10 inches of rain. The
number of rivers in flood was enormous as was the spatial extent of the affected
areas spanning the entire central portion of Texas from major city centers such
as Austin and Houston to smaller towns such as Wimberley and Bastrop. This
proposal seeks immediate acquisition of high-resolution topography data using
airborne remote-sensing technology to assess the impact of the Memorial Day
Floods. The data will be acquired by the National Center for Airborne Laser
Mapping at the University of Houston. Data analysis will be conducted at the
University of Texas at Austin. The objective of the proposed research is to
quantify the hydrological and sedimentological connectivity between river
channel and floodplain during this extreme event and its impact on downstream
sediment transport. Such knowledge is fundamental for informing sustainable
catchment management through better understanding of where erosion and
sedimentation will occur during major storm events. The data collected for this
project will immediately be made publically available and shared with the
engineering community to aid in assessing the structural damage to bridges and
dams impacted by the floods. The data will also be used in a case study to train
46 graduate students at a 2015 Summer Institute that is part of the National
Flood Interoperability Experiment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The team will test a
hypothesis that channel-floodplain connectivity influences downstream sediment
transport, and in particular that high channel-floodplain connectivity resulted
in reduced downstream sediment transport due to sediment dispersal and storage
on the floodplain. To test this hypothesis, the study targets two contrasting
areas: the Lower Trinity River--a major meandering river in Texas where sediment
transport is the subject of ongoing research, and an urban setting in downtown
Austin. Both experienced major flooding conditions during the May 2015 event,
but their floodplains are quite different. Analytical work will use the
topography analysis tool GeoNet in conjunction with post-flood fieldwork and
enhancement of simulation and forecasting models used in the National Flood
Interoperability Experiment. The data will be stored in the NSF-funded
OpenTopography repository for access by the community at large. Research results
will be disseminated through open-access publications and conference
presentations, and the tools used as part of the analysis are available to the
community in open-source format.