* 1547301
* CICI: Data Provenance: Data Quality and Security Evaluation Framework for Mobile Devices Platform
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Leon Reznik, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 08/31/2021
* USD 250,042.00

Cyberinfrastructure advancements over the last decade laid a strong foundation
for data generation and their communication on a staggering scale, opening up
exciting opportunities for setting up a new collaboration between data providers
and users, ordinary citizens and government or commercial agencies. Nowadays,
one can easily collect data via a mobile device's sensors and use a smartphone
to report dangerous (for example, road slickness or construction hazard)
conditions to a government agency. But not all data have equal quality,
fidelity, and value. The data may originate from a poor quality camera. The high
quality sensor data may be maliciously altered during its transfer over a
network with low security. This project develops a framework to calculate
integral data quality and security (DQS) indicators and provide them to the user
along with data itself. This innovation has a high potential to significantly
improve a wide spectrum of science and technology applications as it fuses
different types of data based on a new quality and security information
application. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project builds a proof-of-concept design
platform to develop, verify and promote a comprehensive methodology for DQS
evaluation. It focuses on the integration of cybersecurity metrics with other
diverse metrics, such as accuracy, reliability, timeliness and safety, into a
single methodological and technological framework. The framework includes
generic data structures and algorithms implementing a DQS evaluation. While the
developed evaluation techniques cover a wide range of data sources, from cloud
based data systems to embedded sensors, the framework's implementation
concentrates on using an ordinary user's Android smartphone. The developed
methodologies will be verified by their implementation on the eNeighborhoodWatch
platform, an application that not only enables interaction between users and
government but also, with the user's permission, perform data collection for
scientific studies (e.g. noise pollution, earthquake prediction), facilitating
collaboration between thousands of ordinary users with the research community.