* 1547627
* I-Corps:  Fluidic Energy Harvesters for Green Building Applications
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2015,12/31/2016
* Yiannis Andreopoulos, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* lydia mcclure
* 12/31/2016
* USD 50,000.00

An increase in the usage of small electronic devices like cell-phones, sensors,
actuators and other consumer products drives the development of new technologies
to power them. There is an increasing demand for a non-depleting electrical
energy source that can be used to power such electronic devices in Green
Building application. Providing a non-depleting energy source enables the usage
of modern electronic devices that increase the energy efficiency of the
building. This will also eliminate the need for disposal of toxic batteries and
their hazardous waste. Other indoor harvesting technologies are available and
are widely used to enable low power systems. Technology discussed herein
provides the power density ten times that of the nearest competing indoor
harvesting technology. The knowledge for the potential commercial application
for the technology, its potential market size and the competitive landscape is
necessary to establish a feasible path to commercialization.

In this project the team will focus on developing a product and a
commercialization plan that will enable the usage of energy efficient Heating
Ventilation and Air Conditioning (HVAC) devices in modern buildings, increasing
the global energy efficiency of the buildings. This technology can also be used
to harvest small amounts of energy that can be implemented in automotive,
defense, biomedical and other fields that require non-depleting energy source
for small electronic devices. The objectives of the proposed work are first to
carry out market research, identify the competitive landscape and consider the
formation of strategic partnerships and second to develop a pilot-program ready
prototype. The first part will be achieved by conducting a large number of
comprehensive interviews with industry specialists. The feedback from the
interviews will be evaluated to estimate the market size and identify the key
partners and competitors. Also, based on the feedback from the industry
professionals a power requirement for the energy harvester will be established.
The knowledge of the power requirement will allow for the completion of a second
objective by constructing and testing a prototype ready for a pilot program.