* 1547332
* EARS: Spectrum and Infrastructure Sharing in Millimeter Wave Cellular Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 02/01/2016,07/31/2021
* Sundeep Rangan, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Murat Torlak
* 07/31/2021
* USD 769,999.00

With the severe spectrum shortage in conventional cellular bands, millimeter
wave (mmWave) frequencies between 30 and 300 GHz have been attracting growing
attention as a possible candidate for next-generation micro- and pico-cellular
wireless networks. The mmWave bands offer orders of magnitude greater spectrum
than current cellular allocations and enable very high-dimensional antenna
arrays for further gains via beam-forming and spatial multiplexing. However, due
to unique nature of propagation in these frequencies, cellular systems will need
to be significantly redesigned to fully exploit the potential of these
frequencies. This project investigates one key dimension in mmWave network
design: resource sharing, involving the sharing of spectrum and network
infrastructure resources by multiple operators. It is argued that sharing of
this form will be essential to fully exploit the tremendous bandwidth and
antenna degrees of freedom offered by these bands and also provide statistical
multiplexing to accommodate the highly variable nature of
traffic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This inter-disciplinary project explores both the
engineering and economic aspects of mmWave resource sharing. On the engineering
side, the key challenge is that the spectrum must be shared not only in time and
frequency, but also space. In addition, new decentralized mechanisms are
required to rapidly reallocate backhaul and core network elements across
multiple parties. The project develops signal processing methods, protocols and
network optimization algorithms to facilitate directional sharing of spectrum
along with dynamic re-routing and load balancing. On the economic and policy
side, several shared ownership models under varying forms of licensing
agreements between the operators, regulatory agencies and third-party spectrum
and resource brokers are investigated. Based on the capacity estimates obtained
from the engineering side, economic models are developed to assess key
indicators such as operating and capital costs and coalition formation and
market concentration.