* 1547005
* EAGER:   Cybermanufacturing: Cloud-based, Rapid, Microscale 3D Bioprinting
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Shaochen Chen, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 08/31/2018
* USD 142,000.00

Precision tissue engineering is an emerging field that applies the principles of
engineering and life sciences to the development of biological substitutes that
restore, maintain or improve tissue function or a whole organ. The success of
tissue engineering relies on the ability to manufacture/print complex,
functional three-dimensional structures with seeded/encapsulated live cells.
Current printing techniques are typically very slow, have limited printing
resolution for cells, and are limited in their ability to fully replicate the in
vivo environment, either in terms of the material used, the distribution of
cells, or the complex geometries of the native physiology. These bioprinters are
usually individual lab/fab based, not accessible to the broader scientific
communities. This EArly-concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) award
supports fundamental research to provide needed knowledge for the development of
a cloud-based, rapid, 3D bioprinting platform that creates functional tissues
with application to the emerging field of precision medicine. By using the
anticipated system, a research team will be able to create specialized tools and
share critical data with the biomedical science community through the cloud.
Therefore, results from this research will benefit the U.S. economy and society.
This research involves several disciplines including manufacturing, biomaterials
science, cloud computing, and precision medicine. The multi-disciplinary
approach will help broaden participation of underrepresented groups in research
and positively impact engineering education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
presents a simple and rapid fabrication approach for encapsulating cells within
complex 3D geometries using a combination of digital printing and a naturally-
derived gelatin-based hydrogel. By providing scanless printing, the fabricated
structures will not exhibit the planar artifacts induced by traditional drop-by-
drop and layer-by-layer fabrication approaches that involve discrete movement of
the linear stage to a new position. Such a bioprinting platform can create much
better mechanical integrity of the tissue construct than a traditional
bioplotter. The macromer solution used during fabrication can easily be changed
to incorporate a variety of bioactive molecules, such as growth factors, drugs,
or genetic cues along with multiple cell types. This work fills a large
knowledge gap in the field for developing a scalable technique for rapidly
fabricating complex 3D cell-laden scaffolds for precision medicine. The cloud-
based software architecture will provide a modular, extensible, remotely
accessible, and user-friendly "web app" to enhance the collaborative potential
of the bioprinting platform across multiple users. The research team will
perform experiments and simulation to understand the mechanism of light
interactions with polymer chains, and establish relationships between process
parameters and mechanical properties of the 3D-printed tissue scaffolds.