* 1547286
* Collaborative Research: Laboratory and Theoretical Investigations of the Micro-Mechanical Origins of Rate and State Friction on Tectonic Faults
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2016,02/29/2020
* Allan Rubin, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 02/29/2020
* USD 254,833.00

In the earthquake-cycle, tectonic faults slowly accumulate stress, due to plate
tectonic motion of Earth?s surface, and then fail catastrophically in
earthquakes. One of the keys to simulating the earthquake cycle are friction
laws that can be applied to both the fast, dynamic motion of earthquakes, as
fault rocks rub and slide past one another in frictional contact, and the slow
processes of stress accumulation between earthquakes that can take hundreds of
years. In this collaborative work between Princeton and Penn State Universities,
unusually well-controlled measurements of frictional sliding will be conducted
while collecting simultaneous ultrasonic data on the sliding interfaces and
sheared layers of fault gouge. The proposed work has important societal
implications for seismic hazard assessment, earthquake forecasting, and an
improved, fundamental understanding of earthquake
nucleation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Rate-and-state friction laws represent the
current state-of-the-art in the laboratory and for numerical simulations of
earthquake physics, including nucleation, dynamic rupture and the complete
seismic cycle. However, our understanding of friction memory effects and slip
velocity dependence remains primarily empirical, which limits our ability to
apply laboratory measurements to earthquake faults and/or to address the
problems associated with predicting the behavior of tectonic faults from
laboratory measurements. To address these shortcomings, recent advances in
ultrasonic monitoring of sliding rock surfaces and sheared granular fault gouge
will provide fundamental insights into the physics and micro-mechanical origins
of frictional behavior of tectonic faults. &lt;br/&gt;