* 1547292
* RTG: Geometry and Topology
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2023
* NONE NONE, NONE
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 07/31/2023
* USD 1,849,955.00

The goal of this Research Training Group project is to establish a comprehensive
collection of programs to augment the research training of undergraduates,
graduate students, and postdoctoral fellows in the geometry and topology
research group at the University of Notre Dame. A Math for Everyone lecture
series aims to popularize mathematical ideas within the entire Notre Dame
undergraduate community, leading to increased interest in STEM careers. Greater
interaction with undergraduates at other institutions through the Math Club
exchange program, exposure to advanced material through directed reading with
graduate students, and summer undergraduate workshops are intended to get
undergraduates to experience the creative aspects of mathematical research.
Another program, coupled to the summer undergraduate workshops, will target
talented undergraduate mathematics majors, especially from traditionally
underrepresented groups, to increase diversity in the mathematics graduate
program. Beginning graduate students will have access to a summer program to
review necessary background material and build relationships with older graduate
students. A unified vision of topology and geometry will be cultivated by the
topology and geometry survey series and mini workshops, benefiting postdocs and
senior researchers as well as graduate students. Mentoring activities will
ensure that graduate students and postdoctoral associates are well-prepared for
their future teaching and professional duties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The five
investigators have research interests covering a broad range of areas from
geometric and global analysis to homotopy theory and quantum field theory. The
research activities of this project have the potential to foster unique
collaborations between the investigators, their postdoctoral associates, and
students, taking advantage of the group's wide mathematical expertise. Research
involving loop spaces and field theories will develop new geometric applications
to state of the art methods in homotopy theory. These topics dovetail with
investigations of manifolds that admit positive Ricci curvature, and a planned
study of Kahler-Einstein and other special metrics has connections to physics.
Research investigating random Morse functions will develop connections between
probability and geometry. The project's activities and programs will foster a
unified vision of geometry and topology among the group members.