* 1547605
* Estimating the Character of Paleomagnetic Field Excursions and Surrounding Secular Variation at Equatorial Latitudes (Equatorial W. Atlantic; MIS 1-4)
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2018
* Steven Lund, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 12/31/2018
* USD 226,852.00

Geomagnetic field excursions (e.g., Laschamp Excursion, Blake Event) are
intervals of very anomalous magnetic field variability located within one region
of the Earth's surface that last for less than a few thousand years. There have
been, perhaps, 15 excursions since the last global magnetic field reversal
~780,000 years ago. Excursions must be due to some intermittent and anomalous
behavior in the magnetic dynamo situated deep in the Earth's outer core, which
generates the Earth's magnetic field. However, we have very little evidence of
the pattern of individual excursions in several global regions far apart from
one another that would test ideas of dynamo source(s) for excursions. We have no
evidence for the relationship of excursions to surrounding normal magnetic field
secular variation beyond individual records at isolated localities. Scientists
still wonder whether excursions might be aborted global magnetic field reversals
- or not. This grant would add significantly to our understanding of what
individual excursions really look like around the world and how they relate to
normal secular variation. Both of these are key concepts in building more
realistic models of dynamo causes of excursions. The regional environmental
magnetic correlations and paleomagnetic chronostratigraphic framework that the
PI team will develop within the Equatorial Atlantic study region, will also
provide significant insight into the space/time pattern of equatorial
paleoclimate variability, of keen interest to global climate change
policy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant will carry out a paleomagnetic study of
excursions and surrounding normal secular variation recorded in deep-sea
sediments of the Equatorial West Atlantic Ocean over the last glacial cycle
(0-71 ka, MIS 1-4). This time interval contains the Mono Lake Excursion (~34 ka,
Ex. 3a), the Laschamp Excursion (~41 ka, Ex. 3b) and the Greenland/Norwegian Sea
Excursion (~61 ka, Ex. 4a). There are almost no published records of excursions
at equatorial latitudes or of excursion records with reproducible secular
variation surrounding them. This study also will develop, for the first time, a
transect of excursion records and surrounding normal secular variation that
extends from ~40°S to ~40°N along a single longitude swath (290°±20°). This
transect will provide the first evidence of the detailed space/time pattern of
excursions and their relationship to surrounding normal secular variation ever
developed over a large, almost hemispheric, region of the Earth.