* 1547420
* Strategies for Co-existence of  Radio Telescope Arrays with Broadcast Stations and Wireless Communication Systems
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* William Barott, Villanova University
* Standard Grant
* Jon Williams
* 08/31/2020
* USD 650,000.00

This EARS (Enhancing Access to the Radio Spectrum) program was founded in
response to the 2010 Presidential Memorandum on Unleashing the Wireless
Broadband Revolution mandated by Congress as part of the National Broadband
Plan. It was referenced in 2010 State of the Union and later on the Middle Class
Tax Relief and Job Creation Act of 2012 (More than 1/3 of the bill deals with
radio spectrum), the PCAST 2012 Report [President's Council of Advisors on
Science and Technology] (which calls for vastly increased use of spectrum
sharing) and the 2013 Presidential memo (Expanding America's Leadership in
Wireless Innovation). The aim of this program is to identify bold new concepts
with the potential to contribute to significant improvements in the efficiency
of radio spectrum utilization, protection of passive sensing services, and in
the ability for traditionally underserved Americans to benefit from current and
future wireless-enabled goods and services. The impact is large on the economics
of the Nation as seen on the last FCC bidding of 65MHz of the spectrum for over
$45 billion early in 2015. It will enable access to science, engineering,
industry, civilian and military users of the radio frequency (RF)
spectrum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Demand for wireless broadband has soared due to
technological innovation, such as 4G mobile services, and the rapid increase in
wireless internet. This demand would require the utilization of frequencies over
a bandwidth that has been traditionally slated for radio telescopes. This
frequency infringement may interfere with reception and interpretation of
astronomical data and, as such, compromise the search and discoveries of
extraterrestrial intelligence. The project puts forward coexistence strategies
where wireless users cause minimum interference to astronomical observations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project aims at achieving the coexistence strategies
by developing interference mitigation techniques that factor in the high-
elevation of the look direction of the telescope compared to low-elevation
angles of signals emitted by base-stations and wireless systems. A co-existence
strategy calls for authorized broadcast stations and wireless transmitters to
cooperate with radio telescopes by reporting their locations and providing
properties of their signal structures. Prior knowledge of interference location
simplifies its nulling and removal by telescope array of multiple units. On the
other hand, the distinction in signal characteristics between astronomical
events and those of digital communications enables effective cooperative as well
as non-cooperative interference identification and suppression. The project has
the potential to advance spectrum sharing and utilization and therefore enhance
the future capacity for U.S. industry and academic institutions in this area of
research and development.