* 1547447
* EARS: Enhancing Radio-Frequency Spectrum Through Interference Resilient Cognitive Radio Systems: Design, Performance Analysis and Optimization
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2019
* Krishna Narayanan, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Mohammod Ali
* 09/30/2019
* USD 407,344.00

The continuous increase in the number of wireless devices and sensors along with
the huge demand for higher data rates and limited radio frequency spectrum
resources have prompted the need for novel wireless communications technologies
with improved radio frequency spectrum sharing features. Recent radio spectrum
measurements have corroborated the fact that the radio spectrum is being used
inefficiently; and consequently, the concept of cognitive radio has been
proposed as a promising approach for the efficient utilization of the radio
frequency spectrum. A cognitive radio represents a communication system equipped
with the abilities to learn its surrounding environment through sensing and
measurements and to adapt its features for a better utilization of existing
radio frequency spectrum resources with the aim of securing communications links
with adequate quality of service. This proposal addresses several important
problems that must be overcome before cognitive radio systems can be implemented
in practice. These challenges include the design of circuits with adequate
precision for processing of the received signals, the design of fast and
computationally efficient ways to sense the occupancy of the spectrum and the
design and analysis of multiple access schemes that will permit many users to
share the spectrum without causing undue interference to each other. This
project will use innovative techniques to solve these challenges thereby
enabling a better utilization of the available radio spectrum resources.
Applications of the proposed work include radio astronomy, communication
networks, smart grids, wireless sensing and monitoring devices, remote
monitoring of earth, and telemedicine.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
design interference-resilient orthogonal frequency division multiplexing based
cognitive networks and optimize their performance for better utilization of the
radio frequency spectrum. The objective is to develop transformative solutions
and approaches by unveiling and exploiting cross-disciplinary concepts and
results from mixed analog/digital signal processing, fast spectrum sensing,
computational statistics and stochastic geometry with significant impact to both
theory and practice. Successful completion of this project holds the potential
to advance the state-of-the-art knowledge and understanding in the deployment
and optimization of spectrum sharing communications networks. This project will
develop new algorithms and methodologies to optimize the design of a radio
frequency front-end and analog-to-digital converters in the presence of primary
user interference, and multiple-access schemes to mitigate secondary user
interference. This project will also contribute to the development of large-
scale simulation and computational methods for enhancing the operation of
cognitive wireless communications networks. The proposed research work will be
integrated with the educational mission through the development of innovative
pedagogical practices, advising of students, active recruitment of domestic
students and students from under-represented groups. These efforts will dovetail
with the ambitious 25 by 25 growth plan at Texas A&amp;M University, which seeks
to increase the enrollment in the College of Engineering to 25,000 students by
2025, thereby increasing access to high quality education.