* 1547106
* EAGER/Cybermanufacturing: Modular System Design for CyberManufacturing of Customized Apparel
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,07/31/2018
* Dinesh Manocha, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 07/31/2018
* USD 316,000.00

The apparel industry is of critical importance to the US and worldwide economy
in terms of investment, revenue, trade, and employment. Despite the economic
uncertainties and fluctuations, the global apparel industry continues to grow at
a healthy pace and is expected to reach approximately $3.2 trillion dollars in
2015 with an estimated annual growth rate in excess of 4 percent. The U.S.
apparel market is the largest in the world, comprising about 28 percent of the
global market. While customized apparel is highly desirable, customized clothing
currently comprises only 2 to 3 percent of the apparel market, due to high
manufacturing cost, which includes significant human labor. This EArly-concept
Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) project plans to design an end-to-end
system architecture and a proof-of-concept prototype application software for
affordable individualized clothing and personalized manufacturing. The resulting
approach can facilitate high-quality yet low-cost individualized apparel, enable
innovative product design and/or manufacturing, and potentially transform the
fashion industry. The resulting scientific and technological advances have the
potential to improve the status of the US apparel manufacturing industry in the
world market. Complementing these research goals, we will introduce a new
graduate course on cyber-manufacturing, release example software systems, and
organize workshops related to cybermanufacturing. The multi-disciplinary
curriculum development and cyber-engineering research training, featured through
the departmental outreach and the University science fairs, can also help
attract underrepresented groups, especially women and minority students, to
computer science and engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This early-concept
exploration focuses on providing a novel computational framework and software
system architecture required to solve challenging cyber-manufacturing of
customized apparel by offering an alternative, clean, green, and resource-
efficient approach. It will feature a seamless integrated system that can
provide real-time, customized design of apparel with human-in-the-loop
prototyping, virtual testing, and intelligent manufacturing. The prototype
system will consist of new, simple-to-use 3D body measurement systems on
portable devices, real-time pattern selection, interactive cloud-based design
optimization, reliable visual inspection, predictable virtual try-on, and adept
fabrication with different fabric materials. The overall project contributes to
building a scientific foundation, system framework, and computational principles
to integrate different constitutive models, by linking the computational
processes of low-cost sensing, simulation analysis, design optimization, to the
agile, rapid cybermanufacturing of a customized product, thereby providing
cross-cutting scientific advances.