* 1547954
* I-Corps L:  A Tool for Peer Assessment Grading and Evaluation - PeerAGE
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2015,12/31/2016
* Jonathan Pearlman, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Karen Crosby
* 12/31/2016
* USD 50,000.00

Through the NSF Innovation Corps for Learning Program (I-Corps L) this project
will develop ways to increase the scale and impact of an innovative method to
facilitate peer assessment of student engineering design projects. Design based
learning (DBL) classes are being increasingly utilized to engage and nurture
student inquiry and learning across the educational landscape. DBL is primarily
supported by formative assessment methodologies, but increasing resource
constraints and class size make it difficult for a single teacher/facilitator to
provide all students with equal attention and feedback. One potential method to
increase the feedback students receive is to use peer assessment. Peer
assessment methodology can not only supplement teacher feedback, but also engage
students in the assessment process and subsequently, enhance their own learning.
Additionally, peer assessment can help lower the cost of managing larger design
classes by reducing the need for multiple facilitators/tutors and allow virtual
participation of experts and other feedback providers. This I-Corp team is
working on developing a web based peer assessment tool that works seamlessly
with large classes and a variety of DBL assignments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will utilize a web app that enables collaborative learning through
students' participation in the assessment process, and provides a natural way of
participating in a DBL class. Design artifacts could include multimedia files,
documents and 3D CAD models, which can all be easily uploaded into the web app.
The app presents these design artifacts to the reviewers in a clear interactive
fashion, enabling them to provide feedback in an organic way using methods such
as annotating the artifacts directly and providing written/audio feedback.
Feedback can be structured by using rubrics, prompts, and/or ratings.
Furthermore, the whole review process is anonymized and reviewers are randomly
chosen (with randomization options selected by the facilitator) to prevent any
bias or collusion. The goal of this project is to enable more faculty to use an
easy and simple peer assessment implementation in the classroom that works with
a variety of Internet connected devices and allows students to clearly express
themselves and learn from others. Potential applications move beyond peer work
facilitation, providing instructors with additional data points to assess
student learning and engagement in class, moreover, this tool can be utilized
outside the K-12/Higher Ed fields and benefit large virtual design competitions
and other virtual design reviews.