* 1547785
* EAGER: Biomanufacturing: Development of a Quantitative Framework of Directed Stem Cell Differentiation in Scalable Bioreactors
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2017
* Shashi Murthy, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Michele Grimm
* 08/31/2017
* USD 299,973.00

PI: Tzanakakis, Emmanouhl S. Proposal Number: 1547785

The development of stem cell biomanufacturing is essential for realizing the
potential of stem and progenitor cells for therapies in regenerative medicine. A
quantitative framework is proposed for the rational design and optimization of
the cultivation of stem cells and their conversion to pancreatic islet cells in
bioreactors, which are utilized in the commercial production of
biopharmaceuticals. The proposed approach takes into account the inherent
heterogeneity of stem cell populations and can be universally applied to
progenitor cell differentiation into any clinically relevant phenotype. The
theoretical framework is combined with the derivation of functional islet cells
as an experimental model system. The expected outcomes will address the unmet
need for cellular material for islet replacement therapies with potential
benefits to the quality of life of diabetes patients and associated economic
burden.

Quantitative models are indispensable for the rational design and prediction of
stem cell differentiation processes and their translation to biomanufacturing
practices. The inherent heterogeneity of isogenic stem cell ensembles
invalidates the averaged population behavior assumed in current models. This
application centers on the hypothesis that differentiation can be modeled by
population balance equations (PBEs), which are multiscale and take into account
temporally distinct intra- and intercellular processes, including stochastic
events influencing stem cell physiology. More importantly, stem cell
specification along a particular lineage can be described by a distribution
(differentiation) function without many of the restrictive assumptions of
existing differentiation models. Starting with measurable distributions of
cellular traits, the investigators propose to extract differentiation functions
via inverse solution of the PBE framework. For this purpose, in the first aim of
the proposed studies, human pluripotent stem cell lines will be generated by
clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats (CRISPR)/Cas9 genome
editing. Reporter genes will be inserted downstream of promoters of pluripotency
or pancreatic endoderm fate adoption markers. These cell lines will facilitate
the identification of subpopulations and the measurement of relevant
distributions for the solution of the inverse PBE problem leading to the
extraction of differentiation functions. In the second aim, functional
expressions describing the state of self-renewing stem cells will be determined
from bioreactor cultures. The expansion and directed specification of stem cells
will be carried out in a fully automated stirred-suspension bioreactor,
permitting both the proper control of operational variables and the
investigation of their role on the maintenance of stem cell pluripotency and on
specification. Human stem cells will be directed along the pancreatic endoderm
lineage in stirred suspension cultures under conditions of varying combinations
and concentrations of differentiation stimuli. The planned research activities
will provide excellent opportunities for undergraduate and graduate student
training. The expected quantitative landscape of pancreatic cell commitment will
expedite the development of efficient strategies for the scalable production of
islet cells. The universal applicability of the proposed approach will spur
similar efforts in the manufacturing of other therapeutically significant cell
types such as cardiomyocytes, neurons, hepatocytes, and endothelial cells, with
direct impact on the lives of patients afflicted by presently incurable
diseases.