* 1547092
* I-Corps L:  TheDesignExchange- Nuturing a National Design Innovation Ecosystem
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2016
* Alice Agogino, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Karen Crosby
* 07/31/2016
* USD 50,000.00

Through the NSF Innovations Corps for Learning Program (I-Corps L), this project
will transform TheDesignExchange into a high impact sustainable enterprise,
nurturing a national design innovation ecosystem. Human-centered design is
emerging as an important approach to innovation and product development.
Although there are many programs to introduce the principles of human-centered
design to interested individuals, progressing from these programs to becoming an
expert is poorly supported. This is especially true for those that focus on the
research portion of the human-centered process, those that design and conduct
research studies with potential customers and users that inform innovation and
product development efforts. TheDesignExchange aims to support individuals as
they progress through the levels of design mastery, while encouraging the
development of best practices for conducting design research and applying human-
centered design methods. TheDesignExchange will match design methods to design
problems in order to help designers and design researchers to make informed
decisions about when and how to apply methods, and facilitates discussions
between practitioners in an exchange of professional support. Another goal is to
leverage knowledge gained from theDesignExchange to identify and teach the
underlying skills associated with the various methods, providing recent
graduates a more fluid understanding of how, why, and when to apply specific
design research methods. TheDesignExchange has the potential to produce broad
impacts as a source of information on innovation and the design process for the
design community, and for those interested in joining these fields, while acting
as an online meeting place for community discussions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TheDesignExchange team has created a taxonomy of design
methods collected from an in-depth analysis of 82 design process models, and the
collection of over 300 design methods. Ongoing work falls into four categories:
(1) refinement of the taxonomy through a series of workshops held with design
practitioners; (2) collection of relevant design process case studies analyzed
for the use of design methods; and (3) development of a design method
recommendation system, using machine learning algorithms; (4) development of an
interactive and intelligent web portal. By analyzing whether methods frequently
co-occur with one another or not, it was found that predictions based on method
covariance have higher precision-recall performance than predictions based on
problem content; and by using spectral clustering on the method covariance data,
methods can be automatically divided into expert-given groupings with 92%
accuracy.