* 1547810
* EAGER: Collaborative Research: Biomanufacturing: Developing a Harvesting Approach for Spatially Targeted Cells from 3D Organoids and Tissues
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Philip LeDuc, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 08/31/2018
* USD 154,687.00

PI: LeDuc, Philip R.&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1547810&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI:
Davidson, Lance A. &lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
1547790&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cellular biomanufacturing is significant for cell
and tissue-based therapies and drug testing applications. Procuring the
necessary types of cells from tissues as the starting material is critical for
the success of cellular biomanufacturing operations. In this application, the
investigators will study a new technology that has been developed for
controlling fluid flow at the micrometer scale to extract live cells from living
tissues, so they can be used as building blocks for the biomanufacturing
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cells most desired for biomanufacturing grow
naturally within a complex heterogeneous three dimensional (3D) environment
within human bodies, making their extraction very challenging. The goal of this
proposal is to develop high throughput cell-harvesting approaches that allow for
the controlled spatiotemporal application of reagents to 3D tissues for targeted
cell extraction. To accomplish this, the investigators plan to develop a novel
microfluidic harvesting approach to simultaneously image and etch phantom
tissues layer-by-layer while recovering target cells downstream; and implement
this microfluidics approach for use with laboratory grown organ-buds, i.e.
organoids, to enable the extraction of stem cells with spatiotemporal control.
The investigators will develop the ability to collect cells from defined
locations within small complex 3D tissues such as organoids and use
microfluidics to sort extracted cells and maintain their viability. If
successful, this project will produce a significant advancement in the targeted
harvesting of highly desired stem and progenitor cells from organoids and
tissues with a high throughput technology that will then enable the use of
recovered cells in cellular biomanufacturing as building blocks for diagnostic
and therapeutic applications. The broader impacts of these studies include
building an education and training pipeline for preparing future leaders in
engineering and science.