* 1547836
* HBCU-RISE: Research and Educational Infrastructure for the Chemical Design of Advanced Carbon Nanomaterial Based Quantum Dots for Bio Imaging
* EDU,EES
* 03/01/2016,07/31/2020
* Glake Hill, Jackson State University
* Standard Grant
* Victor Santiago
* 07/31/2020
* USD 999,995.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities Research Infrastructure for
Science and Engineering (HBCU-RISE) activity within the Centers of Research
Excellence in Science and Technology (CREST) program supports the development of
research capability at HBCUs that offer doctoral degrees in science and
engineering disciplines. HBCU-RISE projects have a direct connection to the
long-term plans of the host department(s) and the institutional mission, and
plans for expanding institutional research capacity as well as increasing the
production of doctoral students in science and engineering. With support from
the National Science Foundation, Jackson State University (JSU) aims to develop
a research and educational program that will prepare chemistry undergraduate
(RISE Scholars) and graduate students (RISE Fellows) to be globally competitive
by: recruiting highly talented doctoral students with an interest in
nanochemistry; providing faculty-led mentoring of interdisciplinary research
activities for doctoral students; supporting leadership development activities
for doctoral students; developing new courses toward a unique updated curriculum
for the JSU chemistry doctoral program; upgrading the lab equipment to support
the expansion of nanochemistry research; and generating collaborative-
interdisciplinary research among faculty members and doctoral students who will
give presentations and publish. The purposes of this proposal are to (a) improve
and expand the institution's research and educational capability in order to
prepare African Americans and women to become effective future generation of
scientists for our nation and (b) to increase the number and quality of minority
students through the effective preparation of the next generation of US
scientists. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The JSU-RISE interdisciplinary faculty mentors
will collaborate on a research project pertaining to the chemical design and
development of novel multifunctional carbon quantum dots (CQDs) based
fluorescence imaging materials and demonstrate their possible application for
biological and chemical imaging. The goal is to establish synthetic procedures
to develop different types CQDs as imaging materials for targeted sensing of
several pathogenic bacteria and viruses simultaneously. The proposed research
applies an integrated approach combining nanoscience, organic chemistry, and
theory to construct interfaces that give quantitative information about chemical
activities at the nano interface. The research activities will include: a)
developing synthetic procedures for bright and photo stable CQDs such as
graphene oxide quantum dots, carbon dots and metal doped graphene dots; b)
measuring the two photon absorption cross section by measuring two-photon
luminescence intensity; c) finding the photo-stability and biocompatibility of
the developed CQDs; d) demonstrating CQDs based near IR imaging of bio-molecules
for the selective and simultaneous sensing of several waterborne pathogens; and
e) using quantum chemical calculations to understand the interaction between
CQDs and biological molecules. The goals of this proposal are well-aligned with
the ongoing developmental plan of JSU to become one of the region's foremost
centers for nanotechnology with the aim of making devices that can be used for
daily life applications.