* 1547554
* RAPID:  Contribution of Linking Networks in Nepalese Earthquake Response: A Case Study
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2016
* Bimal Paul, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* David Mendonca
* 07/31/2016
* USD 48,945.00

After each major disaster, many public agencies, humanitarian organizations, and
others involved in emergency relief operation to reduce sufferings of survivors
of such extreme event and enhance their disaster recovery process so that they
can return livelihood to pre-disaster levels as quickly as possible. For various
social, political, economic, and cultural factors, each relief operation
confronts with unique challenges and therefore careful examination of such
operation can provide valuable insights and lessons for disbursers of emergency
assistance. These insights and lessons can assist both public and other relevant
organizations in developing efficient and orderly relief operation plans for
survivors of future natural disasters. The findings of this Rapid Response
Research (RAPID) study are expected to develop further policies and priorities
to enhance linking networks' support of disaster survivors in Nepal as well as
other mountainous and earthquake-prone countries of the world. Thus, the study
has the potential to produce policy options that can have transformative value
for confronting the extreme natural events. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study
aims at investigating how well government and nongovernmental organizations (GOs
and NGOs), as members of social network, performed emergency relief operations
in Nepal after the country struck by a massive 7.8 magnitude earthquake on April
25, 2015. The specific objectives of this study are to: 1) investigate the
effectiveness of emergency aid delivered to earthquake survivors in Nepal by GOs
and NGOs, 2) examine challenges and lessons GOs and NGOs learned from emergency
aid distribution, and 3) identify the factors associated with earthquake
survivors' opinion regarding effectiveness of GOs and NGOs relief efforts. The
primary source of data for this study will come from field surveys to be
conducted among earthquake survivors living in two affected areas in rural
Nepal. Effectiveness of humanitarian aid will be examined by developing an
additive composite index. Appropriate bivariate and multivariate techniques will
be employed to accomplish the objectives of this study. The research will
contribute to hazards and disasters fields through peer-reviewed journal papers
and presentation at a profession meeting. Moreover, the research will contribute
to the burgeoning literature on the role of social networks in disaster
response.