* 1547560
* Comprehensive high-precision relocation of global seismicity
* GEO,EAR
* 02/15/2016,01/31/2020
* Felix Waldhauser, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Raterron
* 01/31/2020
* USD 182,294.00

Hundreds of thousands of earthquakes are detected and recorded each year by
regional and global seismic networks. Seismic network operators routinely
analyze their seismograms to estimate various parameters, including time,
location, and magnitude of each new earthquake, adding to a rapidly growing
archive of digital seismic data. Catalogs of earthquake locations are a
fundamental source of data in seismology, and in the Earth sciences in general.
Yet these individual locations have had notoriously low spatial resolution,
which limits their potential to address fundamental questions concerning the
structure and composition of the Earth?s interior, the nature of earthquakes,
and the seismic hazards they impose on our society and the built environment.
The main goal of this project is to significantly improve the location precision
of millions of earthquakes on a global scale by applying higher-order earthquake
location methods that take advantage of the increasing quantity and quality of
seismic archives and the availability of affordable computing power. This
project will focus on using the wealth of high-precision data to better
understand, in a comparative way, the seismogenic structure and processes that
control subduction zones worldwide. Results from this project are expected to
find many applications in the Earth Sciences, and to have social impact in the
areas of natural hazards and seismic verification of the Comprehensive Nuclear-
Test Ban Treaty (CTBT).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The tremendous growth in global
seismic archives over the last several decades, the continuous fall in computing
costs, and advances in earthquake relocation methods provide a unique
opportunity to substantially improve the spatial resolution of standard global
earthquake catalogs. The locations of hypocenters in these catalogs, typically
estimated one event at a time from phase arrival times observed at global
seismic stations, have notoriously low accuracy that hamper studies in a wide
range of research areas, not only in Seismology, but in the Geosciences in
general. This continuing project builds on previous work that developed high-
efficiency waveform cross-correlation and double-difference (DD) algorithms to
relocate more than 3 million earthquakes listed in the combined bulletins of the
International Seismological Centre (ISC) and NEIC?s Earthquake Data Report,
spanning the years 1964-2012. These tools increase the precision of the
earthquake locations by harnessing new procedures that can cope with the
computational load of this massive-scale undertaking. Cross-correlation based
phase delay times are measured on billions of pairs of waveforms, and efficient
teleseismic double-difference algorithms invert these data in combination with
reported phase arrival times. Initial results using this approach already reveal
characteristic seismicity patterns in time and space, and provide new data that
help gain insight into seismogenic processes at unprecedented resolution. This
project will focus on the fine-scale structure of Wadati-Benioff zone seismicity
at subduction zones and the nature of narrow double-seismic zones, and analyze
the relocated seismicity associated with recent great subduction earthquakes to
better understand their structural and kinematic behavior. A global DD catalog
will likely find many applications in the Earth Sciences, and may help improve
our understanding of the physical processes controlling earthquakes, our ability
to image the structure and composition of the Earth?s interior, and our
capability to estimate the hazards imposed by large earthquakes.