* 1547499
* Constraining lowermost mantle flow through observations and models of seismic anisotropy
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2020
* Maureen Long, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 05/31/2020
* USD 269,934.00

The core-mantle boundary (CMB) is the most dramatic physical boundary within the
Earth's interior. The CMB is the interface between the rocky, convecting mantle
and the liquid iron outer core, whose motions give rise to the Earth's magnetic
field. The major contrasts in composition, density, viscosity, and temperature
across the CMB region mean that this interface plays a critical role in
controlling the dynamics and evolution of the Earth's interior. Specifically,
the CMB represents the bottom boundary layer for mantle convection, the process
through which the Earth cools off over geologic time as relatively hot material
rises and relatively cool material sinks. A major unsolved problem is what the
pattern of mantle convection looks like just above the CMB, and how that pattern
interacts with convective motions in the rest of the mantle and their surface
expressions in plate tectonic features such as subduction zones. The goal of
this project is to use observations of seismic waves that have passed through
the lowermost mantle to constrain the pattern of mantle flow just above the
CMB.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project involves a three-year effort to study
seismic anisotropy and flow patterns at the base of the mantle via observations
and modeling. Because of the causative link between deformation and seismic
anisotropy, the characterization and interpretation of anisotropy can provide
crucial constraints on flow patterns in the mantle. While seismic anisotropy is
commonly studied in the upper mantle, it is much more difficult to isolate the
signal from lowermost mantle anisotropy; furthermore, major uncertainties remain
about the relationships between strain and anisotropy in lowermost mantle
minerals. Despite the challenges inherent in studying D" anisotropy, however, it
holds exceptional promise as a tool for deciphering patterns of flow at the base
of the mantle and understanding the processes that drive these patterns. This
project addresses two fundamental unsolved problems related to the structure and
dynamics of the lowermost mantle: 1) What is the geometry of seismic anisotropy
in the D" layer? and 2) What is the pattern of flow in the lowermost mantle, and
what physical processes drive this flow? In order to address these science
questions, the investigator proposes to carry out five activities. First, the
team will carry out differential shear wave splitting observations of S-ScS and
SKS-SKKS phases to constrain splitting due to anisotropy at the base of the
mantle in selected regions over a range of ray propagation directions. Second,
they will carry out array analysis of phases that have been reflected off the D"
discontinuity (PdP and SdS); the polarities of these phases are affected by D"
anisotropy and in combination with shear wave splitting measurements can more
tightly constrain the anisotropic geometry. Third, they will apply a mineral
physics-based forward modeling framework that uses single-crystal elasticity to
identify plausible anisotropic geometries that are consistent with seismic
observations. Fourth, they will use these observations of anisotropy to test the
predictions of global models for flow and elasticity at the base of the mantle.
Finally, they will integrate results from all phases of the project to test the
predictions made by a set of hypotheses about the driving forces for flow at the
base of the mantle. Broader impacts of this work include the training of a
graduate student, the cultivation of international collaborations, the creation
of a website on deep Earth processes aimed at the general public, and the
dissemination of the results in both scientific publications and public
education and outreach presentations.