* 1547880
* INSPIRE: Teaming Citizen Science with Machine Learning to Deepen LIGO's View of the Cosmos
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2019
* Joshua Smith, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 09/30/2019
* USD 1,015,663.00

This INSPIRE award is partially funded by the Cyber-Human Systems Program in the
Division of Information and Intelligent Systems in the Directorate for Computer
Science and Engineering, the Gravitational Physics Program in the Division of
Physics in the Directorate for Mathematical and Physical Sciences, and the
Office of Integrative Activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This innovative project
will develop a citizen science system to support the Advanced Laser
Interferometer Gravitational wave Observatory (aLIGO), the most complicated
experiment ever undertaken in gravitational physics. Before the end of this
decade it will open up the window of gravitational wave observations on the
Universe. However, the high detector sensitivity needed for astrophysical
discoveries makes aLIGO very susceptible to noncosmic artifacts and noise that
must be identified and separated from cosmic signals. Teaching computers to
identify and morphologically classify these artifacts in detector data is
exceedingly difficult. Human eyesight is a proven tool for classification, but
the aLIGO data streams from approximately 30,000 sensors and monitors easily
overwhelm a single human. This research will address these problems by coupling
human classification with a machine learning model that learns from the citizen
scientists and also guides how information is provided to participants. A novel
feature of this system will be its reliance on volunteers to discover new glitch
classes, not just use existing ones. The project includes research on the human-
centered computing aspects of this sociocomputational system, and thus can
inspire future citizen science projects that do not merely exploit the labor of
volunteers but engage them as partners in scientific discovery. Therefore, the
project will have substantial educational benefits for the volunteers, who will
gain a good understanding on how science works, and will be a part of the
excitement of opening up a new window on the universe.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
is an innovative, interdisciplinary collaboration between the existing LIGO, at
the time it is being technically enhanced, and Zooniverse, which has fielded a
workable crowdsourcing model, currently involving over a million people on 30
projects. The work will help aLIGO to quickly identify noise and artifacts in
the science data stream, separating out legitimate astrophysical events, and
allowing those events to be distributed to other observatories for more detailed
source identification and study. This project will also build and evaluate an
interface between machine learning and human learning that will itself be an
advance on current methods. It can be depicted as a loop: (1) By sifting through
enormous amounts of aLIGO data, the citizen scientists will produce a robust
"gold standard" glitch dataset that can be used to seed and train machine
learning algorithms that will aid in the identification task. (2) The machine
learning protocols that select and classify glitch events will be developed to
maximize the potential of the citizen scientists by organizing and passing the
data to them in more effective ways. The project will experiment with the task
design and workflow organization (leveraging previous Zooniverse experience) to
build a system that takes advantage of the distinctive strengths of the machines
(ability to process large amounts of data systematically) and the humans
(ability to identify patterns and spot discrepancies), and then using the model
to enable high quality aLIGO detector characterization and gravitational wave
searches.