* 1547202
* I-Corps L:  Scaling the University Innovation Fellows Program to Catalyze Student Engagement and Change in Higher Education
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2015,12/31/2016
* Leticia Britos Cavagnaro, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Karen Crosby
* 12/31/2016
* USD 50,000.00

Through the NSF Innovation Corps for Learning Program (I-Corps L), this project
will develop ways to increase the scale and impact of University Innovation
Fellows (UIF) program at Stanford University. In higher education, there is
widespread interest in developing ways to provide students with the knowledge,
skills and attitudes that they need to solve complex problems of the 21st
century. The University Innovation Fellows program prepares and empowers
university students to make lasting changes at their schools to address this
issue. Through UIF, student leaders collaborate with faculty and administrators
to promote and embed innovation, entrepreneurship and design thinking to enhance
the educational experience of all students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While there is
no single prescription for which strategies and activities will be effective in
higher education, each institution can develop context-appropriate strategies
based on understanding best practices, information about what has worked and not
worked in similar institutions, and innovative thinking. The University
Innovation Fellows (UIF) program offers faculty a way to activate selected
students to work alongside them in expanding the innovation and entrepreneurship
ecosystem on campus. The program combines online experiential training with in-
person gatherings in Silicon Valley. In the training, university students
evaluate the landscape of learning opportunities and resources at their schools,
and design a strategic plan to transform and enrich that landscape, by
leveraging experiential learning techniques. Students who successfully complete
the training (and become Fellows) are motivated and prepared to work alongside
faculty as change agents. This program will provide year-round support for the
Fellows via webinars and networking tools that allow students to share
strategies across institutions.