* 1547961
* Collaborative Research: RAPID: Linking Population and Community Ecology in Restored Communities: Interactions Between Species Diversity and Genetic Diversity
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2017
* Jennifer Lau, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Betsy Von Holle
* 07/31/2017
* USD 124,797.00

Understanding how landscapes change following human disturbance is increasingly
important. Large portions of the Northeastern and Midwestern parts of the US
were formerly cleared of native vegetation to support agriculture, and many of
the resulting farms were subsequently abandoned. This cycle of modification and
abandonment continues. This project will capitalize on planned restoration of
abandoned agricultural land in Michigan to establish long-term experiments.
These experiments can be used by diverse researchers, including the
investigators on this project, to understand how native communities and native
biodiversity are restored. The research will engage citizens who are active in
butterfly, bird, and plant monitoring programs, along with local K-12 teachers,
undergraduate students, and graduate students. The project will strengthen a
collaboration among research scientists, the Michigan Division of Natural
Resources, and local land owners, who will be engaged in project development.
Results from the study, including the experimental plots, will be used as
exemplars for future community and private land restoration efforts.

The relationship between species diversity and community and ecosystem processes
is of fundamental importance in the fields of community and ecosystem ecology.
Recent research includes genetic diversity and its influence through potential
feedbacks between genetic and species diversity. The large-scale and long-term
experimental manipulations that will be established through this project will
provide a unique testing ground for understanding the relationships between
species and genetic diversity and how these aspects of biodiversity affect
population, community, ecosystem, and evolutionary processes under realistic
field conditions. To date, most studies have been small in scale and short in
duration. Twelve former agricultural fields will be restored to native prairie
and experiments will be established that manipulate both species and genetic
diversity. This is a unique opportunity to overlay experimental treatments on
large-scale restoration. Short-term results will test questions about how
genetic diversity affects species diversity in newly assembling communities and
how species and genetic diversity interact to affect the establishment, growth,
and extinction of focal populations. Although rarely applied in genetic
diversity-species diversity work, population demography and evolutionary ecology
approaches hold great promise for identifying mechanistic links driving
feedbacks between genetic diversity and species diversity. Over the longer-term
these experiments will be available to diverse researchers to pursue wide-
ranging ecological questions.