* 1547168
* EAGER: New genomic resources and models for predicting evolving vector-borne disease dynamics in a changing world
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2017
* Robert Fleischer, Smithsonian Institution
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 06/30/2017
* USD 130,000.00

Global climate change has accelerated our need to understand disease dynamics.
Diseases transmitted among hosts by small invertebrates such as mosquitoes or
ticks (vectors) are on the rise across the world but links to climate change are
unclear. Climate change can impact vector-borne disease transmission directly by
shifting the occurrence of competent hosts and vectors, or a parasite, or more
subtly by changing the timing or nature of their interaction. Predicting the
response of vector-borne diseases to climate change requires both an
understanding of how all the species involved are likely to be affected as well
as new ways to identify and predict how they interact and furthermore how they
and their interactions may evolve. This research will develop and test
functional models of vector-borne diseases that incorporate co-evolutionary
change. Specifically, the project will develop models that account for past and
predict future evolution of responses to avian malaria, a mosquito borne
disease, using a database of disease prevalence in the endangered Hawaiian
honeycreepers. This research will answer important questions in epidemiology by
measuring and integrating evolutionary changes in hosts, vectors and parasites
into predictive models of disease dynamics under future climate
scenarios.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An ideal disease system in which to develop and
train such a model is avian malaria in native and introduced Hawaiian birds. The
agent of avian malaria in Hawaii is a non-native Haemosporidian parasite,
Plasmodium relictum, vectored by mixes of two non-native strains of the mosquito
Culex quinquefasciatus. Avian malaria in Hawaii occurs as a series of replicated
natural experiments in which vector and parasite prevalence vary along
elevational gradients on several islands, and a parallel gradient in tolerance
among some bird hosts has been reported. Although P. relictum was previously
highly virulent to all Hawaiian honeycreepers, evolution of tolerance (or
resistance) has been observed in several species such as the Amakihi (Hemignatus
sp). Within- and among-species differences in the degree of tolerance suggest
that genomic variation underlie such differences; moreover, there is geographic
variation within and across islands in host species composition, host tolerance,
climate (temperature and precipitation), vector abundance, vector competence,
and pathogen fitness. This system has been studied for several decades; thus,
many of the host and vector demographic characteristics are well understood.
Specifically this project will (1) use a machine learning approach to develop
ways to correlate the genetic data from the relevant species with the
ecological, environmental, and epidemiological pressures that might shape their
evolution; (2) analyze past and current parasite diversity using Next Generation
genomics to be fed into the model. Though constructed with reference
specifically to the Hawaiian Plasmodium system, if successfully validated, this
model methodology will then be available for broad application into any disease
system in which evolution is expected to occur in response to shifting
climatological, environmental, or ecological conditions.