* 1547901
* Recreating the world in our minds:  Relationships between language, imagery and perception
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2013,10/31/2016
* Lera Boroditsky, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 10/31/2016
* USD 211,450.00

One emerging view in cognitive science is that language understanding is
fundamentally grounded in perception. In this view, mental simulation or mental
imagery serves as the basic substrate through which people represent and process
linguistic meaning. However, such theories can only have explanatory power if
there is a detailed understanding of the mechanisms underlying mental simulation
and mental imagery. If mental imagery proves to be just as mysterious as
language understanding, then there is little use in trying to explain one in
terms of the other. In the present work, Dr. Lera Boroditsky of Stanford
University explores the nature of mental imagery and the relationships between
language understanding, mental imagery and perception. The studies examine
whether imagined, inferred and real motion show the same motion aftereffect
properties in response to changes in perceptual contrast, motion speed, motion
type, and frame of reference. Dr. Boroditsky will also explore whether motion
imagery is affected by cultural differences in how specific languages represent
space. For example, residents of Pormpuraaw, a remote aboriginal community on
the west coast of Cape York in Australia, organize space according to cardinal
directions (as in "there is an ant on your North-West leg"). This raises the
possibility that people who have learned different default ways of organizing
space in their language or culture may be imagining motion in different sets of
spatial coordinates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research has the
potential to draw important connections between cognition and perception, two
areas that are often viewed as separate. If the characteristics of one's
language fundamentally affect perception, this has broad implications for
understanding mathematics, which is known to be strongly related to spatial
cognition. Effective teaching methods for learners in different cultures should
be sensitive to, or exploit, how language structures perception.