* 1547467
* CICI: Data Provenance: Protecting Provenance Integrity and Privacy
* CSE,OAC
* 12/01/2015,09/30/2021
* Ashish Gehani, SRI International
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 09/30/2021
* USD 499,728.00

The amount of data associated with scientific and medical analysis has grown,
and in parallel, the desire to share resulting data has increased. Similarly, as
more science and medical analysis is performed by exploring large volumes of
data, with numerous transformations along the way, tracking the history of a
result is of increasing utility. Despite these incentives, concerns such as
respecting human subject and patient privacy, maintaining intellectual property,
and compliance with copyright laws remain as barriers to sharing data with its
detailed provenance. By simplifying the process of safely releasing provenance
metadata, the project will facilitate the sharing of data with a concomitant
benefit to science and medicine.

The project creates software to tightly couple data and its accompanying
provenance metadata, and sanitize the resulting provenance when it is shared. A
storage overlay is developed to perform partial computation over the data as it
enters the system. This allows the application of pre-configured functions to
incoming data without affecting extant workload performance, by leveraging idle
processing resources. The paradigm facilitates efficient content-based
provenance that describes the state of the data in the system. This allows
references in the provenance metadata to be strongly linked to integrity claims
about the specific data inputs and outputs, even when these correspond to large
data sets. When such scientific and medical data sets are combined, new privacy-
violating inferences may be drawn.

The project investigates techniques that operate on sets of provenance graphs,
descriptions of unsafe inferences, and ontological or probabilistic
characterizations of the relationships of provenance elements. A tool is
developed to transform the provenance into graphs with reduced leakage of
sensitive information that are still usable for pre-defined provenance queries,
and to identify which elements need auxiliary protection.