* 1547515
* EAGER: Biomanufacturing: Controlling stem cell behavior via novel photo activation of FGF signaling pathway using blue light
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2018
* Gabsang Lee, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 09/30/2018
* USD 300,000.00

PI: Lee, Gabsang Proposal Number: 1547515

Recent advances in stem cell biology hold great potential in regenerative
medicine. To realize the therapeutic promise of stem cells, approach to realize
high-quality and high-precision culture system is essential. The investigator
proposes an innovative approach of optical control of stem cell behaviors
through blue light illumination. If successful the approach will be expanded to
other stem cell applications by controlling multiple signaling pathways.

Current stem cell culture systems include different growth factors, but their
uneven distribution in the media (lack of spatial control), and gradually
decreased activity due to temporal-instability, often cause significant problems
in a large-scale stem cell biomanufacturing. To address this problem, the
investigator proposes photo-inducible modulation of fibroblast growth factor
(FGF) signaling in human pluripotent stem cells and muscle stem cells, using an
innovative optically controlled fibrobast growth factor receptor (OptoFGFR)
system allowing precise control of FGF signaling. The proposed investigation
will accelerate the in vitro and in vivo spatio-temporal modulation of stem
cells, and will be the first example of the 'opto-signaling' application in stem
cell biology with potential translational characteristics. More importantly, the
OptoFGFR system will be expanded to other signaling pathways such as epidermal
growth factor (EGF), vascular endothelial growth factor VEGF, and nerve growth
factor (NGF), and if successful the approach could be useful for multiple human
diseases.