* 1547003
* Understanding Two-way Coupling Between Cloud Radiative Effects and the Large-Scale Extratropical Atmospheric Circulation
* GEO,AGS
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2020
* Ying Li, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Varavut Limpasuvan
* 07/31/2020
* USD 635,603.00

The goal of the proposed research is to improve understanding of the two-way
coupling between clouds and the large-scale atmospheric circulation at
extratropical latitudes. The work includes two components. In the first
component, the influence of largescale extratropical climate variability on
clouds and cloud radiative effects will be analyzed. The research will include
analyses of both climate model output and observations, including various
CloudSat products, multiple reanalyses products, and remotely sensed estimates
of atmospheric cloud radiative effects. The analyses will explore and interpret
the changes in vertical cloud structure and radiative heating rates associated
with variations in a range of patterns of extratropical variability.

In the second component, the response of the large-scale extratropical
circulation to atmospheric cloud radiative effects will be examined. In the
process, the impact of atmospheric cloud radiative effects on the structure,
amplitude, and timescale of patterns of large-scale extratropical atmospheric
variability will be explored. The analyses will exploit output from the Clouds
On/Off Klima Intercomparsion Experiments (COOKIE), which include numerical
simulations run with and without atmospheric cloud radiative effects. They will
also include numerical experiments run on the dry dynamical core of a general
circulation model forced with heatings that mimic atmospheric cloud radiative
effects.