* 1547105
* EAGER/Cybermanufacturing: Just-In-Time Compilation of Product Manufacturing Data to Machine Instructions via an Industrial Machine Operating System
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,06/30/2018
* Binil Starly, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 06/30/2018
* USD 319,752.00

The factory of the future will be driven by a seamless integration of cyber-
enabled software and physical machines to increase manufacturing flexibility,
agility and ultimately production efficiency. In this cybermanufacturing
environment, the foundational physical asset is the individual manufacturing
machine on a shop floor which processes raw materials/in-process workpieces into
final products. The core design configuration of these machines has changed
little over decades, with proprietary hardware and control configurations that
vary among machine tool builders. This fragmented and closed machine
architecture hinders the development of software for cyberphysical machines.
This EArly-concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) award supports
fundamental research into transforming the individual machine tool on a
manufacturing shop floor into software defined machines, wherein software
determines the operational characteristics of a particular machine. The results
of this research will lay the foundation of an open source Industrial Machine
Operating System (IMOS) which will provide the capability to individual
developers, researchers and organizations to write software applications for
various manufacturing processes. This research involves several disciplines
which include manufacturing process planning, embedded computing, compiler
optimization and machine tool control system theory. This multi-disciplinary
research combining manufacturing and computing sciences will educate a new
generation of scientists and engineers leading to improved US competitiveness in
cybermanufacturing.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The Industrial Machine Operating
System will provide horizontal and vertical resource management within a machine
tool's hardware and software components. This operating system will be built on
the open sourced Linux kernel by a software stack that provides hardware
abstraction, packaged libraries, an application framework and user defined
applications installed on a manufacturing machine such as a milling machine. The
value of the operating system concept will be demonstrated through two unique
aspects critical to cybermanufacturing: 1) Demonstration of the direct transfer
of design and manufacturing process data to machine instructions on an embedded
computing platform while making use of internationally accepted product
documentation formats, and 2) Establishment of the rules behind Just-In-Time
compilation and code optimization of manufacturing process data during run-time
memory within an embedded computing system. The above merits will be
demonstrated through the machine operating system framework, intended to be
scalable and adaptable to various memory architectures.