* 1547095
* EAGER/Cybermanufacturing: Smart Manufacturing Platform for Tissue Engineering
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Utpal Roy, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 08/31/2018
* USD 226,000.00

Organ failure and tissue damage are major health problems. The current therapy
of organ transplantation is inadequate because of the shortage of available
donor organs, resulting in long waiting times. A promising alternative is tissue
engineering, which seeks to create functional tissues to replace or repair
damaged tissues using biomaterial-substitutes (scaffolds). Scaffolds have
stringent design requirements, such a three-dimensional (3D) internal-porous
structure, patient-specific geometry, and appropriate materials and mechanical
properties to encourage the growth of functional living tissues. Current
scaffold manufacturing methods typically adopt a trial-and-error approach, which
does not consider comprehensive interactions among design, material and process
and results in scaffolds with unpredictable properties. The goal of this EArly-
concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) project is to develop an
intelligent system to guide the optimization of shape, materials and process
parameters, resulting in a smart decision matrix for designing and manufacturing
3D scaffolds. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to research
an SOA (Service Oriented Architecture) based integrated technical and social
networking platform that enables effective human-human collaboration and
communication among the domains of product (3D porous scaffold), process (Fused
Deposition Modelling-FDM) and material (thermoplastic polycaprolactone-PCL).
This smart platform, enabled by semantic web technology and social network
analysis, embeds the capability of intelligent configurations of design and
manufacturing solutions; therefore promoting information and knowledge reuse and
cost reduction. Although the focus of this work is on porous PCL scaffolds using
the FDM process, the knowledge-driven, smart platform can be extended to other
biomanufacturing methods.