* 1547406
* EARS: Cross Layering in Full Duplex - from Integrated Circuits to Networking
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2021
* Gil Zussman, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 08/31/2021
* USD 626,000.00

The exponential growth of wireless traffic calls for the design of spectrum-
efficient communication schemes. Existing wireless systems are half-duplex,
where the separation of a users transmitted and received signal in either
frequency or time causes inefficient utilization of the limited spectrum. An
emerging and transformative communication technology that can substantially
improve spectrum efficiency is Full-Duplex communication, namely, simultaneous
transmission and reception on the same frequency channel. The fundamental
challenge associated with Full-Duplex communication, however, is the extremely
powerful transmitter self-interference, or echo, that can overwhelm the
receiver. Full-Duplex operation, therefore, requires the cancellation of the
self-interference at the receivers. Despite recent progress in the development
of laboratory bench-top Full-Duplex transceiver implementations, these designs
utilize bulky off-the-shelf components and are not suitable for compact
Integrated Circuit implementations necessary for commercial small-form-factor
mobile applications. Moreover, fully utilizing the benefits of Full-Duplex
communication calls for a fundamental redesign of the higher layer protocols.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This interdisciplinary project directly addresses the
important cross-layer challenges stemming from the need to design compact Full-
Duplex transceiver Integrated Circuits and to jointly design the Medium Access
Control and Physical layers, while taking into account the Full-Duplex
Integrated Circuit characteristics. In particular, a main component of the
project is the development of next-generation Full-Duplex transceiver Integrated
Circuits that meet the challenging requirements. Another major component is
obtaining fundamental understanding of the impact of Full-Duplex Integrated
Circuit transceivers, designed for small form factor nodes, on algorithm and
Medium Access Control layer design as well as on network capacity. Hence, the
main activities include: (i) developing new Full-Duplex transceiver concepts and
Integrated Circuits that simultaneously achieve self interference cancellation
and robustness to the new interference mechanisms that arise from widely-
deployed Full Duplex operation, (ii) deriving realistic models for recently
developed Full-Duplex canceller Integrated Circuits and developing adaptive
algorithms for physical layer cancellation, (iii) developing algorithms for
power control, channel allocation, and scheduling, and studying the resulting
Full-Duplex capacity gains (under realistic models), and (iv) understanding the
design considerations of Full-Duplex Medium Access Control protocols for random
access networks (e.g., Wi-Fi) and for small-cell cellular networks. The
developed algorithms will have a strong theoretical foundation and will be
evaluated in a unique software-defined Full-Duplex testbed composed of the
custom-designed Full-Duplex transceivers developed within the project.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;On a societal scale, enabling Full-Duplex operation and
improving spectrum utilization will contribute to wireless applications in the
areas of disaster recovery, healthcare, and public safety. The broader impacts
also include major outreach activities involving local high school students and
aiming at broadening the participation of women and underrepresented minorities;
incorporation of new theory and design techniques into undergraduate and
graduate classes; dissemination of the results through the literature and
conferences; and technology transfer to industry.