* 1547364
* EARS: Collaborative Research: Spectrum Sensing for Coexistence of Active and Passive Radio Services
* MPS,AST
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2019
* Lara Waldrop, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Jon Williams
* 12/31/2019
* USD 203,838.00

This EARS (Enhancing Access to the Radio Spectrum) program was founded in
response to the 2010 Presidential Memorandum on Unleashing the Wireless
Broadband Revolution mandated by Congress as part of the National Broadband
Plan. It was referenced in 2010 State of the Union and later on the Middle Class
Tax Relief and Job Creation Act of 2012 (More than 1/3 of the bill deals with
radio spectrum), the PCAST 2012 Report [President's Council of Advisors on
Science and Technology] (which calls for vastly increased use of spectrum
sharing) and the 2013 Presidential memo (Expanding America's Leadership in
Wireless Innovation). The aim of this program is to identify bold new concepts
with the potential to contribute to significant improvements in the efficiency
of radio spectrum utilization, protection of passive sensing services, and in
the ability for traditionally underserved Americans to benefit from current and
future wireless-enabled goods and services. The impact is large on the economics
of the Nation as seen on the last FCC bidding of 65MHz of the spectrum for over
$45 billion early in 2015. It will enable access to science, engineering,
industry, civilian and military users of the RF spectrum.

Effective use of radio spectrum is coveted by both active services (e.g.,
cellular, radar, wireless internet) and passive services (e.g., radio astronomy
service (RAS) and earth exploration satellite service (EESS)). It has led to an
increasing tension between the growing demand for greater spectrum use by active
radios and the pressing need for quiet spectrum by passive systems. The first
and foremost step towards alleviating this tension is to monitor the radio
frequency environment at high resolution in time, space, frequency, and even
some appropriately defined feature space. Although the spectrum monitoring issue
has undergone extensive research and radio frequency interference (RFI)
detection has been fervently investigated in the remote sensing communities,
only limited efforts exist in examining spectrum monitoring from the
perspectives of both active and passive systems to conscientiously support
coexistence. To support peaceful coexistence on radio spectrum, this project
aims to develop efficient spectrum monitoring techniques that provide deep
understanding and technological enablers for future spectrum management in the
growing presence of active and passive radio services.

Advanced signal processing techniques will be developed to provide high-
resolution spectrum sensing at short sensing time, and optimal sensing resource
allocation schemes will be investigated to maximize the payoffs of the sensing
budget. The proposed research on spectrum sensing will inform and advance the
RFI detection and management in support of increased societal and scientific
returns from RAS and EESS investments. The developed techniques can also be
leveraged by cognitive radio networks for dynamic spectrum sharing, impacting
practices of the services like cellular data and Internet of things (IoT).
Graduate and undergraduate students will benefit from the unique
interdisciplinary nature of this research, especially through interactions with
the scientists at the Arecibo Observatory, and the hands-on experience with its
305 m telescope.