* 1547638
* EAGER: Biomanufacturing: Physiologically-inspired Large Scale Manufacturing and Potency-Biomarker identification for Chimeric Antigen Receptor (CAR)-T cells
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Krishnendu Roy, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 08/31/2018
* USD 300,000.00

1547638 &lt;br/&gt;Roy, Krishnendu&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A novel, biologically-
inspired strategy is proposed to enhance the expansion of therapeutic T cells by
mimicking the environment and conditions of lymph nodes, where these cells
normally expand in the body. This idea of T cell expansion inside synthetic
lymph-node-like niches, where cells communicate with each other and with 'self'
is unique, but firmly rooted on physiological principles. Our approach could
vastly enhance the expansion potential of T cells making larger numbers of them
available for therapy and also reduce overall manufacturing cost, making the
treatment more affordable and widely available. Further, predictively measuring
the efficacy and potency of these manufactured T cells, before infusing them in
patients, is of critical importance. A comprehensive characterization of
manufactured T cells will be carried out to develop robust correlative markers
that can predict cell potency and can eventually be used as a routine analysis
tool to determine the quality of these cells before
infusion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This EAGER project will investigate human CAR-T
cell expansion within synthetic 3D microenvironments that mimic the T cell
niches within lymph nodes (LN). Anti-CD3/anti-CD28-functionalized microcarriers
will be used and human CAR-T cells will be cultured in LN-mimicking 3D niches
where T cells remain at high density with close cell-cell contact, and allow
efficient paracrine/autocrine signaling. These parameters, absent from the
current T-cell manufacturing concepts, are critical since T cells secrete large
amounts of interleukins (ILs) locally to promote rapid, large scale expansion.
Thus, this approach could also reduce culture media and IL requirements, thereby
significantly reducing cost. The effect of low O2 tension will be evaluated
together with various cell-seeding densities and anti-CD3/anti-CD28 ligand
densities on expansion efficacy and T cell quality. Further, the LN-like niche
will be combined with stirred tank or perfusion bioreactors, to determine
whether dynamic culture and flow perfusion improve expansion efficacy, product
quality, scalability and cost effectiveness.