* 1547801
* EAGER:  Mechanism of Energy Coupling with a Membrane Symport Protein
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2017
* Ronald Kaback, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Engin Serpersu
* 08/31/2017
* USD 299,986.00

The detailed mechanism of the transport of sugars, amino acids and other
nutrients across cell membranes is an unsolved biological problem. This project
focuses upon the lactose permease transporter (LacY) of the bacterium
Escherichia coli. LacY transports a specific sugar molecule and a proton across
the cell membrane and is typical of membrane proteins that catalyze the
transport of nutrient molecules such as sugars against a concentration gradient.
The goal of this project is to understand precisely how this coupled mechanism
works. Current biochemical/biophysical studies provide supporting evidence for a
mechanism in which sugar- and proton-binding sites of LacY gain alternating
access to either side of the membrane as the result of global structural changes
in the protein. Although alternating access is now generally accepted as the
mechanism for membrane transport, the chemistry of coupling between sugar and
proton transport remains unresolved. The current research project will utilize a
number of Camelid nanobodies, which are a special form of antibody, to stabilize
LacY in different intermediate states that will provide an in-depth
understanding of the mechanism for the first time for this class of transport
proteins. Understanding the molecular details of this mechanism will address an
important issue for the function of living systems and provide a model for
systematically dealing with structural determinations of membrane proteins that
are difficult to study. The project will provide training and education to
students at the graduate and undergraduate level.

The aim of this research is to develop an atomic-level understanding of the
mechanism of lactose/proton symport by the lactose permease of Escherichia coli
(LacY), a paradigm for the Major Facilitator Superfamily (MFS), the largest
family of membrane transport proteins. Members of the MFS are found in the
membranes of all living cells. However, despite an increasing number of X-ray
structures of MFS members, as well as the demonstration that lactose/proton
symport is driven thermodynamically by chemiosmosis, the mechanism of this
chemiosmotic process is not completely understood. Thus, it has been
demonstrated that sugar binding to highly dynamic and protonated LacY triggers a
global conformational change in which sugar- and proton-binding sites gain
alternating access to either side of the membrane, but it is apparent that sugar
binding and dissociation drive this conformational change through an induced-fit
mechanism, while the proton electrochemical gradient accelerates the rate of
deprotonation. Therefore, LacY behaves much like an enzyme except that the
transition state(s) involves the protein rather than the substrate. X-ray
structures of LacY inward- and almost occluded outward-facing conformations
provide the structural basis for studying the alternating access mechanism. The
alternating access mechanism will be studied by applying pre-steady state
kinetics, as well as multiple biochemical and spectroscopic approaches pioneered
in the PI's laboratory and by using kinetic data obtained in real time for
several steps in the transport cycle. This research focuses on the use of
Camelid nanobodies to stabilize LacY in different intermediate states to be
studied by X-ray diffraction. These studies will provide an in-depth
understanding of the symport mechanism.