* 1547580
* S2I2: Impl: The Molecular Sciences Software Institute
* CSE,OAC
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2022
* Theresa Windus, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Varun Chandola
* 07/31/2022
* USD 19,420,000.00

The Molecular Sciences Software Institute (MolSSI) will become a focus of
scientific research, education and scientific collaboration for the worldwide
community of computational molecular scientists. The MolSSI aims to reach these
goals by engaging the computational molecular science community in multiple ways
to remove barriers between innovations that often occur in small single-
researcher groups and the implementation of these ideas in software that is used
in the production of science by the entire community. Thus, great ideas will not
languish in the "just get the science right" mode, but be incorporated into
usable software for the wider community to enable bigger and better molecular
science. The MolSSI will catalyze significant advances in software
infrastructure, education, standards, and best-practices. These advances are
critical because they are needed to address the next set of grand challenges in
molecular science. Activities catalyzed by the Institute will improve the
interoperability of the software used by the community, make easier the use of
this software on the varied and heterogenous computing architectures that
currently exist, enable greater scalability of existing and emerging theoretical
models, as well as substantially improving the training of molecular-science
students in software design and engineering. Through the range of outreach
efforts by its multiple institutions, the MolSSI will engage the community to
increase the diversity of its workforce by more effectively attracting and
retaining students and faculty from underrepresented groups. All of these
endeavors will result in fundamentally and dramatically improved molecular
science software and its usage, that will reduce or eliminate the current delays
- often by years - in the practical realization of theoretical innovations.
Ultimately, the Institute will enable computational scientists to more easily
navigate future disruptive transitions in computing technology, and most
importantly, tackle problems that are orders of magnitude larger and more
complex than those currently within their grasp and to realize new, more
ambitious scientific objectives. This will accelerate the translation of basic
science into new technologies essential to the vitality of the economy and
environment, and to compete globally with Europe, Japan, and other countries
that are making aggressive investments in advanced cyber-
infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The MolSSI aims to reach these goals by
engaging the computational molecular science community in multiple ways to
remove barriers between innovations that often occur in small single- principle
investigator groups and the implementation of these ideas in software that is
used in the production of science by the entire community. The MolSSI will
create a sustainable Molecular Sciences Consortium that will develop use cases
and standards for code and data sharing across the software ecosystem and become
a focus of scientific research, education and scientific collaboration for the
worldwide community of computational molecular scientists. The Institute will
create an interdisciplinary team of Software Scientists who will help develop
software frameworks, interact with community code developers, collaborate with
partners in cyber-infrastructure, form mutually productive coalitions with
industry, government labs, and international efforts, and ultimately serve as
future experts and leaders. In addition, the Institute will support and mentor a
cohort of Software Fellows actively developing code infrastructure in research
groups across the U.S., and, in turn, they will engage in MolSSI outreach and
education activities within the larger molecular science community. Through a
range of multi-institutional outreach efforts, the Institute will engage the
community to increase the diversity of its workforce by more effectively
attracting and retaining students and faculty from underrepresented groups. The
Institute will educate the next generation of software developers by providing
workshops, summer schools, on-line forums, and a Professional Master's program
in molecular simulation and software engineering. MolSSI will be guided by an
internal Board of Directors and an external Science and Software Advisory Board,
both comprised of leaders in the field, who will work together with the Software
Scientists and Fellows to establish the key software priorities. MolSSI will be
sustained by a mix of labor contributed by the community, revenue from education
programs and license revenues. In summary, the MolSSI's ultimate impact will be
in the translation of basic science into future technological advances essential
to the economy, environment, and human health.