* 1547628
* RAPID: How does reduced snowpack in winter impact the availability and processing of stream nutrients in summer?
* BIO,DEB
* 06/15/2015,11/30/2015
* Dana Warren, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 11/30/2015
* USD 33,863.00

Declining snowpack is a growing environmental, social and economic concern
across the western United States. The climate of the Pacific Northwest provides
little rainfall during middle of summer and early fall, so that streams rely on
the legacies of winter snow to maintain higher discharge during spring and into
the summer. In 2015, the snowpack was at record low levels in the Cascade
Mountains and with severely diminished snowpack in winter, streams that drain
Cascade Mountain catchments across Oregon, Washington and California are
expected to experience record low summer discharge this year. This project will
measure the variation in stream nitrogen concentrations across a large forested
watershed in Oregon and determine how nitrogen and life in streams change under
these severe drought conditions. Forecasts for the Pacific Northwest suggest
that droughts associated with reduced snowpack will be more common in the
future, with associated ecological, social and economic consequences, including
effects on fish species that rear in headwater ecosystems. This project will
support two undergraduate interns. Because it will be conducted in association
with other long-term university and U.S. Forest Service research projects, it
will leverage the outreach and broader network infrastructure for extending
results and engaging with the public and forest managers.

Extreme low flow conditions are expected to increase variability in background
nutrient concentrations as dilution by surface water declines. In headwater
streams, areas with both elevated nutrients and elevated light have higher
primary production which in-turn enhances biogeochemical activity. Determining
how patterns of nitrogen availability change as flow declines is therefore
important in understanding not only where primary production may be elevated but
also where biogeochemical hotspots are likely to develop. This work will
quantify inorganic nitrogen, light, and in situ chlorophyll a in a synoptic
sampling effort that will encompass 12 km of a 4th-order stream network in the
Cascade Mountains of Oregon. Working in a drought year will maximize the
potential to identify the influences of spatial heterogeneity in nutrient
availability.