* 1547130
* EAGER/Cybermanufacturing: A Cybermanufacturing System for the Design and Fabrication of Manufacturing Equipment
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,11/30/2018
* Emanuel Sachs, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 11/30/2018
* USD 299,125.00

Cyber-manufacturing is the emerging field that links information systems with
the physical systems and hardware used to turn raw materials into manufactured
goods. Cyber-manufacturing is a specific part of "the internet of things." A
stunningly successful example of cyber-manufacturing is the design and
manufacture of integrated circuits that has enabled revolutions in computation,
telecommunications and much more. This EArly-concept Grant for Exploratory
Research (EAGER) award will investigate of a cyber-manufacturing system for the
design and fabrication of manufacturing equipment. This system will have high
impact on innovation in manufacturing by dramatically reducing the lead time and
cost associated with manufacturing equipment. Invigorating innovation in
manufacturing by reducing lead time and cost will enable new product designs and
will allow innovators in manufacturing to defend their market positions through
rapid improvement. With these changes, innovators in manufacturing will be able
to capture economic benefit, rather than watching that benefit go to others, and
a sustainable ecosystem in manufacturing innovation can be
envisioned.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The lesson learned from the integrated circuit
industry is to focus on a specific product class to be fabricated/manufactured
because in this way a user community is created which brings the aggregate
effort above critical mass and allows for organic growth. Following this lesson,
the project focuses on the design and fabrication of manufacturing equipment.
This focus area provides the user base and is high impact, and is therefore
achievable. This is because: i) in the design of manufacturing equipment,
similar challenges are encountered repeatedly, and each type of challenge or
subsystem is usually addressed by a choice among a limited range of fabrication
technologies, ii) the design of manufacturing equipment is hierarchical and not
strongly coupled, and iii) human factors, which are among the most difficult to
codify, are better circumscribed and less critical to the competitive advantage
of manufacturing equipment, as compared to other realms. Fundamental
requirements for applications (apps) will be researched for several classes of
subsystems which are frequently incorporated in manufacturing equipment. The
user will interact directly with these subsystem apps. The subsystems apps will
interface with a CAD system on the front end and a procurement app on the back
end. The procurement app will interface with vendors. This work will focus on
the requirements for the subsystem apps and the interfaces in the system. The
interfaces will embody the abstractions required to codify the exchange between
system blocks.