* 1547436
* Blocker-Tolerant Wideband Cognitive Spectrum Sensor
* MPS,AST
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2019
* Jose Silva-Martinez, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Jon Williams
* 12/31/2019
* USD 750,000.00

This EARS (Enhancing Access to the Radio Spectrum) program was founded in
response to the 2010 Presidential Memorandum on Unleashing the Wireless
Broadband Revolution mandated by Congress as part of the National Broadband
Plan. It was referenced in 2010 State of the Union and later on the Middle Class
Tax Relief and Job Creation Act of 2012 (More than 1/3 of the bill deals with
radio spectrum), the PCAST 2012 Report [President's Council of Advisors on
Science and Technology] (which calls for vastly increased use of spectrum
sharing) and the 2013 Presidential memo (Expanding America's Leadership in
Wireless Innovation). The aim of this program is to identify bold new concepts
with the potential to contribute to significant improvements in the efficiency
of radio spectrum utilization, protection of passive sensing services, and in
the ability for traditionally underserved Americans to benefit from current and
future wireless-enabled goods and services. The impact is large on the economics
of the Nation as seen on the last FCC bidding of 65MHz of the spectrum for over
$45 billion early in 2015. It will enable access to science, engineering,
industry, civilian and military users of the radio frequency (RF)
spectrum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this proposal is to provide an
innovative, secure and resilient spectrum-sharing technology to improve wireless
broadband communications for the consumer electronics sector and enhance
spectrum availability for critical government services. The problem of sensing,
estimating and detecting several gigahertz of a spectrum bandwidth populated by
a number of unidentified (as to location) user's signals has unleashed a highly
interdisciplinary research endeavor. This problem a crosscutting problem in all
these disciplines: signal processing, communications, systems, and circuit
problem. The fundamental challenge is to estimate unoccupied spectrum regions
that are surrounded by potentially large signal blockers. The combined
bandwidth, linearity and dynamic range requirements of these unoccupied regions
exceed that found in state-of-art of radio receivers by several times. Cognitive
radio technology has been proposed for such purposes over the last decade;
however, its development has run into bottlenecks due to several technological
challenges. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal addresses the need for a more
efficient coexistence of weak opportunistic secondary user signals with mixed
strong/weak primary signals that are currently used for commercial applications,
public safety, homeland security, and national defense. This proposal aims at
designing and optimizing novel and innovative cognitive multi-channel spectrum
sensors, enabling smart and dynamic next-generation wireless communication
systems, which will coexist harmonically with other broadband systems over the
same frequency bands. To accomplish this goal, the proposed research objectives
are: (1) coarse frequency estimation of strong primary signal blockers that
interfere with the estimation and detection of weaker primary signals and
spectrum holes; (2) strong blocker removal system in the radio frequency (RF)
and analog domain to filter out the selected channel for reliable determination
of opportunistic communications; (3) novel signal processing techniques based on
locally most powerful (LMP) detectors for the estimation and detection of weak
primary signals and spectrum holes.