* 1547913
* SBIR Phase I:  Learning to Think Mathematically and Problem-Solve Right From the Start
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2016
* Elizabeth Schwartz, Production Resource Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 12/31/2016
* USD 179,845.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I project will produce the
prototype for a supplementary K-2 math program, tablet delivered, that builds
mathematical reasoning and problem-solving skills. For students to succeed in
gate keeper courses that are prerequisite to high-paying jobs, reasoning and
problem-solving skills are essential, yet the majority of schools focus strictly
on computation. To address this nationwide problem, the pedagogy and strategies
from the federally-funded Comprehensive School Mathematics Program (CSMP) will
be appropriated. Studies (1970-1990) show that CSMP students had greater ability
to solve novel problems as measured by the MANS test. Although results were
significant from the gifted to the learning challenged, CSMP?s hands-on,
personalized approach was too costly at the time to implement on a larger scale.
This project will address harnessing today?s technology to leverage the
strongest aspects of CSMP. Students will work through repeated exposures to
problem-solving scenarios presented in game-like settings. Rather than
traditional manipulatives, colorful toy building bricks are used to pose
problems, explore concepts, develop skills, and define new ideas. As new
generations are able to think mathematically, considerably more Americans will
be able to thrive in the technologically sophisticated 21st century marketplace,
fostering jobs and generating tax revenues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Employing
powerful technologies devised exclusively for the tablet (touch, drag-and-drop,
and accelerometers) makes possible the creation of detective-like adventures
that encourage students to form hypotheses, consider alternatives, and test
conclusions. Resplendent with pictorial and concrete representations, children
are able to interpret and internalize mathematical concepts many think are
beyond their comprehension. Replicas of popular childhood building bricks make
the experience seem play-like rather than a series of tasks to be completed. By
moving these familiar objects across the tablet screen, children see the cause
and effect of their actions. Adaptive learning mechanics deliver auto-graded
experiences based on performance -- saving considerable preparation and
supervisory time. Automatically generated reports provide data for decision-
making. Phase I research will focus on the viability of the technology, student
engagement and teacher use. During Phase II, an extensive evaluation will
determine if students internalize Common Core concepts and use their growing
understanding of mathematics to solve problems. Traditional qualitative analysis
techniques will be used to answer research questions and provide a foundation
for continued studies. In schools where the supplementary program has been
implemented as designed, the MANS test can be administered to ascertain if
students have similar or better outcomes than the original CSMP cohort.