* 1547523
* Extreme Interaction Between Atmosphere and Solid Earth: Understanding the Forcing Mechanism by Hurricanes and its Application for Monitoring
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2016,02/29/2020
* Toshiro Tanimoto, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Raterron
* 02/29/2020
* USD 197,763.00

Hurricanes are one of the most devastating natural hazards that affect our
society. Understanding their detailed mechanism, especially when it is at a
mature stage, is quite important for hazard mitigation. Progress in the
atmospheric sciences has been remarkable in the last few decades because of
multi-faceted observations from aircraft, radar, and satellite observations.
However, monitoring the intensity changes of these hurricanes while they are
still in warm oceans has been quite difficult from these observations alone.
This study will explore the use of seismic data for monitoring sudden changes in
hurricane strength. Hurricanes generate ground motions in the Earth and a sudden
intensification naturally leads to the excitation of larger seismic waves. The
key to developing such a seismic monitoring scheme is in the basic understanding
of the seismic-wave excitation by hurricanes. This seems to be a reachable goal
within a few years, aided with data from the USArray
network.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technically, the generation of strong ground
motions by hurricanes is one of the strongest examples of mechanical couplings
between the atmosphere and the solid earth. The USArray network unexpectedly
recorded hurricane data that are unique because of dual installation of
barometers and seismometers. These data are the cause and effect of the
atmosphere-land interactions because barometers provide the information on the
excitation source (surface pressure) and seismometers provide the resultant
seismic wavefields. Our investigation on Hurricane Isaac (2012) has shown that
these data can give us fresh new insights into the seismic-wave excitation
process. The primary goal of this project is to extend our current approach to
other hurricanes in the USArray data and test the stochastic, seismic-wave
excitation theory that has been developed. This knowledge will then be applied
to monitoring the intensity changes of hurricanes while they are still in the
oceans. If such a monitoring becomes possible, it can be a useful tool for
hurricane-hazard mitigation in combination with atmospheric and satellite-based
data.