* 1547223
* Collaborative Research: Preserving User Privacy in Server-driven Dynamic Spectrum Access System
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2019
* Chunming Qiao, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Alhussein Abouzeid
* 12/31/2019
* USD 300,000.00

Dynamic spectrum access (DSA) technique enables wireless devices, called
secondary users (SUs), to use spectrum that are allocated to licensed incumbent
users (IUs) as long as they do not interfere with IUs' operation. It has been
widely accepted as a crucial solution to mitigate the spectrum scarcity problem
for wireless communications. As a key form of DSA, regulators have proposed to
release more Federal spectrum for sharing with commercial wireless users, under
the umbrella of a spectrum access system (SAS) database to govern the spectrum
sharing between IUs and SUs. However, the success of this sharing hinges upon
how privacy issues are managed. In current SAS schemes, the operation data of
both federal IUs and commercial SUs need to be shared with the SAS database for
it to decide if sharing is permitted. Yet, operation data of federal IUs are
often classified information and SU operation data may also be commercial
secret. Since SAS is not necessarily operated by a trusted third party and can
potentially be breached by attackers, these current schemes threaten the privacy
of both IUs and SUs. To address this privacy issue, this project develops a
privacy-preserving SAS (P2-SAS), which ensures that the SAS system can still
accurately decide whether spectrum sharing among IUs and SUs are permitted while
it learns nothing about the operation data of IUs and SUs. This project is the
first to be able to successfully realize privacy-preserving spectrum allocation
in SAS. It addresses regulators' concerns with DSA's privacy issue and hence
greatly help the development of the entire nation's broadband networks. The
project provides a blueprint on how privacy-preserving mechanisms can be
integrated in many other communication systems beyond DSA.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project realizes its privacy preserving spectrum
allocation using secure homomorphic computation. In P2-SAS, IUs and SUs share
only ciphertexts of their operation data with the SAS Server, which then
performs secure homomorphic computation directly over these ciphertexts, so that
none of the IU/SU operation data would be exposed to any snooping party,
including the SAS itself. The project aims to convert complex spectrum
allocation computation and certification procedures into the limited homomorphic
computation types provided by efficient Paillier cryptosystems. Leveraging the
unique characteristics of spectrum allocation computation, various refining
techniques will be explored to significantly reduce the computation and
communication overhead of P2-SAS and prevent potential attacks on the system.