* 1547132
* RAPID: Investigating the Composition, Behavior, and Environmental Fate of Emerging Unconventional Oils from North America: Bakken Crude Oils and Canadian Diluted Bitumens
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2016
* Christopher Reddy, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* William Cooper
* 07/31/2016
* USD 49,999.00

1547132&lt;br/&gt;Reddy&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will investigate the
composition, behavior, and environmental fate of crude oils and bitumens in
order to produce a robust baseline data set desperately needed by scientists,
policy makers, and spill responders. The production and transport of these two
emerging unconventional petroleum products has been hailed as the path to North
American energy independence, and their production continues to expand at a
dramatic pace.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The lack of data available in the peer-
reviewed literature has hindered a robust understanding of the risks associated
with environmental discharge of these products. These emerging unconventional
products have already been analyzed for their chemical and physical properties
and these data will be used along with some additional analyses to understand
their environmental fate and transport. The results of this research will extend
beyond publications and presentations and be used to actively engage critical
stakeholders. This effort will support a postdoctoral scientist, inform industry
and government officials, and provide accessible information to the media,
policy makers, and non-governmental organizations (NGOs). By giving the PIs
cause to interact outside their peer group, this research will also allow them
to learn about the interests and needs of others and improve bidirectional
communication between academia and other stakeholders.