* 1547225
* EAGER: Biomanufacturing: Engineering Cell-Intrinsic Control of Cardiomyocyte Differentiation in Human Pluripotent Stem Cells
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2018
* Timothy Kamp, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 09/30/2018
* USD 300,000.00

PI: Palecek, Sean P. Proposal Number: 1547225

Recent scientific advances in the discovery of human pluripotent stem cells
(hPSCs) and the ability to direct hPSCs to specialized cell types offer the
potential to revolutionize the study of human development and disease, drug
screening and safety profiling, and cell-based regenerative therapies. To
realize this promise of hPSCs, however, efficient biomanufacturing platforms are
needed to robustly generate large quantities of high quality hPSCs and their
derivatives. Traditional biomanufacturing strategies employ bioreactors to
control the environment of the cell, providing extrinsic signals that direct
cell fates. Here, the investigators propose a novel intrinsic paradigm for
control of hPSC fate, using recent advances in molecular biology to program an
hPSC to develop into a heart muscle cell in the absence of external cues.
Successful completion of this project will provide a deeper fundamental
understanding of how hPSCs make decisions to turn into more specialized cells
and provide a new strategy to biomanufacture specialized cells from stem cells
by engineering the cell.

This project will develop a novel paradigm for controlling human pluripotent
stem cell (hPSC) differentiation, using cell intrinsic sensing of cell state and
control of developmental signaling pathways. The investigators will employ
recent advances in understanding how canonical Wnt signaling drives hPSC
commitment to mesoderm and subsequent specification to cardiac mesoderm and
functional cardiomyocytes to design cells that sense their differentiation
status and drive signaling to elicit desired differentiation trajectories. The
investigators will identify mesoderm and cardiac mesoderm-specific promoter
elements and use these to activate expression of Wnt pathway modulators,
generating hPSC lines that differentiate to functional cardiomyocytes in the
absence of extrinsic signaling. Then, the investigators will test the hypothesis
that cell intrinsic control of differentiation enables more robust and scalable
biomanufacturing of cardiomyocytes than extrinsic control via application of
small molecules during scale down for high throughput screening application and
scale up for production of cells suitable for clinical evaluation. The broader
impacts of this project include providing a blueprint for engineering hPSC lines
for biomanufacturing of somatic lineages beyond cardiomyocytes. Education and
outreach activities will also stem cell engineers at the graduate and
undergraduate levels, and will provide outreach to K-12 students, K-12 teachers,
undergraduate students, and the general public on aspects of stem cell science
and biomanufacturing.