* 1547492
* Collaborative Research: Experimental analysis of strain transients in a heterogeneous semi-brittle system: Implications for tectonics
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2019
* Jacqueline Reber, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 03/31/2019
* USD 185,500.00

Tectonic motions give rise to destructive earthquakes and to enigmatic slower
slip events on fault zones. Brittle behavior and friction laws that describe
slip over fractured or rough fault surfaces do not account for the fact that
fault zones can simultaneously break in a brittle manner and flow in a ductile
way as has been observed in the geologic record. This project combines
laboratory experiments and theoretical analysis on the effect a semi-brittle
material can have on the mechanisms of deformation localization and slip
accumulation, which may provide critical insights on the mechanics of
earthquakes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project proposes that the wide variation
in deformation speeds from earthquake to steady creep can be explained by the
interaction of brittle fracturing and ductile flow in a semi-brittle material.
This behavior will be explored with physical experiments using Carbopol, which
exhibits both brittle and ductile deformation simultaneously. The experiments
will test whether the interaction of tensional and shear fractures in a semi-
brittle material leads to strain transients, or if, alternatively, the re-
occurring strain transients are controlled by the strength along the shear
fracture such that the formation of the fractures only appears to be concurrent
with the slip. The results will be incorporated into an analytical model, which
allows extrapolating the results to time scales relevant to strain transients in
Earth. The work proposed here will fundamentally advance the understanding of
semi-brittle deformation and its impact on strain transients.&lt;br/&gt;