* 1547102
* EAGER:   Cybermanufacturing: Predictive Analytics Models and Techniques for Intelligent Cybermanufacturing
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2017
* Ling Liu, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 08/31/2017
* USD 100,000.00

Enabling information infrastructure is the major element of the emerging
service-oriented cybermanufacturing paradigm. Quality and cost are the major
issues that 3D printing service providers (i.e. manufacturers) are facing as
they are the critical measures for keeping their services competitive and
affordable. The bidding price from a manufacturer or 3D printing service
provider for a submitted job is crucial in market competition. This EArly-
concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) project is the development of
three data analytics approaches in a pilot prototype system to provide accurate
cost estimation of 3D printing jobs. They are shape mining, user-product usage
based analytics, and a hybrid approach combining shape mining with statistical
mining of user-oriented data for enhanced cost prediction.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The data analytics models and service-oriented framework
will provide a generic and systematic approach to improve the efficiency of
next-generation cybermanufacturing infrastructure, enabling manufacturers to
make timely and sound decisions based on evidence and insight derived from deep
learning from big data. This data science-based approach will enable better
understanding of the power and the potential of cybermanufacturing in
manufacturing efficiency enhancement and decision making.