* 1547784
* CSUB CREST Phase II: Climate Science and Natural Resource Solutions for Water-Limited, Paired Mountain/Valley Systems
* EDU,EES
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2022
* Robert Negrini, CSUB Auxiliary for Sponsored Programs Administration
* Continuing Grant
* Luis Cubano
* 04/30/2022
* USD 5,031,734.00

Center for Climate Science and Natural Resource Solutions for Water-Limited,
Paired Mountain/Valley Systems&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With National Science
Foundation support, California State University at Bakersfield, will continue
development of the Center for Climate Science and Natural Resource Solutions for
Water-Limited, Paired Mountain/Valley Systems. Center research is aimed at
better understanding the role of drought, evaluating potential responses, and
assisting with adaptive planning in response to these changes. The similarity of
the Center's focus system to other mountain-valley systems worldwide broadens
the impact of this research as a model for similar systems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Center's approach articulates three research
subprojects addressing the effects of climate variability on landscape
processes, ecology, and human response. Subproject 1 will evaluate the landscape
response and predicted time intervals for preferential occurrence of mass
wasting events, floods, and wildfires. This subproject will also characterize
the response of the Sierra snowpack to historical climate variability to inform
forecasts of amount and seasonality of water resources. Subproject 2
investigates the ecological response of plant communities and focuses on the
sensitivity, adaptive capacity, and resilience of vegetation to drought along a
transect from the San Joaquin Valley floor to the Sierra Nevada crest. Results
will identify the vulnerability of key woody species to climate variability
including the mechanisms behind differential vulnerabilities. Subproject 3
focuses on the human response to climate variability through the sequestration
of CO2 into mature oil fields and saline aquifers and the predictive mapping of
treatable groundwater from the same saline aquifers. This work addresses the
feasibility of carbon storage to replace the region's reliance on petroleum
extraction. Center research will also quantify potential underground water
resources and allow for the development of predictive models for the occurrence
of treatable groundwater in similar water-stressed
areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Center will continue to involve local students
from backgrounds underrepresented in science, technology, engineering and
mathematics (STEM) fields and will support these students through a series of
activities designed to optimize their inclusion into the STEM research
community.