* 1547189
* EAGER/Cybermanufacturing:  Abstractions and Architectures for Open Composable Services
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Vadim Shapiro, International Computer Science Institute
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 08/31/2018
* USD 200,000.00

A key element of cloud-based design and manufacturing is the notion of
virtualization of software and hardware resources, which allows automated
composition and delivery of manufacturing services to diverse communities of
makers and supports a variety of manufacturing industries. This EArly-concept
Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) project will investigate new
architectures for such composable services in manufacturing that seek to replace
problematic and error-prone data translation by open communication and
interoperability protocols. If successful, the research will empower
standardized open communication between variety of software tools and
manufacturing applications. This in turn should enable the virtualization of
manufacturing services, leading to significant gains in efficiency, further
fueling democratization of manufacturing, and empowering the culture of
making.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research seeks to demonstrate feasibility of
the new approach by focusing on four specific tasks: (1) identifying key
abstractions for modular representation of manufacturing knowledge, including
shape, material, and physical information; (2) formalizing these abstractions in
terms of computable functions (constructions and queries); (3) developing open
protocols for interoperability and composition of services using the identified
abstractions and functions; (4) investigating effectiveness of the architecture
on selected use-case scenarios. If successful, the results of the research will
be used to develop a comprehensive research agenda on abstractions and
architectures for open composable services in cyber-manufacturing.