* 1547597
* I-Corps:  Automatically Localizing Functional Faults In Deployed Software Applications
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2015,12/31/2016
* Mark Grechanik, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 12/31/2016
* USD 50,000.00

Very few problems impact people more negatively than field failures, where
deployed software behaves incorrectly. Just like distinct human anatomies would
prevent medical professionals from quickly diagnosing diseases using symptoms,
production fault localization requires a huge effort from software
professionals, since each software application has its own unique structure and
programmers must spend a lot of time to understand it even for smaller
applications. Not only do field failures zap customer confidence in software
applications, but also they cost dearly, sometimes in human lives, since
software applications support all aspects of our lives. Despite hundreds of
different approaches for fault localization, the problem of localizing
production faults for field failures automatically is unsolved. A problem is
that production faults are not known by definition when the application is
deployed, therefore running existing test suites is not applicable. Only when
field failures occur in a deployed application can programmers start analyzing
the symptoms to determine what faults cause them. Time to fix is critical, since
the applications' downtime often costs thousands of dollars per minute.
Currently, there is no solution that can automatically localize functional
production faults in deployed software applications with a high degree of
precision using only symptoms of the field failures and input values and without
deploying instrumented applications and without collecting any runtime data and
without having any tests with oracles, without performing successful and failed
runs, and without collecting large amounts of state information from field
failures. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps team proposes a novel research
program for Automatically Localizing Faults For Functional Field Failures in
Applications (pronounced as al-five) that enables stakeholders to enter symptoms
of a failure that occurs during deployment of a given application and the input
and configuration parameter values, and ALF5 will return locations in the code
that are likely to contain specific faults and it recommends modifications to
the code at these locations that can fix these faults. Examples of symptoms of
failures include but not limited to incorrect output values, program crashes and
computations that take much more time that they are supposed to, possibly
indicating infinite loops. The team plans to explore partnering with potential
customers who can provide production worthy systems upon which to demonstrate
the proposed innovation and can help the team scale up its innovation to
commercial delivery. The most likely markets for the proposed innovation are:
software systems developers, like IBM Global Services and Sapient and Accenture;
business process outsourcing firms like Deloitte and CSC, that host complex
applications on behalf of customers; and companies with complex in-production
custom systems, e.g., insurance processing, transportation logistics.