* 1547258
* Complex Coacervation: Principles and Applications - A Special Symposium at the 2015 American Chemical Society Fall Meeting; August 17-18, 2015; Boston, MA
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2015,12/31/2015
* Paul Dubin, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Joseph A. Akkara
* 12/31/2015
* USD 5,000.00

Non-Technical: This award by the Biomaterials program in the Division of
Materials Research to University of Massachusetts at Amherst is to support
students, postdoctoral scientists and junior faculty members to attend a
conference titled "Complex Coacervation: Principles and Applications - A Special
Symposium" at the 2015 American Chemical Society Fall Meeting in Boston, MA,
August 16 to 21, 2015. The focus of this two-day symposium is on biomaterials,
and this conference builds upon earlier successful smaller conferences on this
topic held at American Chemical Society Meetings in 2009, 2012 and 2014. This
conference is expected to provide a setting for the exchange of ideas and the
generation of new approaches and technologies in such areas as: phase separation
in biological and proto-biological systems; biomedical applications; and
applications in food, personal care. The broader impact of this proposal is to
increase the participation of students, postdoctoral scientists and
underrepresented minority students in science and engineering areas. The
conference format will provide students with various opportunities to attend
state-of-art lectures by top scientists and meet with them, communicate and
present their results, and participate in discussions.

Technical: This two-day conference is designed to provide an introduction to
charge-driven materials self-assembly in general and complex coacervation in
specific. The event is expected to present recent developments in this area of
research, emphasizing new trends and future directions for complex coacervates
as a class of materials, and highlighting the wide variety of applications and
science relevant to these types of materials. Since this field would greatly
benefit from multidisciplinary interactions from chemists, biologists,
physicists, and engineers, the conference program contain an excellent
arrangement of both invited speakers and students. The conference is broken down
into four areas: 1) theory and characterization; 2) phase separation in
biological and proto-biological systems; 3) biomedical applications; and 4)
applications in food, personal care, and drug delivery systems. The poster
sessions are organized in such a way that students will be able to present their
results and communicate with peers in the field. The conference format will
provide various opportunities for students to attend state-of-art lectures of
the top scientists, meet the scientists, communicate, present their results, and
participate in discussions. In addition, this conference is expected to provide
students with career and professional development opportunities.