* 1547294
* EARS: Joint Optimization of RF Design and Smartphone Sensing:  From Adaptive Sniffing to WAZE-Inspired Spectrum Sharing
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2019
* Jennifer Kitchen, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 08/31/2019
* USD 650,000.00

The past decade has witnessed a skyrocketing demand for commercial wireless
spectrum. These sharp increases in mobile traffic (particularly smartphone
traffic) are projected to continue in the foreseeable future, creating an urgent
need to develop innovative spectrum sensing and sharing technologies. The
proposed research is inspired by Waze, a highly successful GPS-based mobile
navigation application program that provides real-time traffic information,
based on user-submitted travel times and route details. Inspired by Waze, this
project is centered around the vision that future generation smartphones will be
able to carry out real-time spectrum sensing and sharing of the communication
environment, through built-in spectrum sniffers and the help of shared usage
information from mobile devices. This research shall enable a paradigm shift
from existing cognitive radio design approaches to usage aware spectrum sharing.
Innovative implementation of a low-cost integrated broadband RF design for
smartphone spectral sniffing, in combination with novel spectrum sharing
techniques, will have a compelling and transformative impact in smartphone
design and enable efficient spectrum sharing. The educational activities will
develop skilled workforce in this area of national need by inspiring and
engaging the middle and high school student population in engineering.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Built on this vision, this project advocates joint design
of radio frequency (RF) hardware and spectrum sensing for smartphones, aiming to
enable usage-aware spectrum sharing with minimal dynamic range and power
consumption requirements placed on the smartphone hardware. Under this common
theme, this project consists of the following research and educational thrusts.
I) Low-cost RF architecture for smartphone sensing. Thrust I focuses on low-
cost, integrated, broadband RF design for spectrum sensing and data
transmission. The spectral sniffer leverages shared usage information to detect
RF signals from 1 GHz to 18 GHz with both high dynamic range and sensitivity,
and the digital transmitter enables modulation-agnostic data transmission with
low handset power consumption. Built on the low-overhead design of RF hardware
in this thrust, database assisted spectrum access and distributed spectrum
access are explored in Thrusts II and III, respectively. II) Waze-inspired
database assisted spectrum sharing. Along the same line as in the Waze
application, a database is used to gather spectrum usage information from
smartphones, and sends both real-time location-specific usage information and
the set of potentially vacant channels in response to the requests from
individual users. Each user then carries out refined sensing, followed by data
transmissions. III) Waze-inspired usage-aware distributed spectrum sharing.
Thrust III is dedicated to study distributed spectrum sharing, where usage
information is shared only among smartphone users in the vicinity. IV) Integrate
research into education and outreach by performing a diverse set of activities
that include curricular tasks and K-12 outreach.