* 1547377
* RAPID: Narrating Disaster: Calibrating Causality and Responses to the 2015 Earthquakes in Nepal
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2020
* Geoff Childs, Southern Illinois University at Edwardsville
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 06/30/2020
* USD 94,113.00

The immediate research response to a natural disaster frequently focuses on loss
of life, injuries, structural damage, and aid response. Research on the
demographic shifts associated with response efforts and the social, linguistic,
and economic effects of 'outsiders' engaging with affected communities is often
overlooked. Without immediate action to capture and document these details, the
individual experiences of people who survived these events risks being merged
into more generalized narratives, influenced and homogenized by media reports.
The possibility of this disconnect was brought to the fore during events such as
Hurricanes Andrew in 1992 and Katrina in 2005, where initial media coverage
under-represented individual and local experiences, but where subsequent
ethnographic studies found practical and pedagogical value in capturing such
details (for example, the lived effects of the privatization of health and
housing services, and the construction of culturally sensitive science
curriculum materials about hurricanes). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
focuses on Nepal, which was recently devastated by major earthquakes in April
and May 2015, to capture individual-level and local experiences in a timely
manner. The researchers will collect, annotate, and make publicly available
interviews and narratives conducted with earthquake survivors. The geo-
linguistic focus will be communities of Tibeto-Burman language-speaking peoples
from three districts of Nepal's Western Zone: Mustang, Manang and Gorkha,
including local residents and former residents (rural-urban migrants) who are
now moving back to their home villages to participate in relief and rebuilding
efforts. All are speakers of endangered languages. Linguists Kristine
Hildebrandt of the Southern Illinois University, Edwardsville and Mark Donahue
of Australian National University along with Medical Anthropologist Sienna Craig
of Dartmouth College and Cultural Anthropologist Geoff Childs will work with
Nepali researchers to elicit narratives and interview speakers to build a
database of survivor narratives, one that takes the perspective of the survivors
and responders. The narratives will reveal grammatical and discourse features of
emotive language. These materials will also reveal nuances about the
relationship between humans and their social and physical environment while the
collective memory of the event is still fresh, providing valuable insider
perspectives on why and how people create and maintain their livelihoods in
places and in ways where extreme environmental conditions are a constant and
powerful presence.