* 1547927
* I-Corps Sites:  Bridging the Gap: Dartmouth's I-Corps Site for Translating Science and Technology Discoveries to Value
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2016,01/31/2023
* Laura Ray, Dartmouth College
* Continuing Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 01/31/2023
* USD 300,000.00

This project, from Dartmouth College, creates an Innovation Corps
Site.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NSF Innovation Corps (I-Corps) Sites are NSF-funded
entities established at universities whose purpose is to nurture and support
multiple, local teams to transition their technology concepts into the
marketplace. Sites provide infrastructure, advice, resources, networking
opportunities, training and modest funding to enable groups to transition their
work into the marketplace or into becoming I-Corps Team applicants.
&lt;br/&gt;I-Corps Sites also strengthen innovation locally and regionally and
contribute to the National Innovation Network of mentors, researchers,
entrepreneurs and investors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dartmouth's I-Corps Site
provides intensive entrepreneurial training following the Lean LaunchPad
curriculum and resources for customer discovery and market need analysis to
90-112 teams of students, faculty, researchers, and mentors. The program bridges
campus wide research in science, engineering, medicine, and student projects,
all of which can lead to potential innovations - with Dartmouth's suite of
entrepreneurial services offered through its Office of Entrepreneurship and
Technology Transfer (OETT). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of
Dartmouth's I-Corps Site is the creation of a consistent curriculum that helps
scientists, engineers, and students frame their discoveries in the context of
how they can be used outside of the academic institution. The program helps a
nascent entrepreneurs to place their discovery into one of three categories:
continued academic exploration, pursuit of its use within the market discovered
through program participation, or reevaluation with the intent of determining
whether a market and need exists in a completely different area.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of the Dartmouth I-Corps Site is to engage
and equip more students and researchers at all levels - undergraduate, graduate,
post-doctoral, and faculty - to move their discoveries out of academia and into
the marketplace. Dartmouth I-Corps Lean LaunchPad workshops are held twice
annually during Dartmouth's interim periods in December and June. Using the
workshops as a springboard and seed funding from the grant, teams perform
customer discovery, form a value proposition, and determine market need and size
beginning with the workshop and for a three-month period following the workshop.
After completing the program, participants are prepared to either rethink their
discovery or move forward with commercialization. If a team concludes that a
discovery has commercial value, the team will be well positioned to take
advantage of the support of the OETT, the NSF I-Corps program, Dartmouth's
alumni support network, local angel investors, and other
organizations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: &lt;br/&gt;The broader
impacts of this program lie in its objective to create a campus environment that
fosters innovation and produces graduates who understand and can engage in
defining value and identifying need as they launch their careers. Dartmouth's
enrollment of underrepresented minorities and women in its undergraduate and
graduate STEM programs significantly exceed national averages; women represent
42% and 48%, respectively, of the current senior and junior engineering classes,
and 30% of declared Computer Science majors. Sciences consistently enroll
approximately 50% women. The engineering school's first-of-its-kind Ph.D.
Innovation program, established in 2008, has graduated 30% women or
underrepresented minorities. Feeders into Dartmouth's I-Corps Sites program come
from courses and research laboratories from across Dartmouth's college of Arts
&amp; Sciences and three professional schools and all levels and engage these
traditionally underrepresented populations in innovation as a natural outcome of
the project activities. In order to broaden impact to the years beyond the
I-Corps grant, investigators will use project outcomes to seek alumni support
for offering of the Site curriculum and seed funding programs semi-annually.