* 1547804
* EAGER: Adaptive Shared Memory Management for Heterogeneous CPU-GPU Architectures
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Xubin He, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Standard Grant
* Yuanyuan Yang
* 08/31/2018
* USD 300,000.00

Building efficient memory systems for exascale computing has nowadays become
extremely challenging. Applications running in exascale computing environments
are becoming increasingly diverse and complicated, making managing shared memory
system particularly difficult. Graphic Processing Units (GPUs) are entering
exascale computing as accelerators, imposing new technical challenges in sharing
memory. Non-volatile memory (NVM) has promising future in the memory/storage
hierarchy. It can be used to enlarge memory capacity and/or improve energy
efficiency. However, how to efficiently integrate NVM into current memory
architecture to build a highly efficient memory system remains an open problem.
This project proposes an adaptive shared memory management scheme to address the
memory interference problem in heterogeneous CPU-GPU architectures. A flexible
framework based on a hybrid memory model for integrating non-volatile memory
into a shared memory system will be developed. In addition, the project will
explore designs to build a unified address space for heterogeneous
architectures. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses the challenges in
exploring shared memory management schemes for heterogeneous architectures.
Proposed techniques of management for memory interference in both homogeneous
and heterogeneous architectures are well amenable to the high concurrency and
widely different interference patterns in exascale computing environments. These
techniques provide a compelling solution to managing shared memory for
heterogeneous systems. The proposed work can serve as a starting point to
conquer the bigdata and exascale computing challenges in terms of large-scale
memory and computer system design. Moreover, the proposed research will
facilitate the server clusters for memory-intensive applications to most
effectively utilize those existing/emerging architecture and system technologies
to tackle the memory challenge in heterogeneous CPU-GPU systems. The proposed
efficient shared memory management can benefit numerous memory-intensive
applications such as big data analytics, biology, chemistry, earth science, etc.
In addition, the project will integrate research and education together. It will
provide opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students to participate in
the research and help train a new generation of computer scientists and
engineers in the area of high-performance computing.