* 1547073
* EAGER/Cybermanufacturing: A Cloud-Based Additive Manufacturing and Quality System for Custom Orthoses and Prostheses
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,04/30/2019
* Albert Shih, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 04/30/2019
* USD 111,498.00

Orthoses are assistive devices for people with disabilities. It has been shown
that custom orthoses with personalized fits are more effective than their off-
the-shelf counterparts. However, the manufacture of custom orthoses currently
relies on the traditional plaster molding method, a technique with limited
accuracy and long delivery times. These concerns can be overcome by integrating
additive manufacturing into a cybermanufacturing system, enabling same-day or
next-day delivery and improving the fit and quality of custom orthoses. This
EArly-concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) project will broadly engage
computer science students in Software Engineering, an undergraduate capstone
course. Students from this class will be recruited to further develop the
cybermanufacturing service system they work on during the course.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research aims to investigate the fundamental
requirements for a cybermanufacturing system for custom orthoses. A cyber data
and design center outfitted with a software suite will automate the design,
manufacturing, and interactive verification with clinicians for personalized
orthoses. An industrial collaborator will advise on software development to
address the need of scalability in future full-scale implementation. An
innovative wavy porous structure will be implemented to optimize the production
time, strength, weight, and delivery time for additive manufacturing. The shape
mismatch between orthosis and the human subject will be determined to calculate
to improve the fit and patient comfort.