* 1547611
* S2I2: Impl: The Science Gateways Community Institute (SGCI) for the Democratization and Acceleration of Science
* CSE,OAC
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2023
* Linda Hayden, University of California-San Diego
* Cooperative Agreement
* Varun Chandola
* 07/31/2023
* USD 18,030,000.00

Science gateways are user-friendly web portals that make advanced computing,
data, networking and scientific instrumentation accessible and easily usable by
scientists at all levels, including students, thereby revolutionizing how
research and education is done in science. For example, scientists are
conducting biomedical studies through Galaxy, a science gateway for data
intensive biomedical research, as well as engaging citizens in investigating
lion density using Snapshot Serengeti, a science gateway for citizen science. By
being easily accessible via the Web, science gateways expand and democratize
access to supercomputers, telescopes, sensor networks, unique data collections,
collaborative spaces that enable the multidisciplinary collaborations needed to
solve complex problems, and analysis capabilities. Thus, science gateways expand
and broadening participation in science - an important goal of the National
Science Foundation (NSF). By increasing participation, science gateways increase
the NSF's return on investment in advanced technologies and facilities. The
Science Gateways Community Institute (SGCI) will speed the development and
application of robust, cost-effective, sustainable gateways to address the needs
of scientists and engineers across the sciences. The work of the institute will
increase the number as well as the effectiveness and usability of gateways to
science and engineering. This will result in broader gateway use and more
widespread conduct of science ranging from professionals to citizen scientists,
thus, directly amplifying the impact of the SGCI. Further, and very importantly,
the Institute's community engagement and exchange activities will, over time,
increase the audience for its services, and its partnerships with minority
professional organizations will ensure involvement in training and workforce
development from underrepresented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Science gateways are user-friendly web
portals that make advanced computing, data, networking and scientific
instrumentation accessible and easily usable by scientists at all levels,
including students, thereby revolutionizing how research and education is done
in science. Gateways enable scientists to test their assumptions more quickly,
providing them more time for deeper thinking about the types of problems that
have yet to be solved. In this way, gateways become "research amplifiers". They
also enable synthetic science - by using modelling and simulation tools powered
by high-performance computing - across ecosystems, geographic distances,
methodologies, and disciplines. However, and despite the presence of gateways
for many years, development of these environments is often done with ad-hoc
processes, limiting success, resource efficiency, and long-term impact.
Developers of gateways are often unaware that others have solved similar
challenges before, and do not know where to turn for advice or expertise. Thus,
projects waste money and time re-implementing the more basic functions rather
than building the value-added features for their unique audience. Many gateway
efforts fail. Some fail early by not understanding how to build communities of
users; others fail later by not developing plans for sustainability. The Science
Gateways Community Institute (SGCI) has been designed to address the above
limitations while providing career paths for gateway developers and for
students. The five-component design of the SGCI is the result of several years
of studies, including many focus groups and a 5,000-person survey of the
research community. Its Incubator component will provide shared expertise in
business and sustainability planning, cybersecurity, user interface design, and
software engineering practices. The Extended Developer Support component will
provide expert developers for up to one year to projects that request assistance
as well as demonstrating the potential to achieve impacts on their research
communities. The Scientific Software Collaborative component will offer a
component-based, open-source, extensible framework for gateway design,
integration, and services, including gateway hosting and capabilities for
external developers to integrate their own software into Institute offerings.
The Community Engagement and Exchange component will provide a forum for
communication and shared experiences among gateway developers, within NSF,
across federal agencies, and internationally. Finally, with its training
programs the Workforce Development component will increase the pipeline of
gateway developers, with special emphasis on recruiting underrepresented
minorities, and by helping universities form gateway support groups. In short,
the work of the institute will increase the number, ease of use, and effective
application of gateways to science and engineering, resulting in broader gateway
use and more widespread conduct of science ranging from professionals to citizen
scientists. The Institute's community engagement and exchange activities over
time will increase the audience for its services, and its partnerships with
minority professional organizations will ensure involvement in training and
workforce development from underrepresented groups.