* 1547981
* 12th International Conference on Gas-Liquid and Gas-Liquid-Solid Reactor Engineering; New York, NY
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2016
* Kevin Chin, American Institute of Chemical Engineers
* Standard Grant
* William Olbricht
* 06/30/2016
* USD 25,000.00

CBET-1547981&lt;br/&gt;PI: Chin, Kevin &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
support the participation of U.S. graduate students and postdoctoral fellows at
the 12th International Conference on Gas-Liquid and Gas-Liquid-Solid Reactor
Engineering, which will be held June 28 to July 1, 2015, in New York, NY. The
conference will focus on the special challenges scientists and engineers face in
the design and analysis of multiphase chemical reactors, which are essential
elements in many chemical processes. The conference, which is part of a series
that started in 1992, is an important platform for U.S. researchers to exchange
results and findings with their U.S. and international colleagues. This
particular event in the series will emphasize multiphase reaction engineering in
water and sustainable energy technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Gas-Liquid-
Solid Reactor Engineering conference series focuses on all aspects of
fundamentals and engineering of multiphase reactors and processes. Topics that
will be covered in the 12th International Conference include multiphase fluid
dynamics in chemical reactors, interfacial engineering, gas-liquid and gas-
liquid-solid transport, measurement and flow visualization techniques,
microreactor systems, and applications in biotechnology, energy, water and
environmental systems. In addition to plenary lectures and topical sessions, the
conference will organize site visits to nearby chemical plants and research
facilities, which will provide graduate students and postdoctoral fellows with
an opportunity to see multiphase systems in industrial research and practice.