* 1547770
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award: The Construction Of Identity And Foodways In A Borderland Zone
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2018
* Brigitte Kovacevich, Southern Methodist University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 12/31/2018
* USD 25,200.00

Whitney Goodwin, a PhD candidate, will investigate how groups actively negotiate
their identities and affiliations to navigate the complex social and political
landscapes of border areas. Border areas, both past and present, are locations
of frequent and often contentious redefinitions of the traditions that underlie
shared identities. Archaeological approaches to identity in border areas provide
the long-term and multi-scalar perspective necessary for understanding the
complex causes and consequences of these changes. What strategies were used to
resist change and were they successful? How and why were traditions from
neighboring groups sometimes borrowed or appropriated? This research is
concerned with addressing these questions by examining multiple classes of
materials and how these were combined in ways that reinforced or contested and
eventually redefined traditional practices. Understanding variation in responses
to border interactions and their long-term implications is significant given
they occur more widely and frequently today than ever before in human
history.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Prehispanic populations of northeastern Honduras
were positioned at the border of Mesoamerica and Lower Central America. Despite
shifting affiliations with groups to the north and south, the northeastern
region remained a cohesive entity with minimal social inequality and internally
shared styles and practices for over 1,200 years, beginning around A.D. 300.
Previous research suggests this long term stability can be attributed to the
active promotion of symbols of identity that purposefully blended local and
exotic styles to express both internal cohesion and strategic external
affiliations. The actual implementation of this strategy, however, remains
unexplored. Rather than rely on stylistic analyses alone, the present study
combines analyses of ceramic style with a concern for where and how ceramic
vessels were used in practice. In many cases, vessels that portray symbols or
designs expressing identity were combined with foods and practices that were
equally as important in defining or contesting those identities. By looking at
foodways - the resources and food-related practices particular to a group - in
conjunction with ceramic style, the possibility for multiple or conflicting
identities is recognized. If local groups were able to balance local tradition
with shifting affiliations, how was this accomplished? Were ceramic styles and
foodways signaling the same external affiliations or were there multiple or
competing influences represented? Archaeological excavations of communal
feasting events and the characterization of cooking residues in and stylistic
elements on ceramic vessels in these settings will provide a long-term
perspective on how both foods and styles were employed. Tracing how these
significant elements of identity were combined over time, and the source of
influences for both, will provide information for disentangling the processes by
which identity was negotiated and highlight the varied ways in which groups
embrace, appropriate, and resist change in response to interaction.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project includes significant collaboration with
descendent community leaders and government representatives to increase the
representation of indigenous heritage in the regional museum, with the goal of
encouraging tourists to visit local communities. Additionally, Honduran
undergraduate anthropology students are partaking in fieldwork and community
collaboration efforts, allowing them to fulfill their internship requirement for
degree completion.