* 1547091
* EAGER/Collaborative Research/Cyber Manufacturing: Cyber-Manufacturing Systems for Open Product Realization
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* S. Jack Hu, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 08/31/2020
* USD 215,231.00

Open Product Realization is a new paradigm of product design and manufacturing
where distributed consumers and suppliers actively participate and collaborate
in the process of design, fabrication and value creation. This EArly-concept
Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) project aims to develop scientific
principles and methods for designing cyber manufacturing systems in support of
open product realization through personalization involving user-in-the-loop
design, responsive manufacturing, and distributed assembly. Personalized
products will bring added value to the consumers because of the improved
usability and functionality. Personalization also has the potential to transform
the design and manufacture of consumer products by changing the design goal from
focusing on the product to focusing on the customer. In turn, manufacturers will
embrace the paradigm of open architecture products and personalization, enabling
a new culture of open collaboration and innovation. Entrepreneurs will be
attracted to such a paradigm because it provides a new platform for innovation.
New companies will be created to participate in the design of innovative modules
and products to enhance product functionality. Therefore, this project will have
the potential to significantly impact the U.S. economy and society as a whole.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cyber-manufacturing algorithms and technologies will be
developed to enable personalized design under assembly constraints, and rapid
fabrication and assembly methods for product co-creation. More natural
interfaces using tablets and cloud-based computing will be created to support
personalized design and manufacturing. The research tasks are: (1) "Art-to-part"
cyber platforms enabling the customer to create, manipulate, and modify virtual
shapes in a straightforward manner, and visualize the final product after
assembly; (2) Process planning and quality control tools for rapid manufacturing
of personalized modules using additive manufacturing; and (3) Integration of
individual tools and system-level validation with a distributed test bed
approach to realize an industrial-scale system. Students will learn, collaborate
and innovate by participating in the research as "customers", designers, and
manufacturers.