* 1547457
* CICI: Secure Data Architecture: CapNet: Secure Scientific Workloads with Capability Enabled Networks
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2015,03/31/2019
* Jacobus VAN DER MERWE, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 03/31/2019
* USD 499,999.00

Modern scientific experiments have outgrown the capacity of a single lab.
&lt;br/&gt;They require the storage and processing power of a datacenter,
involve &lt;br/&gt;cross-institutional access to sensitive data, and span
multiple domains of &lt;br/&gt;administrative trust. In such a setting, security
is fragile. In the face of &lt;br/&gt;steady growth of sophisticated cyber-
attack tools, modern server and desktop &lt;br/&gt;machines are fundamentally
insecure. Over a hundred critical &lt;br/&gt;vulnerabilities that allow
unrestricted access to the entire system are &lt;br/&gt;discovered in the Linux
kernel each year. Lacking flexibility to express &lt;br/&gt;fine-grained access
control policies, modern networks often give vulnerable &lt;br/&gt;hosts
excessive or even unrestricted connectivity to the rest of the network.
&lt;br/&gt;An exploit of any host enables attackers to explore, exploit and take
control &lt;br/&gt;over an entire cyber facility. Without support from the
network, scientific &lt;br/&gt;facilities will remain vulnerable.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CapNet is a network architecture that enables secure,
least privilege &lt;br/&gt;collaboration in the cross-institutional environment
of a modern research &lt;br/&gt;facility. Building on the principles of
capability access control, this &lt;br/&gt;research develops key elements needed
to secure a network of a modern &lt;br/&gt;scientific infrastructure: 1) "off by
default" behavior, with connectivity &lt;br/&gt;granted on as-needed basis; 2)
mechanisms for decentralized, &lt;br/&gt;application-driven dynamic management
of connectivity; and 3) a formal &lt;br/&gt;foundation enabling secure
collaboration of fine-grained, dynamic, &lt;br/&gt;multi-institutional
principals. The basis for CapNet's design is strong &lt;br/&gt;isolation of
network activities with the mechanisms of software defined &lt;br/&gt;networks
(SDN) and mediation of all communication between network hosts by &lt;br/&gt;a
capability access control model. CapNet represents the network as an access
&lt;br/&gt;control graph. Nodes are network hosts, edges (or "capabilities") are
&lt;br/&gt;pointers to other hosts allowing communication and further exchange
of rights. &lt;br/&gt;By controlling the initial distribution of capabilities
and their flow, CapNet &lt;br/&gt;governs network interactions through fine-
grained, application-driven policies &lt;br/&gt;that enable safe collaboration
among multiple institutions and third-party &lt;br/&gt;services. Finally, while
taking a holistic approach to network access control, &lt;br/&gt;CapNet remains
practical: it retains compatibility with unmodified network &lt;br/&gt;network
stacks, integrates with existing datacenter and cloud management
&lt;br/&gt;stacks, enables incremental adoption, and is fast and scalable.