* 1547205
* INSPIRE: Optimization Algorithms for Regional Thermoelectric Power Generation with Nonlinear Interference
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Matthew Johnson, Research Foundation Of The City University Of New York (Lehman)
* Standard Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 08/31/2020
* USD 316,000.00

This INSPIRE project is jointly funded by the Algorithmic Foundations program in
the Computing and Communications Foundations Division in the Directorate for
Computer and Information Science and Engineering, the Environmental
Sustainability program in the Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental, and
Transport Systems Division in the Directorate for Engineering, and the Office of
Integrative Activities (OIA) INSPIRE program.

A thermoelectric power plant's operations can affect its surrounding
environment, for example by raising water temperatures, which can be harmful to
aquatic life, and so must comply with government regulation such as the Clean
Water Act (CWA). It has recently been observed that the effects of power plants'
operations can be much longer-reaching and subtler than this, however: the use
of this warmer water by a second power plant located downstream can degrade that
plant's efficiency, causing it in turn to heat the river water more than it
otherwise would have, or even forcing it to shut down in order to comply with
the CWA. Such complex dynamics characterizing the joint effects of a region's
power plants suggest possible gains from managing plants jointly rather than
individually. This analytical perspective prompts consideration of a huge
variety of potential benefits to seek and costs to avoid in optimizing regional
plant operations, and the interference phenomenon prompts (re)consideration of a
number of classical algorithmic problems in the field of combinatorial
optimization. This research offers many potential societal benefits in terms of
environmental protection, economic savings, energy security, protection from
blackouts, public health, and so on. Insights provided by the algorithmic
solutions this project develops will be conveyed to decision makers and, if
successful, will ultimately lead to improvements in management practices in
existing plants and in long-range strategic planning. The project will provide
research training for graduate students and will expose undergraduates at Lehman
College and CCNY (both Minority-Serving Institutions) to interdisciplinary
scientific research.

This project will inaugurate the study of a novel class of combinatorial
optimization problems. More specifically, it will investigate new variations on
classical problems such as knapsack and job scheduling, modified to incorporate
a distinctive feature of the motivating application setting, i.e. the *nonlinear
interference* that can occur between active power plants. The PI and his team
will design efficient (near-)optimal algorithms for these problems in the sense
of guaranteed approximation, and, leveraging existing analytical models, they
will perform algorithmic engineering studies assessing their algorithms' real-
world viability. Finally, using tools from algorithmic game theory, they will
quantify and provide a rigorous foundation for the perceived benefits of solving
the motivating plant management problems jointly rather than plant-by-plant.