* 1547821
* CREST Center for the Integrated Study of Coastal E
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2022
* Margaret Sexton, University of Maryland Eastern Shore
* Continuing Grant
* Luis Cubano
* 08/31/2022
* USD 5,000,000.00

Center for the Integrated Study of Coastal Ecosystem Processes and Dynamics in
the Mid-Atlantic Region&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With National Science Foundation
support, the University of Maryland Eastern Shore will continue operations of
the Center for the Integrated Study of Coastal Ecosystem Processes and Dynamics
in the Mid-Atlantic Region. This Center brings together a team of scientists
with expertise in geochemistry, phytoplankton and zooplankton ecology, fish
ecology, environmental microbiology, biogeochemistry, and physical oceanography
to conduct a collaborative study of the effects of climate variability on
trophic interactions and food web dynamics, exchange of materials between
Maryland Coastal Bays and the coastal ocean, and dynamics of heterotrophic
bacteria. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Coastal lagoons such as Maryland Coastal Bays
are very productive ecosystems that serve as nurseries for many economically and
ecologically important species of finfish and shellfish. Coastal lagoons have
restricted water exchanges with the coastal ocean. As a result, they are not
well flushed, and are vulnerable to nutrient enrichment and pollutant
accumulation. The Center for the Integrated Study of Coastal Ecosystem Processes
and Dynamics in the Mid-Atlantic Region emphasis is on understanding the
dynamics and processes within the Maryland coastal lagoon and estuarine
ecosystems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A hydrodynamic model will be developed and used
to evaluate the magnitude of material transport between the Maryland Coastal
Bays and the coastal ocean through the northern and southern inlets. A particle
tracking model will be used to assess the dispersal and retention of gelatinous
zooplankton and ichthyoplankton in the Maryland Coastal Bays. Additionally,
information on the dynamics of heterotrophic bacteria including Vibrio species
will be examined, and the possible role of Vibrio as a stressor leading to co-
infection by other microbes in crabs will be investigated. Abiotic and biotic
variables will be used to develop models for predicting the occurrence of Vibrio
species.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Center for the Integrated Study of Coastal
Ecosystem Processes and Dynamics in the Mid-Atlantic Region will positively
impact the number of minority students that obtain degrees in marine and
environmental sciences. The Center will integrate research and education by
recruiting and educating high school students, middle school and high school
teachers, and undergraduate and graduate students, particularly members of
underrepresented groups.