* 1547516
* Space geodetic observations and modeling of co- and post-seismic deformation due to the 2015 M7.8 Gorkha (Nepal) earthquake
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2017
* Yuri Fialko, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Continuing Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 12/31/2017
* USD 194,000.00

The 2015 magnitude 7.8 Gorkha (Nepal) earthquake was the largest earthquake at
the southern edge of Tibet in the last 80 years. We will use precise
measurements of surface deformation to study the earthquake rupture, as well
slow relaxation of the Earth?s crust following the earthquake. These
measurements will bear on a long-standing debate about mechanical properties and
strength of rocks comprising the lower crust and upper mantle beneath Tibet. We
will compare and contrast the observed deformation due to the 2015 Gorkha
earthquake with observations from other large events in the region, in
particular the 2005 Kashmir (Pakistan) earthquake. This will result in better
understanding of seismic hazards in Nepal and surrounding areas.

The 2015 Gorkha earthquake was well imaged by the recently launched
Interferometric Synthetic Aperture Radar (InSAR) missions, such as ALOS-2 and
Sentinel-1. Short revisit times and wide-swath coverage of new operating
satellites will allow measurements of postseismic deformation due to a major
shallow thrust earthquake in unprecedented details. We will use coseismic radar
interferograms from different lines of sight to derive a well-constrained finite
slip model of the 2015 Gorkha earthquake. Because the earthquake epicentral area
is characterized by a highly variable relief, we will evaluate the effects of
topography by comparing results of inversions assuming elastic half-space, and
finite element models that explicitly account for topography. These models will
also accurately account for the 3-D elastic structure of the crust, as inferred
from seismic tomography data. We will process and analyze a rich 2-year-long
catalog of radar acquisitions in the earthquake area, generate time series of
postseismic deformation, and combine available InSAR and GPS data to investigate
the mechanisms of postseismic relaxation. Data and modeling results generated
under the auspices of this project will be made available to a wider research
community.