* 1547154
* EAGER/Cybermanufacturing: WYSIWYG (What You See Is What You Get) Middleware for Additive Manufacturing
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Wojciech Matusik, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 08/31/2019
* USD 300,000.00

Custom products can offer advantages over their mass-produced counterparts,
including greater comfort, unique aesthetic appeal, and/or better performance.
Additive manufacturing promises cost-effective fabrication of such custom
products, and there has been steady progress in the additive manufacturing
hardware, the range of available materials, and the production cost. However,
taking advantage of additive manufacturing for customization requires new types
of digital models and software applications. Current solutions to this problem
either provide very restricted customization, or do not guarantee that the
customized objects are valid and can be fabricated to the desired
specifications. This EArly-concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER)
project award supports research to establish a software framework for additive
manufacturing that provides a substantially easier and a more scalable way of
developing domain-specific software applications supporting an interactive,
highly-predictive preview of digital objects. The design exploration tools and
accurate preview mechanisms will enable additive manufacturing according to
precise dimensional specifications. This translates to enormous time and
material cost savings, accelerating the adoption of additive manufacturing. This
software framework will be made available to a large population of expert
designers, engineers, hobbyists, and students, facilitating design exploration,
manufacturing, and customization of both industrial and consumer
products.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The software framework will be a middleware that
allows development of domain-specific applications for digitally-driven
manufacturing, and will be informed by quantitative knowledge of the design
space that can be realized by a given additive process. To realize this goal,
the following components are to be designed and built: (1) general
representations for physically realizable, end-user customizable digital object
families encapsulated within domain-specific applications; (2) data-driven
methods for an accurate and computationally efficient characterization of
additive manufacturing processes, including identification and mitigation of
geometric imperfections, feature size bounds, and intrinsic process defects; (3)
methods for an interactive and highly-predictive exploration of the design space
spanned by a given object family and a desired manufacturing process; and (4)
computationally tractable methods for optimizing process parameters for a
desired digital object and a specific additive manufacturing material-machine
combination.