* 1547873
* I-Corps Sites:  Expanding the Innovation Ecosystem at Washington State University
* TIP,TI
* 01/15/2016,12/31/2022
* Howard Davis, Washington State University
* Continuing Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2022
* USD 411,724.00

This project, from Washington State University (WSU) creates an I-Corps Site at
this institution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NSF Innovation Corps (I-Corps) Sites are
NSF-funded entities established at universities whose purpose is to nurture and
support multiple, local teams to transition their technology concepts into the
marketplace. Sites provide infrastructure, advice, resources, networking
opportunities, training and modest funding to enable groups to transition their
work into the marketplace or into becoming I-Corps Team applicants.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The WSU Site serves as mechanism for collaboration across
campus, acting as a structure for providing experiential learning opportunities
for students and faculty. By expanding the connectivity between related programs
on and off campus, the Site realizes benefits that transcend the individual
efforts and enhance WSU's contribution to the national innovation ecosystem as
well as the geographical region around WSU.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of
WSU's I-Corps Site is to enhance and broaden access to existing entrepreneurship
programs within their experiential entrepreneurship ecosystem. To accomplish
this goal, 30 to 40 I-Corps Teams per year are supported, expanding startup
generation activities to include an 8-week training and idea development
process. Each supported Team produces a draft business model for a university
technology or Site-generated business idea. Those Teams emerge ready to pursue
funding or partnership opportunities through the Site network and national
I-Corps Network. Ultimately, WSU will provide a core blueprint for
student/faculty collaborative experiential entrepreneurship training which will
provide additional pathways for STEM students to engage with faculty in the
business assessment of new technology ideas. Bringing WSU into the I-Corps
national network allows Site Leaders to accelerate the positive startup culture
velocity achieved in the last few years.