* 1547139
* Collaborative Research: Patronage and Political Exchange Networks in a Municipal Legislature: Discretionary Spending on Nonprofit Organizations in New York City
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2015,09/30/2016
* Nicole Marwell, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* chu-hsiang chang
* 09/30/2016
* USD 63,223.00

Scholars from a wide variety of disciplines increasingly agree that the
governance of contemporary economic and political life operates through complex
and shifting webs of organizational relations. This complexity often hides the
locus of decision making, raising key problems of accountability for citizens
and interest groups of all kinds. Public policy governance systems offer
important opportunities to understand these dynamics and their consequences,
because public policy by nature attempts to adjudicate among competing interests
to produce some form of public good. This project examines legislators'
decisions to allocate public funds to private nonprofit organizations that
provide social services in a large city. As the proportion of publicly-supported
welfare services privately provided has grown, nonprofit organizations
increasingly mediate the relationship between local legislators and their
constituencies. In turn, nonprofits have become increasingly dependent on
government contracts, leaving the amount and quality of public services that
citizens experience greatly affected by nonprofits' location and capacity to
attract funding. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;How legislators allocate discretionary
public funds to nonprofits reveals two key dynamics of social welfare
governance: patronage relationships between legislators, their constituencies,
and local nonprofits; and political exchange relationships between legislators.
Patronage involves delivering and claiming credit for public resources allocated
to a legislator's district. Presumably, the reward for successful patronage is
re-election by one's constituents. Political exchange involves deals cut among
legislators that lead to the allocation of public resources to a legislator's
district, and/or to specific votes on legislation. Focusing on the network
structure produced by this governance system and its consequences for specific
citizen constituencies, this project asks: (1) What is the structure of
patronage relationships between municipal legislators and their district
constituencies? And how does it relate to the re-election prospects of municipal
legislators, the growth of nonprofit organizations, and citizens' needs? (2)
What is the structure of political exchange relationships among municipal
legislators? And what are legislators' individual and district characteristics
that make them more likely to initiate and reciprocate exchange patterns? (3)
How does the structure of political exchange relate to whether consequential
legislative proposals are passed?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: This
project contributes to three distinct literatures: (1) By studying sociological
processes through a social network approach, it provides a contemporary picture
of patronage patterns at the community level, assesses the mutual dependence of
legislators and nonprofit organizations, and evaluates the distributive
consequences for citizens' welfare. (2) Public administration scholars are
concerned with the relative balance of managerial best practices and
distributional equity in state administration. This is the first study that
examines how patronage fits into a larger system of merit-based public service
contracting. (3) This project also advances political science's understanding of
distributive politics by disentangling mechanisms of patronage and exchange at
the local level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: In conjunction with prior
NSF-funded work, this project will allow comparison of 3 mechanisms of public
resource allocation to nonprofit organizations: patronage, political exchange,
and competition. Project results will be communicated via a written policy brief
and presentations to audiences in government, the nonprofit sector, and the
media. The dataset resulted from the project will offer an important resource to
scholars, practitioners, and government officials. It also provides a model set
of procedures for constructing datasets for other cities or states that have
similar discretionary forms of public resource allocation.