* 1547315
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award: The Role Of Ritual In The Construction Of Social Organization
* SBE,BCS
* 11/15/2015,10/31/2017
* David Chicoine, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 10/31/2017
* USD 25,024.00

Dr. David Chicoine and doctoral candidate Ms. Kimberly Munro, both of Louisiana
State University, examine the long-term use of ceremonial landscapes and
construction of religious buildings in the ancient Andes. Their research focuses
on the persistence of sacred monuments as places of public gatherings,
collective memory, social interactions, and political negotiation. Archaeology
is particularly well positioned to provide longitudinal perspectives on
religious and political movements and their role in shaping the trajectory of
ancient civilizations, especially their material manifestations. Such traditions
in many regions of the world continue up to the present day and play an
important role in shaping peoples' behaviors. Thus studies such as this one have
relevance in a modern day context. In the Central Andes, the unique mountainous
terrain has shaped the development of subsistence strategies, trade and
religious networks. Previous archaeological research has focused either on the
Pacific coast or the high elevation plains, lagoons, and mountain peaks, leaving
mid-elevation regions under studied. Yet, these regions provide unique
geographic conditions, ecologies, and landscapes with significant potential to
become valued and powerful agents of symbolic constructs and religious
worship.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The researchers employ mapping and excavation
methods to study successive episodes of monumental ceremonial constructions at
the Cosma Archaeological Complex, a basin located 2600 meters above sea level in
the upper reaches of the Nepe√±a Valley, north-central Peru. Data from
architectural designs, visual arts, ritual objects, mortuary contexts, landscape
features and occupation sequences are used to shed light on the development of
local identities, their materialities, and relation to overarching political
networks from the late Preceramic Period (3000-1800 BCE) to the Early Horizon
(900-100 BCE). Ultimately, the project examines the rise to regional prominence
of a ritual, and likely pilgrimage center with a long and persistent history of
religious influence. Previous archaeological work has often focused on the
collapse and regeneration of polities and associated ideologies. Instead, this
project seeks to understand the stability of a place over time and the changing
influences of trends that go in and out of favor. Data obtained may shed light
on the plurality of identity in zones of dynamic cultural interactions. This
project will produce comparative data of interest to broad sections of
anthropology and archaeology. It will provide training to doctoral candidate Ms.
Kimberly Munro, as well as generate primary data for her PhD dissertation. All
primary data will be stored permanently and made publicly accessible. Results
will be disseminated through various venues including official field reports,
peer-review manuscripts and conference papers. Finally, the researchers will
help train US and Peruvian students in archaeological field techniques. Such
collaborations strengthen academic bonds between US and Peruvian institutions
and have broader impacts for the development international relationships.