* 1547899
* Collaborative Research: Assessing and Understanding Climate Change in South America
* GEO,AGS
* 05/15/2016,10/31/2020
* Paul Loikith, Portland State University
* Standard Grant
* Varavut Limpasuvan
* 10/31/2020
* USD 269,989.00

The observational temperature and precipitation records suggest that several
regions of South America are already experiencing the effects of climate change.
An overarching goal of this project is to determine whether observed changes in
key climate variables, such as precipitation, temperature, and humidity are a
result of human activities, related to naturally occurring climate variability,
or a combination of both. Given its influential agricultural sector, climate
variability and change in South America can have global ramifications.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This goal will be accomplished through two tasks. The
first task is to assess whether the changes in these key climate variables
differ significantly from trends that could arise as a result of naturally
occurring climate variability. The extent to which humans have influenced
climate over the continent to date will also be quantified. The second task will
be to systematically examine mechanisms leading to natural climate variability
over South America, including patterns of variability such as the El Ni√±o
Southern Oscillation. Using this comprehensive understanding of the natural and
anthropogenic influences on observed changes in climate, the ability of current
state-of-the-art climate models to reproduce these features in simulations of
the past will be evaluated. In the case that a given climate model can simulate
observed trends in climate and features of natural climate variability with
reasonable skill, confidence in future projections of climate can be boosted. A
major goal of this project to develop methods of conveying the multi-dimensional
nature of the investigation results in a concise and easily interpretable way to
better inform those communities interested in climate information for South
America. Furthermore, the approaches and methods used here will be extensible to
other regions of the world. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Key results of the project
will be presented, interpreted, and made publicly available via a user-friendly
website to serve both scientific and non-scientific audiences. These results
will be communicated throughout the South American climate science and
information communities via an email list associated with the World Climate
Research Programme's Coordinated Regional Climate Downscaling Experiment
(CORDEX). Additionally, the project will support the professional development of
a postdoctoral scientist and a graduate student. All team members will
participate in publishing results in peer-reviewed scientific journals and in
reporting results at relevant professional conferences and meetings. In all
cases, the presentation style will aim to the broad community interested in
South American climate science and information.