* 1547330
* Collaborative Research: EARS: Spectrum and Energy Efficient Radio Resource Access in Wireless Networks with Densely Deployed Underlay Devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2019
* Hamid Sharif, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 08/31/2019
* USD 300,000.00

Wireless traffic volume is expected to expand tremendously in the next few
years. Sustaining this growing trend will require high spectrum efficiency. In
the meantime, energy efficiency has become another essential requirement for
future wireless networks. Furthermore, as video content delivery over wireless
networks is expected to escalate fast, how to support these energy and bandwidth
consuming video applications with high Quality of Experience is becoming a very
challenging issue in future wireless networks. Inspired by recent advances in
wireless technologies and challenges, the proposed research aims to develop
Quality of Experience aware spectrum efficient and energy efficient radio
resource access schemes in next generation wireless networks with densely
deployed underlay devices. The proposed research project and activities have
significant potentials to enhancing access to the radio spectrum and wireless
services. The project will investigate a new wireless network paradigm to meet
the ever increasing new devices, wireless traffic demand, and to address the
needs on global environmental protection. The proposed research will also
improve Quality of Experience for wireless videos, which will be the dominant
wireless traffic in the coming years. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
identify unique technical challenges in wireless networks with densely deployed
underlay devices and explore new solutions to research problems, including
distributed opportunistic spectrum access schemes to achieve high spectrum
efficiency, optimum energy efficiency schemes and energy and spectrum efficiency
tradeoffs, and Quality of Experience aware spectrum efficiency and energy
efficiency in wireless networks with densely deployed underlay devices.
Theoretical analysis and performance evaluation for novel radio spectrum access
schemes in wireless networks with densely deployed underlay devices will be
obtained. Simulation and performance evaluation tools will be developed and
shared with the broader scientific research and engineering community. The
proposed research will significantly advance the understanding in the field of
radio spectrum efficiency and energy efficiency as well as Quality of Experience
for video applications for emerging wireless networks with densely deployed
underlay devices, which are expected to play a key role in the modem society to
meet the future wireless capacity explosion and energy consumption escalation.
The project will give both undergraduate and graduate students direct simulation
modeling experience as well as research opportunities in designing and
developing new wireless technologies. With an emphasis on integrating research
and education, curriculum development and improvement, and diversity and
outreach, PIs are committed on the continuous achievement on educating and
training students, especially female students and students from under-
represented groups, and prepare them for the workforces of future wireless
telecommunications industry and society.