* 1547268
* CICI: Secure Data Architecture: CILogon 2.0 - An Integrated Identity and Access Management Platform for Science
* CSE,OAC
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2018
* James Basney, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 12/31/2018
* USD 499,973.00

When scientists work together, they use web sites and other software to share
their ideas and data. To ensure the integrity of their work, these systems
require the scientists to log in and verify that they are part of the team
working on a particular science problem. Too often, the identity and access
verification process is a stumbling block for the scientists. Scientific
research projects are forced to invest time and effort into developing and
supporting Identity and Access Management (IdAM) services, distracting them from
the core goals of their research collaboration. The "CILogon 2.0" project
provides an IdAM platform that enables scientists to work together to meet their
IdAM needs more effectively so they can allocate more time and effort to their
core mission of scientific research. To ensure that the project makes a real
contribution to scientific collaborations, the researchers have partnered with
the Laser Interferometer Gravitational-Wave Observatory (LIGO) Scientific
Collaboration, the North American Nanohertz Observatory for Gravitational Waves
(NANOGrav) Physics Frontiers Center, and the Data Observation Network for Earth
(DataONE). The project also provides training and outreach to additional
scientific collaborations, and the project supports integration with the Extreme
Science and Engineering Discovery Environment (XSEDE), which provides a
national-scale cyberinfrastructure for scientific research in the
US.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Prior to the "CILogon 2.0" project, the CILogon and
COmanage projects separately developed platforms for federated identity
management and collaborative organization management. Federated identity
management enables researchers to use their home organization identities to
access cyberinfrastructure, rather than requiring yet another username and
password to log on. Collaborative organization management enables research
projects to define user groups for authorization to collaboration platforms
(e.g., wikis, mailing lists, and domain applications). The "CILogon 2.0" project
integrates and expands on the existing CILogon and COmanage software to provide
an integrated Identity and Access Management (IdAM) platform for
cyberinfrastructure. This IdAM platform serves the unique needs of research
collaborations, namely the need to dynamically form collaboration groups across
organizations and countries, sharing access to data, instruments, compute
clusters, and other resources to enable scientific discovery. The project
provides a software-as-a-service platform to ease integration with
cyberinfrastructure, while making all software components publicly available
under open source licenses to enable re-use.