* 1547277
* Collaborative Research: EARS: Broadband Mobile Wireless Access Using mm-Waves Bands Beyond 100 GHz
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2015,05/31/2019
* Michel Kornegay, Morgan State University
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 05/31/2019
* USD 175,131.00

The importance of wireless communication on the quality of our lives and on our
economy cannot be overstated. While network operators and researchers have done
a tremendous job to improve the capacity of existing networks, there is a strong
need to explore new options to support the exponentially growing wireless
Internet traffic. This research will investigate a completely new spectrum in
the mm-wave band that could enable Gigabit links for mobile users, allowing
network operators to expand capacity in a graceful manner. Up to now, mm-wave
communication has been mostly limited to either point-to-point links or to
short-range communication for fixed terminals. Using mm-wave radios for mobile
communication requires a complete rethinking and co-design of the circuits,
antennas, packages, and systems and protocols. This research will explore the
design of mm-wave circuits and systems at 120 GHz, enabling large arrays of
radios to communicate with very high data rates (&gt; 10 Gbps) over relatively
long ranges (hundreds of meters). Compared to research below 100 GHz, this area
is relatively unexplored, with only about a dozen demonstrations of working
transceivers. The research team will investigate system and circuit
architectures to support beam forming, beam nulling, multi-user MIMO (multiple-
input multiple-output), allowing efficient spectrum re-use through spatial
filtering and interference rejection. Novel circuit design concepts will be
prototyped in 28 nm CMOS (Complementary Metal-Oxide Silicon) technology along
with GaN (Gallium Nitride) transistors for high power transmission. Today's mm-
wave transmitters are extremely inefficient when the waveform has a high peak to
average ratio (2% average efficiency), whereas the proposed transmitter
architectures will increase both the output power and efficiency by an order of
magnitude. The range of mm-wave systems realized in CMOS, particularly without
the use of lens, will also be increased from a few meters to hundreds of meters.
This research will enable the exploitation of completely untapped spectrum for
5G cellular and beyond applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical
objective of the proposed collaborative research project is to focus on circuit
and system level realization of a hardware platform that can enable the study of
optimal beam forming and beam nulling (interference cancellation), while
allowing practical measurements to be carried out on the propagation
characteristics of indoor and outdoor channels above 100 GHz. Specifically, the
PI, co-PI and a team of researchers will design and implement key building
blocks for the transceiver to enable measurement and characterization of
communication above 100 GHz. This project involves four main thrust areas to be
investigated. The first thrust area will focus on transmitter circuit design and
integration challenges and explore technology limits for silicon-based power
amplifiers for MIMO applications in CMOS, especially above 100 GHz. The second
thrust will provide insight regarding the integration of GaN transistors with
CMOS to allow for high-density logic for digital signal processing and waveform
shaping, and high breakdown voltage GaN devices for power generation. The third
thrust will focus on antenna and system architectures to support beam forming
with special attention to solving problems regarding LO (local oscillator)
generation and distribution and finding the optimal configuration to minimize
power consumption in a large array. The final thrust area will focus on
investigating system level integration challenges from the sub-modules developed
in the other thrust areas to produce a 120GHz transceiver.