* 1547048
* A New Paradigm for Spectrum Sharing between Wireless Communications and Radio Astronomy
* MPS,AST
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2019
* Jin Liu, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Jon Williams
* 12/31/2019
* USD 596,737.00

This EARS (Enhancing Access to the Radio Spectrum) program was founded in
response to the 2010 Presidential Memorandum on Unleashing the Wireless
Broadband Revolution mandated by Congress as part of the National Broadband
Plan. It was referenced in 2010 State of the Union and later on the Middle Class
Tax Relief and Job Creation Act of 2012 (More than 1/3 of the bill deals with
radio spectrum), the PCAST 2012 Report [President's Council of Advisors on
Science and Technology] (which calls for vastly increased use of spectrum
sharing) and the 2013 Presidential memo (Expanding America's Leadership in
Wireless Innovation). The aim of this program is to identify bold new concepts
with the potential to contribute to significant improvements in the efficiency
of radio spectrum utilization, protection of passive sensing services, and in
the ability for traditionally underserved Americans to benefit from current and
future wireless-enabled goods and services. The impact is large on the economics
of the Nation as seen on the last FCC bidding of 65MHz of the spectrum for over
$45 billion early in 2015. It will enable access to science, engineering,
industry, civilian and military users of the radio frequency (RF)
spectrum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Active wireless systems (which transmit and
receive RF signals) such as cellular wireless communications have generated
numerous advancements in our society and tremendous impacts on the national
economy. Passive wireless systems (which only receive usually very faint
signals) such as radio astronomy and earth exploration remote sensing have
provided economically and scientifically important observations of Earth's
environment, our solar system and the cosmos (e.g., weather forecasting,
observation of solar flares which could affect infrastructure and lives on
Earth). Both types of systems play crucial roles for the growth of humanity,
thus their advancements need to be accommodated. However, their spectrum
requirements are growing and conflicting to a large degree, and radio frequency
interference (RFI) from active systems to passive systems is an increasing
concern. This calls for a new paradigm of spectrum access and sharing that can
cope with the future's needs. This project proposes such a paradigm between
cellular wireless communications (CWC) and radio astronomy systems (RAS).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project develops a novel time and frequency division
spectrum access between CWC and RAS, which not only resolves the spectrum
requirement conflict but also enhances spectrum access opportunities for both
systems. Instead of relying on the geographical isolation of RAS telescopes to
avoid RFI, the project introduces a geographical coexistence paradigm between
CWC and RAS through the use of a large number of distributed auxiliary radio
telescopes (DARTs). The very large scale DARTs will suppress the RFI issue and
potentially enable a quantum leap in RAS's capabilities. In addition, the
project develops novel adaptive circuitry and signal processing algorithms to
handle the RFI issue efficiently. In brief, this project develops an
interdisciplinary and mutually-beneficial technical solution and framework for
spectrum access of CWC and RAS through coordination between them. CWC could gain
more spectrum access opportunities which will enable more wireless
services/applications and new business opportunities, thus expanding and
enriching the national economy. RAS will secure more spectrum access
opportunities and enhanced astronomical observation capabilities, thus
accelerating its contributions to the fundamental science, knowledge of the
universe, and protection of lives on Earth through space environmental
information.