* 1547137
* Collaborative Research: Extratropical Triggering of El Nino/Southern Oscillation (ENSO) Events Through the Trade-Wind Charging Mechanism
* GEO,AGS
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2021
* Benjamin Kirtman, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 08/31/2021
* USD 343,452.00

El Nino/Southern Oscillation (ENSO) events affect weather and climate worldwide,
with El Nino impacts over the United States including flooding in California,
mild winters in Alaska and the northern tier, and drier conditions in the Ohio
valley, with largely opposite conditions during La Nina, or cold phase ENSO,
events. The predictability of ENSO is a matter of both practical and scientific
interest, and there have been many efforts to identify precursor patters in sea
surface temperature (SST), sea level pressure (SLP), and other variables so that
the onset of ENSO events can be anticipated several months to seasons in
advance. The PIs have proposed a novel mechanism through which changes in
surface wind over the North Pacific associated with the North Pacific
Oscillation (NPO, a prominent mode of Northern Hemisphere climate variability)
can lead to ENSO events 9 to 12 months later. The mechanism, dubbed trade-wind
charging (TWC), involves the southward transport of relatively warm subsurface
waters from the central subtropical North Pacific, driven by the curl of the
surface wind stress anomalies associated with the NPO (a Sverdrup transport).
The southward heat transport warms the ocean thermocline in the central
equatorial Pacific, thus creating favorable conditions for the development of an
El Nina event (a similar chain of events can promote a La Nina event starting
from the opposite phase of the NPO). The examination of the TWC mechanism
involves testing three related hypotheses: 1) Positive and negative trade wind
charging (TWC) of the equatorial Pacific heat content in isolation is sufficient
to generate warm and cold boreal winter ENSO events, respectively; 2) Positive
and negative TWC enhances the efficacy of initial subsurface ocean conditions in
generating warm and cold boreal winter ENSO events; and 3) Positive TWC enhances
the efficacy of Meridional Mode (MM) dynamics in generating warm boreal winter
ENSO events. The research is performed through experiments with a climate model,
the Coupled Model version 2.5 developed at the NOAA Geophysical Fluid Dynamics
Laboratory. In one set of experiments, the ocean component model is integrated
subject to surface atmospheric conditions taken from reanalysis products, so
that the ocean state bears the imprint of an observed NPO event, after which the
ocean is coupled to the atmospheric component model and the fully coupled
climate model is integrated for several additional months to track the
development (or lack thereof) of a TWC-induced ENSO event.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work has broader impacts due to the societal value of
better long-lead predictions of ENSO events, as noted above. More specifically,
the research offers specific targets for the evaluation of operational forecast
model used for ENSO prediction, and the PIs plan to develop an index that can be
used to monitor TWC behavior relevant to ENSO prediction. In addition, the
project supports a graduate student and a postdoctoral research associate,
thereby providing future workforce development in this research area.