* 1547603
* Collaborative Research: From Loading to Rupture - how do fault geometry and material heterogeneity affect the earthquake cycle?
* GEO,EAR
* 03/15/2016,07/31/2019
* Brittany Erickson, Portland State University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Raterron
* 07/31/2019
* USD 241,759.00

Analyzing the hazards that accompany large earthquakes requires an understanding
of the interplay between the long term motion of tectonic plates and the
structural features near active faults. As tectonic plates move and deform,
faults (or cracks) between and embedded in the plates do not slide but are
locked due to frictional resistance. As time passes (tens to hundreds of years
for large earthquakes) the stress on these faults increases. An earthquake
rupture occurs when the level of stress resolved on the fault exceeds the
frictional resistance (at least in some local region of the fault). Thus
modeling the full earthquake cycle (tectonic loading, nucleation, and full
evolution of rupture) is challenging because it requires the resolution of many
vastly different timescales. Additional challenges arise from the fact that
faults are geometrically complex -- with large-scale bends and branches as well
as small-scale non-planar features -- and are surrounded by heterogeneous
materials including sediments and clays, as well as much stiffer materials such
as granite. Furthermore, field observations of faults reveal an abundance of
cracks and micro-fractures -- often referred to as a damage zone -- which must
often be included in models to produce realistic results. In this project we
will develop, validate, and utilize an earthquake cycle model that can
rigorously and self-consistently handle complex fault geometries, damage zones,
and heterogeneous materials. We will also explore how geometry and heterogeneity
affect the earthquake locations, magnitudes, and recurrence intervals. This
proposed work benefits the society at large as understanding the impact of
complexity on the earthquake cycle directly informs our understanding of seismic
hazard.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Seismic hazard analysis requires an understanding
of the earthquake cycle including the interaction of remote loading and near-
fault structure. Currently, no existing models can account for both the
interseismic and coseismic periods with complex fault geometries, heterogeneous
materials, and plastic deformation. This funding supports the development and
application of a numerical model that rigorously accounts for interseismic
loading as well as rupture dynamics in both two- and three-dimensions. To
capture the effect of slow tectonic loading on the evolution of the stress
field, a computationally efficient quasi-static model will be used. As inertial
effects become important, the model will transition to a fully dynamic
description where the wavefield is modeled along with its interaction with fault
interfaces. All stages of the earthquake cycle will be modeled in a single,
self-consistent computational and mathematical framework capable of capturing
both complex geometries and material descriptions. The group will develop a
parallel quasi-static and dynamic rupture modeling environment that handles
complex geometries (e.g., branches, bends, and step-overs), general boundary
conditions, plastic deformation, and variable material and frictional
properties. The investigators will use the developed model to consider how
geometry affects nucleation location, recurrence interval, magnitude, and
evolution of the near-fault stress field will be studied as well as the role
that plasticity and bi-material properties play when all stages of the
earthquake cycle are rigorously considered.