* 1547358
* CICI: Data Provenance: Collaborative Research: CY-DIR Cyber-Provenance Infrastructure for Sensor-Based Data-Intensive Research
* CSE,OAC
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2018
* Elisa Bertino, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 12/31/2018
* USD 279,058.00

Today scientists in many disciplines, including biology, medicine, agronomy,
energy management, hydrology, and earth sciences, rely on the use of massive
datasets collected from various sources. Such collections are made possible by
advances in computer technology such as sensors which collect data such as
humidity, air quality and so forth, and powerful computer systems that analyze
the data. The increased use of data for scientific research poses some important
challenges. Data can have errors which impact conclusions derived from the data.
Scientific research has to be reproducible to support validation and detection
of scientific misconduct. Addressing these challenges requires tracking data
used in research projects. Examples include: tracking the source that originated
the data ? for example a mobile phone that acquired some images- and its
geographic location; tracking which computer systems processed the data;
tracking how scientists modified given data. Such a set of information is
referred to as provenance ? very much like the provenance of artistic artifacts.
Managing provenance is technically complex; yet it is key for data-intensive
research. This project makes important advances in this direction by developing
software systems for securely managing provenance. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project develops a provenance management system for cyberinfrastructure that
includes different types of hosts, devices, and data management systems. The
proof-of-concept system, referred to as Cyber-provenance Infrastructure for
Sensor-based Data-Intensive Research (CY-DIR), will support scientists
throughout the life-cycle of their sensor-based data collection processes,
including the continuous monitoring of sensors to ensure that provenance is
collected and recorded, and the traceable use and processing of the data across
different data management systems. CY-DIR provides researchers with provenance
and metadata about data being collected by sensors. Provenance security will be
assured by the use of efficient encryption techniques for use in sensors, secure
logging techniques, and secure processors. Research from this project will
provide novel results in several areas: provenance techniques for sensor data;
cryptographic key management for sensors, mobile devices, and unmanned aircraft
systems; provenance aware streaming data processing techniques; protection of
provenance data against tempering; provenance data integration across different
data management systems.