* 1547754
* Phase II CREST Interdisciplinary Nanotoxicity Center
* EDU,EES
* 03/15/2016,02/29/2024
* Paresh Ray, Jackson State University
* Continuing Grant
* Luis Cubano
* 02/29/2024
* USD 5,099,999.00

Interdisciplinary Nanotoxicity Center&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With National Science
Foundation support, Jackson State University will continue development of the
Interdisciplinary Nanotoxicity Center. The Center goal is to enhance knowledge
of basic properties and environmental characteristics, toxicity, and
applications of nanomaterials. There is a compelling need for studying potential
toxicity of nanomaterials and advancing efficient, fast and inexpensive
computational approaches to predict toxicity of new species. Understanding of
structures, characteristics and biological activities of man-made nanomaterials
is critical to prediction of their impacts on the environment and human health.
Nanoparticle exposure is common, but short- and long-term exposure effects are
currently not fully understood, especially since the primary and agglomerate
sizes, surface area, and the characteristics of the surface play such important
roles. Conversely, nanotechnology can also be used to create new nanomedicines,
sensors, pollutant filters and catalysts with important societal
benefits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Interdisciplinary Nanotoxicity Center focuses
on two research subprojects: addressing nanomaterials discovery and deployment.
Subproject 1 focuses on multifunctional nanoparticles and their model
counterparts: structures, properties, interaction with environment and
applications. The aim of this project is to systematically study structure,
energetics and optics of metal and semiconductor nanoparticles and their
bioconjugates in various environments. Multifunctional environmental safe
magnetic core-plasmonic shell nanopaticle based assay for the detection of toxic
pathogens selectively from water will be designed and developed, and the
possible use of multifunctional nanoparticles for selective removal of toxic
pathogens from drinking water is investigated. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Subproject
2 investigates toxicity of nanoparticles as a function of environmental factors:
experimental studies and computational modeling to include different aspects of
the development and production of nanomaterials and investigation of their
toxicity. The overarching goal is to develop an operational model for directing
production of green metal oxide nanoparticles and to conduct in vitro and in
vivo toxicological studies under selected environmental conditions by using
engineered metal oxide nanoparticles of controlled size and shape. In addition,
computational studies are carried out to develop reliable computational models
effective for prediction of physico-chemical characteristics and toxicity of
nanomaterials. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Both research areas are strongly
interconnected and designed to enhance knowledge of basic properties and
environmental characteristics, toxicity, and applications of nanomaterials. The
Center utilizes the Universal Design for Learning model to maximize learning
outputs of diverse student populations.