* 1547428
* CICI: Secure Data Architecture: STREAMS: Secure Transport and REsearch Architecture for Monitoring Stroke Recovery
* CSE,OAC
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2020
* Martin Margala, University of Massachusetts Lowell
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 12/31/2020
* USD 515,858.00

The rehabilitation of stroke patients is a long but critical process for their
long-term wellness. Monitoring patients with wearable sensors and web cameras
can support at-home rehabilitation by reducing the risk of events such as
accidental falls and inappropriate dietary intake. Such sensor-generated live
data streams about patient status and activities are processed at data centers
for real-time analytics, helping healthcare professionals to respond to
patients' needs quickly and effectively. Since the data streams may contain
electronic Protected Health Information (ePHI), they must be protected so that
transmission and usage conform to security and privacy regulations, such as
Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) and applicable state
laws. Therefore, it is important to investigate advanced networking and
computing technologies to meet these security requirements, which are critical
for bringing sensors and data analytics from research to clinical
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research plans to address the security
challenges in transferring and processing patient related sensor data by
developing a Secure Transport and REsearch Architecture for Monitoring Stroke
Recovery (STREAMS), a technical proof-of-concept implementation, to secure end-
to-end sensor data streams using secure software defined networking and elastic
compute and storage resources. STREAMS will be the first prototype of a secure
network architecture to provide advanced data analytics-based healthcare to
stroke patients in a realistic clinical environment. This project addresses
issues in securing heterogeneous sensory ePHI patient data. It captures the
workflows of patient data analysis and defines a role-based security enforcement
framework to apply access policies. A Secure SDN controller will be designed to
authenticate, identify, and direct encrypted data streams to ensure the data
streaming over the network are HIPAA compliant, provide guidance in provisioning
of compute resources at the cloud, and apply the most appropriate decryption
algorithms based on the role of users, priority, types and source of the sensor
data stream, as well as network conditions. A generalizable secure hardware and
software architecture collects, encrypts, decrypts, stores, transports,
analyzes, and maintains the integrity and availability of the data from these
multimodal sensors to enable them to be fused using analytics algorithms to
learn about patient activities that are highly relevant to stroke recovery. The
highly interdisciplinary project team consists of healthcare professionals,
medical researchers, computer scientists, IT staff, engineering staff, and
industrial partners.