* 1547466
* SHB: Medium: Collaborative Research: Non-Intrusive Multi-Patient Fall-Risk Monitoring in Health Care Facilities
* CSE,IIS
* 02/04/2015,07/31/2017
* Thurmon Lockhart, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 07/31/2017
* USD 72,462.00

This project brings together four investigators who identified an opportunity to
bridge their disparate fields (gait analysis, body sensor networks, low power RF
circuits, and gerontology) in order to address an extremely important health
care problem of fall prevention. Their combined expertise addresses the
following scientific objectives: (1) explore on-node signal processing and low
power RF transceivers to balance energy consumption and mobility analysis
fidelity in wireless on-body inertial sensing, (2) identify the minimal set of
on-body sensor locations to provide high-quality mobility analysis, (3)
determine the appropriate algorithms to identify fall prone individuals in
controlled in- and out-of-lab data collections to assess the external influences
of context and activities, and (4) validate the TEMPO-based data collection and
processing algorithms in a naturalistic HFC living
environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project enables a new paradigm in elderly
patient care to target fall prevention interventions to high fall risk
individuals before fall incidents occur, preserving patient's health and quality
of life while reducing health care costs. In addition, the above described
fundamental scientific objectives apply in the broader application of energy
efficient BSNs in a variety of application domains. The education and outreach
plans focus on crossing the disciplinary divide between technology and health
care, using hands-on public demonstrations, undergraduate laboratory modules,
and multi-disciplinary videoconferencing graduate seminar courses to attract and
develop leaders who can address the tremendous challenges that face the health
care industry in the coming decades.