* 1547949
* I-Corps Sites:  Journey to Innovation and Entrepreneurship at Missouri S&amp;T
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2016,05/31/2022
* Sajal Das, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 05/31/2022
* USD 359,959.00

This project creates an Innovation Corps Site at Missouri University of Science
and Technology (Missouri S&amp;T or S&amp;T).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NSF
Innovation Corps (I-Corps) Sites are NSF-funded entities established at
universities whose purpose is to nurture and support multiple, local teams to
transition their technology concepts into the marketplace. Sites provide
infrastructure, advice, resources, networking opportunities, training and modest
funding to enable groups to transition their work into the marketplace or into
becoming I-Corps Team applicants. I-Corps Sites also strengthen innovation
locally and regionally and contribute to the National Innovation Network of
mentors, researchers, entrepreneurs and investors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
Site at M S&amp;T integrates education and research with cutting-edge
applications to create and convey knowledge that serves the State of Missouri
and the nation, and helps solve societal challenges at global scale. The Site
enhances the university strategic plan which requires experiential learning as
an integral component of undergraduate curricula to foster innovation and
creativity. In addition, the I-Corps Site encourages a large number of untapped
STEM talents and provides institutional support for commercialization. The
complementary, on-campus Student Design and Experiential Leaning Center is also
leveraged to develop student entrepreneurs and accelerate their business ideas
to the market place. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By providing targeted seed funds for
commercialization efforts, the I-Corps Site enhances existing programs at
S&amp;T, improves visibility of entrepreneurship, and expands participation in
existing technology transfer programs. Thirty teams per year receive I-Corps
Site funding to translate ideas and research to the marketplace. The Site
entrepreneurial education program is based on the I-Corps curriculum with
experiential, collaborative learning and uses the Lean LaunchPad methodology.
The Site objectives are to: &lt;br/&gt;(1) Enhance entrepreneurial activities
and training experiences for undergraduate and graduate students at S&amp;T;
&lt;br/&gt;(2) Expand training opportunities available to post docs, faculty,
underrepresented groups using LLP model; &lt;br/&gt;(3) Increase the number of
teams entering the I-Corps program, entrepreneur fellows at the University of
Missouri System and S&amp;T, and VentureWell E-Teams; and &lt;br/&gt;(4)
Transition more activities to commercialization. &lt;br/&gt;Teams are recruited
from existing and new entrepreneurial student activities, course projects,
research, and participants in local and regional venture competitions and
entrepreneurship events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The I-Corps Site impacts the
Midwest region and Central Missouri where S&amp;T is located. Rolla and its
surrounding rural areas are remote and in need of economic resurgence. The
I-Corps Site catalyzes activities to create a critical mass of innovators and
entrepreneurs to establish a local technology hub and economic base and engage
civic leaders and other stakeholders. The Site also serves as a bridge for
collaboration with more mature startup communities and developed economic bases
in St Louis and Kansas City. The Site provides fertile ground for experiential
training of students from nearby community colleges, middle schools, and high
schools through entrepreneurship courses, seminars, workshops, innovation camps
and competitions, and other outreach activities. Special attention is being paid
to recruit and involve female and underrepresented minority students in this
program; the activities of which will be widely disseminated through various
mechanisms including a dedicated website, newsletters and other social media.