* 1547733
* Collaborative Research: Stratospheric Age in a Changing Climate: Connecting Theory, Models, and Observations
* GEO,AGS
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2020
* R. Alan Plumb, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Varavut Limpasuvan
* 03/31/2020
* USD 388,860.00

Changes in the atmospheric circulation in response to anthropogenic forcing are
expected to affect stratospheric water vapor and ozone recovery, with direct
effects on surface temperatures, precipitation, and winds. Policy makers and the
public rely on model projections of these changes. This research will develop
strategies to validate model simulations with analytic theory, to identify and
correct model biases, and to establish rigorous test to assess their fitness for
climate projection. This project will also support the education and training of
two graduate students. providing them the opportunity to develop a physical
understanding of the atmospheric circulation and practical experience with high
performance scientific computing.

This project will connect theory, modeling, and observations of stratospheric
transport. The Brewer-Dobson Circulation describes the transport of mass and
trace gases through the stratosphere. In concert with chemical processes, it
sets the distribution of water vapor and ozone through the middle atmosphere.
Models nearly unanimously predict the Brewer-Dobson Circulation to increase in
response to anthropogenic forcing, but the circulation cannot be observed
directly, due to the slow time scale of overturning (on the order of years). In
situ and satellite-based estimates of the "age of air," a measure of the
transport time from the surface to stratosphere which can be estimated from
observations of trace gases, however, do not robustly detect a change in
transport. Some even suggest a weakening of the circulation, although large
uncertainties imply that model trends are not inconsistent.

The first goal of this project is to establish a connection between the
stratospheric circulation and age distributions with three-dimensional
atmospheric models. In particular, the latitudinal structure of age, which can
be calculated directly from measurements of trace gases such as CO2 or SF6, will
be related to the mean circulation of mass, which is diagnosed in climate model
integrations. The second goal is to use these insights to evaluate stratospheric
transport in numerical models, connecting standard tests of dynamical cores to
the climatological properties of the circulation. Theoretical constraints on age
transport will be used to detect biases in climate models arising from
deficiencies in their representation of the circulation and/or tracer transport.
The third and final goal is to evaluate the new tracer-transport diagnostics in
the context of climate change.