* 1547014
* EAGER: Biocompatibility of nanocrystalline YSZ  transparent cranial implant
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2018
* Guillermo Aguilar, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 07/31/2018
* USD 259,946.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: The overall goal of this project is to develop a new
generation of transparent ceramics, which may be used to replace traditional,
opaque cranial implants (made from titanium and polymer-based materials). This
new implant, which is referred to as a Window to the Brain (WttB) platform,
allows for non-invasive optical interrogation of the brain on a recurring basis
and, thus, serves as a critical enabler of emerging laser-based diagnostic
(e.g., optogenetics) and therapy (e.g., photodynamic therapy) of brain
pathologies and neurological disorders, such as brain cancer, stroke, traumatic
brain injury, Parkinson's disease, etc. In particular, this project focuses on
assessing potential problems of low temperature "ageing" and biofilm formation
around the ceramic implant. The broad impact of this project lies in the added
benefit it provides to the neuroscience community, which aims to advance
understanding and improve brain disease management, thus improving quality of
life and reducing healthcare costs. Furthermore, the advances made in the
science and technology of novel opto-ceramic materials such as this has
potential to extend to numerous other fields, including medical lasers, defense,
energy, etc. This project also provides research opportunities to undergraduate
and graduate students, particularly in the STEM field and for underrepresented
minorities, preparing them to innovate as independent, globally-engaged
engineers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: While traditional cranial
implant materials provide the mechanical properties and acceptable
biocompatibility necessary after implantation, none provide the unique
combination of high fracture toughness and optical transparency that would
enable physicians to diagnose and treat continuously various brain pathologies
and neurological disorders. A recent feasibility study of a transparent
nanocrystalline yttria-stabilized-zirconia (nc-YSZ) on an animal model showed
that non-invasive optical interrogation of the brain is possible. Since aging-
induced degradation has been reported in other types of YSZ implants as a result
of phase change destabilization, independent assessments of a similar kind are
required for transparent nc-YSZ materials. Furthermore, the optical transparency
of these implants allows for laser-mediated controls to arrest and even revert
excessive fouling (biofilm formation), which is another potential impediment for
the use of this material for biomedical applications such as this. Therefore,
the first goal of this project is to investigate if long term ageing could limit
the use of transparent nc-YSZ as a medical material. The second goal is to
measure the extent of biofilm formation on nc-YSZ samples and explore the use of
sub-therapeutic laser irradiation approaches to remedy such a problem if it
arises. The significance of this work lies in the potential of the ceramic-based
WttB platform which may eventually allow advancements in the understanding of
the brain, by facilitating the clinical translation of emerging optogenetic
neurotechnologies. This research is timely and transformational and falls under
the objectives of the BRAIN Initiative. As well, it is providing research
opportunities to undergraduate and graduate students. This project is leveraging
well-established programs and student organizations such as the California
Alliance for Minority Participation (CAMP), UC Leadership Excellence through
Advanced Degrees (UC LEADS), and the Society for Hispanic Professional Engineers
(SHPE).