* 1547249
* CICI:  Secure Data Architecture: Shared Intelligence Platform for Protecting our National Cyberinfrastructure
* CSE,OAC
* 12/01/2015,11/30/2020
* Alexander Withers, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 11/30/2020
* USD 499,206.00

This research is expected to significantly enhance the security of campus and
research networks. It addresses the emerging security challenge of open,
unrestricted access to campus research networks, but beyond that it lays the
foundation for an evolvable intelligence sharing network with the very real
potential for national scale analysis of that intelligence. Further it will
supply cyber security researchers with a rich real-world intelligence source
upon which to test their theories, tools, and techniques. The research will
produce a new kind of virtual security appliance that will significantly enhance
the security posture of open science networks so that advanced high-performance
network-based research can be carried out free of performance lags induced by
more traditional security controls.

This research will integrate prior research results, expertise and security
products from from both the National Science Foundation and the Department of
Energy to advance the security infrastructure available for open science
networks, aka Science DMZs. Further the effort will actively promote sharing of
intelligence among science DMZ participants as well as with national academic
computational resources and organizations that wish to participate. Beyond
meeting the security needs of campus-based DMZs, the effort will lay the
foundation for an intelligence sharing infrastructure that will provide a
significant benefit to the cybersecurity research community, making possible the
collection, annotation, and open distribution of a national scale security
intelligence to help test and validate on-going security research.