* 1547269
* Phase IV: Continued Development of the Core Fluid Dynamics Laboratory at UCLA
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2016,09/30/2019
* Jonathan Aurnou, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 09/30/2019
* USD 697,956.00

This award will allow the planetary core dynamics research group at UCLA to
carry out fundamental laboratory research that bridges important gaps that exist
between current computer models of the geodynamo and advanced theoretical models
of geophysical turbulence. The group's unique, custom-designed and -built
laboratory devices allow them to characterize the convective flows that exist in
planetary core settings. Using water and liquid gallium as the working fluids,
the team will investigate more extreme parameters than are attainable in current
simulations of planetary dynamo action. Thus, this research will provide the
essential laboratory data necessary to benchmark and validate advanced theories
of core flow and to build predictive models of turbulent planetary dynamo
generation in liquid metals. These results will be useful to modelers of Earth's
core and other planetary dynamos, as well as modelers of fluid turbulence, solar
and stellar convection zones and dynamos, and modelers of Earth's climate and
planetary atmospheres. Furthermore, this work will enable two disparate
geophysical communities to integrate their modeling approaches, and ultimately,
generate more robust and geophysically applicable simulations. In carrying out
these tasks, this project will provide training in advanced laboratory
experimentation, numerical and theoretical modeling to three graduate students,
one undergraduate and one researcher. This funding also allows the PI team to
expand their unique library of educational films about geophysical fluid
dynamics that is freely accessible to the public (e.g.,
https://www.youtube.com/user/spinlabucla).

With this award, UCLA SpinLab researchers will carry out a series of rapidly
rotating convection experiments in water that will elucidate principles about
turbulent convective flows occurring in planetary cores. These experiments will
be conducted using the new NSF-funded NoMag device that exists in the PI's lab
at UCLA, and that allows the investigators to image and quantify the convective
velocity, vorticity and helicity fields at Ekman numbers as low as 3 x 10^-8.
Using gallium as the working fluid in their NSF-funded RoMag device, the team
will continue to conduct rotating magnetoconvection experiments, enhanced by
closely- coupled numerical simulations. The novel data these RoMag experiments
provide will allow the researchers to quantify and diagnose the complex
magnetohyrdrodynamics occuring in a simulated parcel of Earth's core fluid
(Elsasser number ~ 1; Ekman numbers > 5 x 10^-8). This work will provide
fundamental laboratory data necessary to benchmark and validate advanced
numerical and theoretical models of core flow and to build predictive models of
turbulent planetary dynamo generation in liquid metals.