* 1547842
* RESEARCH-PGR: Deciphering the molecular basis of elite red alder lines and their Frankia alni symbionts
* BIO,IOS
* 01/15/2017,12/31/2022
* Norman Lewis, National Center for Genome Resources
* Continuing Grant
* Gerald Schoenknecht
* 12/31/2022
* USD 1,904,985.00

Red alder is a hardwood tree of economic importance in the Pacific Northwest,
exceeding the annual value of the dominant softwood species Douglas-fir. Red
alder is used for quality cabinetry, utensils and handles, and as a
biomass/biofuels crop. It grows in inhospitable environments and on unproductive
land, meaning that it does not compete with food production. Demand for saplings
suitable for planting currently greatly exceeds supply. With better
understanding of its genetics, scientists would be able to breed trees that grow
faster and in more inhospitable environments. This would expand the area
available for growing, and increase the annual yield for timber and biomass
fuel. Additionally, red alder does not require nitrogen fertilizers. It achieves
this by harnessing Frankia, a microbe, to provide the nitrogen for it. The
relationship between the tree and the microbe requires scientific study. Some
Frankia strains are better than others, and some combinations of tree and
microbial strains are well suited to certain environments. This project seeks to
understand how the red alder genetics, soil type, Frankia strain, and other
bacteria in the soil interact to promote tree growth. The result will be the
ability to develop new tree strains suited to certain environments, to expand
planting to meet growing demand. The project includes training opportunities for
students (high school through graduate level) and supports a high school summer
innovation academy that targets underserved students. It promotes access to
research by native and Hispanic underrepresented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Red alder (Alnus rubra Bong.), has significant
economic importance, yet is an orphan in terms of scientific understanding of
its genetic variability and its relationship with its nitrogen-fixing symbiont
Frankia alni. This project will create an omics-based resource upon which to
base a breeding and improvement program, aimed at improving tolerance to abiotic
stresses and growth in marginal land area. Objectives are to create the
following: (1) a de novo genome reference assembly of an elite high-performing
red alder clone, using PacBio sequencing and BioNano physical mapping, (2)
reference genome sequences and epigenomic signatures of the five Frankia strains
that result in the best tree performance and symbiosis, using PacBio sequencing
with epigenetic modifications determined using the SMRTanalysis suite,(3) a
dense set of molecular markers to enable accelerated predictive breeding and
improvement, through genotyping of 350 tree lines using the TASSEL-GBS pipeline,
and (4) measurements of interactions among tree genotype, rhizosphere
microbiome, root transcriptome, symbiont (and other endophyte) transcriptomes,
and their impacts on juvenile tree growth on good and marginal soils, through
16s rRNA surveys of rhizosphere microbial communities. The project includes a
summer science outreach program for underserved high school students.