* 1547411
* CICI: Secure Data Architecture: Collaborative Research: Assured Mission Delivery Network Framework for Secure Scientific Collaboration
* CSE,OAC
* 01/01/2016,09/30/2021
* Arjan Durresi, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 09/30/2021
* USD 139,999.00

Collaborative, multi-disciplinary and multi-institutional research projects
require secure and resilient cyberinfrastructure in order to efficiently support
data sharing, access to remote scientific instruments, video-conferencing and
on-line discussions. The underlying network plays a crucial role in supporting
these needs in that it must provide assurance about the security of data and
collaborative activities. This project addresses such requirement by designing
and developing a network architecture to securely share data among groups of
scientists. A community of scientists sharing a common interest and supporting
resources is called a mission. This project will design and prototype the
architecture of the Assured Mission Delivery Network (AMDN), which will enable
collaboration among scientific communities involving multiple independent
organizations with varying levels of trust. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;They novelty
of AMDN lies in the notion of network-level Mission Assurance Services (MAS);
these services allows mission directors to specify actions to be taken by the
network to deal with attacks and anomalies and to quickly reconfigure the
network to best assure the successful completion of the mission. Security is the
key part of the AMDN design, and addresses essential functionality such as
authentication, integrity, accountability and privacy. AMDN also includes
Collective Anomaly Detection, in which intra- and inter-cloud networking alarms
and anomalies indicative of attacks are combined and used for mission assurance
strategies. The detected anomalies and alarms are correlated over the whole
system in order to detect sophisticated attacks that might be undetectable at
the single node level. The security of the entire system is flexible and
programmable depending on the nature of collaborations, computing resources
needed, and various requirements of scientists. In addition to scientific use,
AMDN can be used for commercial applications such as financial data sharing
among banks or health data sharing among hospitals and between critical
infrastructures such as Smart Grids. Although AMDN is primarily designed for
wide-area network usage, it can be used for services and clients residing inside
a single cloud or data center.