* 1547864
* EAGER: Dynamics of collaboration between humans and engineered systems: system design for collective expertise
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Oded Nov, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 08/31/2019
* USD 300,000.00

1547864(Porfiri)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Humans are being continuously involved as
cognitive and social agents in engineered systems, and, in a similar vein,
engineered systems are becoming increasingly integral to systems of interacting
humans. A particularly elusive issue entails understanding and predicting the
evolution of the collaboration between humans and engineered systems, across
behavioral and technological domains. This award supports experimental and
theoretical research to elucidate the dynamics of collaboration in human-
engineered systems, through the integration of dynamical systems theory,
robotics, and human-computer interactions. Humans will socially interact with
engineered systems in an engineering context, which will be, in turn, enabled by
an engineering infrastructure. This research will contribute to lay the
foundation for the next generation of autonomous environmental monitoring
systems, which capitalize on human intelligence and low-cost distributed robots
for rapidly and accurately monitoring the environment. Complementing the
research are interdisciplinary formal and informal education activities that
will benefit the training of underprivileged students and reach out to
economically-disadvantaged local communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
program seeks to establish a transformative experimental and theoretical
framework for understanding, predicting, and, ultimately, controlling the
evolution of the collaboration between humans and engineered systems. In a novel
crowdsourcing infrastructure, online groups comprised of real humans and
artificial experts will collaboratively perform aquatic environmental
monitoring, by virtually patrolling mobile aquatic robots in a polluted canal in
Brooklyn, NY, to explore the water basin, collect and classify wildlife images,
and identify sources of pollution. Similar to a mechanics experiment in which
one applies a sequence of mechanical forces to a solid and measures its
mechanical deformation, this project will study the response of humans to the
controlled actions of artificial experts and investigate their intertwined
dynamics, in terms of social interactions and task performance. A series of
hypothesis-driven studies will explore the roles of human cognitive abilities,
dispositional factors, and behavioral plasticity on technology-mediated social
interactions and performance. A new data-driven mathematical framework based on
signal processing, network science, and information theory will be formulated to
uncover the interplay between personal attributes and plasticity of humans,
their interactions with engineered systems, and how to better design a human-
engineered system for collective expertise.