* 1547791
* Collaborative Research: EAGER: Biomanufacturing: Bioengineering of 3-dimensional brain surrogate tissue models
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2017
* Utkan Demirci, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Michele Grimm
* 08/31/2017
* USD 150,000.00

PI: Demirci, Utkan&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1547791&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI:
Kaplan, David L. &lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1547806 &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
coordinated function in the brain of billions of neurons in dense and entangled
networks can be seen as the epicenter of our unique higher consciousness, as
well as of our vulnerability to debilitating diseases, such as schizophrenia,
autism and Alzheimer's. The investigators propose a unique approach of sound
waves and silk protein biomaterials, to recreate the complex three-dimensional
brain network structures in a small dish, and use them to investigate their
response to a laboratory model of brain concussion damage. With these studies,
the investigators aspire to demonstrate how these constructs may help scientists
better understand the workings of the brain in healthy and diseased
states.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The complexity of the brain poses a large roadblock
for scientists to examine molecular, cellular and circuit level behavior of
brain physiology. Novel approaches and technologies are needed that complement
and advance the existing in vivo, ex vivo and in vitro approaches. The goal of
the proposed research is to develop a new flexible bioprinting platform for the
in vitro fabrication of 3-dimensional (3D) neural tissue constructs that
faithfully mimic the biological complexity, development, architecture and
function of 3D circuits present in the brain. The key innovations include the
strategy of acoustic biopatterning and silk protein scaffolds for encapsulating
neurons in long-lived, 3D multilayered architectures. To prototype and validate
the construct, the investigators propose in the first aim to create 6-layer
cortical circuits built of primary neurons. In the second aim, they will examine
the physiology of the 3D circuit tissues using a comprehensive neuro-
technological tool-box. Electrophysiology, fluorescence imaging, genomics and
proteomics approaches will be employed to evaluate functional and structural
milestones of the developing in vitro 3-D neural circuits, including a brain
damage disease model. This radically different approach for investigating brain
physiology and pathophysiology has the potential to provide new tools for
neuroscience, the utility of which extends to other fields because of the
general applicability of the proposed advanced biomanufacturing approaches. The
broader impact of this proposal includes the participation of high school,
undergraduate and graduate level scientists in research at the intersection of
neuroscience, tissue engineering and biomanufacturing, thus presenting a useful
platform for the training of interdisciplinary scientists.