* 1547738
* SBIR Phase I:  Biomanufacturing Red Natural Food Dye
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2016
* Stephen Pietsch, RedLeaf Biologics Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2016
* USD 179,999.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project will be the development of an alternative to synthetic
chemicals that are used to impart color to food. The food industry has a long
history of using synthetic pigments that impart color to foods. However, there
have been concerns about negative health impacts of some high volume synthetic
colorants, and the food industry is increasingly interested in identifying
colorants that are obtained from biological sources. This project will explore
the technical and commercial feasibility of a class of naturally occurring
pigments that have properties of color, stability, and safety that make them
attractive as food colorants but for which a suitable source is not currently
available. Based on six years of prior research, a potentially suitable
botanical source of a red pigment has been identified, and now propose to
develop a commercial process to produce the pigment from the botanical
source.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I project proposes to develop a
proof-of-concept pilot-scale process for extracting and purifying a naturally
occurring pigment from a source plant. The pigment, which has not previously
been available in commercial quantities, will be produced from a selected
variety of a major crop species. Using mechanical separations, food grade
solvent extractions, and various commercially-available food-grade adsorbants
the goal is to produce pigment under conditions that can be used for proof-of-
concept testing in model food products. The pigment produced will be
characterized by analytical chemistry methods as a prelude to seeking FDA
approval to sell the pigment for food use. The extracted pigment will be tested
for performance characteristics, and for thermal, pH, and light stability in a
range of probable food applications.