* 1547691
* I-Corps L:  Flipping the STEM Classroom Made Easy and Sustainable - Resources for Faculty
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2016
* Mark Brown, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Karen Crosby
* 07/31/2016
* USD 50,000.00

Through the NSF Innovation Corps for Learning Program, (I-Corps L), this project
will develop ways to achieve more widespread use of a teaching method proven to
increase the effectiveness of undergraduate faculty. In the past decade, a body
of higher education research has emphasized the need to address the diverse
learning needs of our students. Yet, the majority of college level science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) courses throughout the nation
still rely upon a traditional lecture format that reaches only a subset of
learning styles. As a result, many students struggle to master the material in
STEM courses which often leads to lower academic performance and/or attrition. A
classroom model called, "flipping the classroom," reduces the amount of
traditional lecturing and augments it with more engaging applications of the
course material. This model has been widely documented for its ability to better
engage broad audiences of STEM students with diverse learning needs, thereby
responding to a national need for improving STEM education. The work supported
through this project encourages critical thinking through real-world
applications of course content. This approach has positively impacted learning
trends for students in disciplines and courses ranging from Cell &amp; Molecular
Biology and Ecology to Biotechnology and Chemical Engineering. Using the I-Corps
for Learning program, approaches will be developed to enable this more easily
implemented method of developing flipped classrooms to benefit more STEM faculty
and students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broadly applied, the flipped classroom model
has a proven ability to achieve higher performance, understanding,
applicability, and retention among STEM students in the U.S. However, most STEM
faculty have exhibited a resistance to flipping the structure of their STEM
courses due to a lack of time for restructuring their classes and/or a lack of
knowledge related to the model and its benefits. To overcome the obstacles and
faculty resistance associated with flipping the STEM classroom, this I-Corps for
Learning Team seeks to sustainably and systematically promote the adoption of an
educational innovation that includes guides and classroom materials to
facilitate the process of implementing the flipped classroom model across a wide
range of STEM subject areas. These materials provide a step-by-step procedure
and teaching tools for simplifying the process and, thereby, reducing resistance
to implementing the flipped style of teaching. The results will help to improve
undergraduate science, technology, engineering, and mathematics education
throughout the country.