* 1547526
* I-Corps Sites:  UNLV Lean Entrepreneurship Advancement Program
* TIP,TI
* 01/15/2016,12/31/2019
* Brendan O'Toole, University of Nevada Las Vegas
* Continuing Grant
* Behrooz Shirazi
* 12/31/2019
* USD 255,680.00

This project, from the University of Nevada, Las Vegas (UNLV), creates an
Innovation Corps Site (I-Corps Site). I-Corps Sites are NSF-funded entities
established at universities whose purpose is to nurture and support multiple,
local teams to transition their technology concepts into the marketplace. Sites
provide infrastructure, advice, resources, networking opportunities, training
and modest funding to enable groups to transition their work into the
marketplace or into becoming I-Corps Team applicants.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;I-Corps Sites also strengthen innovation locally and
regionally and contribute to the National Innovation Network of mentors,
researchers, entrepreneurs and investors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;UNLV establishes
the Lean Entrepreneurship Advancement Program (LEAP) to broaden
commercialization of faculty, student and community innovations. Utilizing the
existing resources and expertise of the UNLV Center for Entrepreneurship (CFE),
the Division of Research and Economic Development, the Mendenhall Innovation
Program (MIP) and the Nevada Small Business Development center (NSBDC), this NSF
I-Corps Site grant helps identify faculty and student innovations suitable for
transition into the marketplace. The LEAP increases the pipeline of innovations
by identifying and supporting faculty and students associated with colleges and
Institutes across the university (e.g., Sciences, Dental School, Nursing,
Hospitality, the Institute of Personalized Medicine, and others). It also
provides commercialization opportunities for students participating in the
recently implemented Lean Startup Las Vegas program. This program, partially
funded by a VentureWell Programs Grant, is designed to aid the development of
software based businesses, making them ideal candidates for funding that
supports prototype refinement and/or customer development.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The implementation of an I-Corps Site program at the
University of Nevada, Las Vegas provides a model of innovation that can be
adopted by other institutions that enjoy similar, highly diverse populations.
The LEAP enables the participation of colleges such as the College of Hotel
Administration, the College of Sciences, the School of Dental Medicine, the
School of Nursing, the Institute of Personalized Medicine, and others, in a
shared entrepreneurial experience that may lead to startups that impact this
institution's geographic ecosystem.