* 1547076
* Workshop on Remote Access Cyber-Physical Testbeds, Arlington, VA, November 12-13, 2015
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2018
* Magnus Egerstedt, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 07/31/2018
* USD 70,001.00

Currently, experimental work on cyber-physical systems is done largely in
isolation, and there is a significant gap between the theoretical foundations
that are being broadly pursued, and a focused, application-driven transition
onto actual experimental platforms. This gap is both scientific and practical in
that it takes significant resources to develop and maintain a research testbed.
The workshop will explore the use of remote access testbeds as a way of
remedying this problem by getting researchers to come together around a shared
platform, lowering the barrier-to-entry in cyber-physical systems research, and
ensuring that practical relevance is an achievable goal to a larger group of
cyber-physical systems researchers. In fact, the establishment of networks of
remote access testbeds would provide researchers access to shared, experimental
platforms. As a consequence, advances in the field are expected to accelerate
greatly through a collection of research testbeds that can be used by
researchers, educators, and students all over the country, without incurring
prohibitive costs associated with setting up and maintaining the actual research
facilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The establishment of networks of remote access
testbeds would provide researchers with access to state-of-the-art experimental,
thereby accelerating advances in the field. In fact, by going beyond the
standard, isolated research endeavors, the power of a community of researchers
working together could be unleashed, with the potential to produce a whole that
is significantly greater than the sum of its parts. As a consequence, one cannot
predict all the research outcomes that will be enabled by such an endeavor. The
proposed workshop will investigate and discuss challenges associated with the
establishment and maintenance of such remote access, cyber-physical testbeds,
including robotics, power and energy, transportation, and smart buildings
testbeds. Ultimately, the workshop has four distinct objectives: (1) Articulate
an over-arching vision for how remote access cyber-physical testbeds should be
structured and organized; (2) Identify existing efforts across different
disciplines; (3) Gather stakeholders to form a critical mass of people committed
to the idea of remote access testbeds; and (4) Identify challenges that need to
be overcome for remote access testbeds to reach their full potential. The
outcome of the workshop is the production of a report that addresses the
aforementioned workshop objectives and that will be disseminated broadly.