* 1547533
* Collaborative Research: Nano- and micro-particle transport prediction in subsurface media: The role of heterogeneity and structure
* GEO,EAR
* 03/15/2016,02/29/2020
* William Johnson, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Laura Lautz
* 02/29/2020
* USD 270,644.00

Many water quality contexts exist in which particle transport and retention in
saturated sands and gravels is a critical process; e.g., streambed removal of
particle-bound contaminants, low energy drinking water treatment using riverbank
filtration, engineered subsurface delivery of novel nanoparticles or bacteria
for contaminant cleanup, and protection of drinking water supplies from disease-
causing pathogen sources. There is yet insufficient capability to predict the
observed complex transport behaviors of these particles under environmental
conditions. Consequently, the theory to support optimized design of the above
environmental systems is lacking. Mathematical models currently can describe but
not predict these behaviors because, as yet, the models do not represent the
underlying mechanisms and processes for particle attachment to surfaces under
environmental conditions. The proposed research aims to determine whether
observed complex colloid transport behaviors will emerge from pore-scale
representation of the surface heterogeneity responsible for particle attachment.
The proposed investigations involve parallel experiments and simulations at pore
(micromodel) and network (packed sand column) scales. The research will provide
for a transformative platform for researchers and practitioners to perform
mechanistic prediction of particle transport for design of solutions to
environmental problems. Additional broader impacts include engagement of middle
and high school biology, chemistry, and earth science teachers in six-week long
summer internships where they undertake field and laboratory experiences
examining the role of particles in trace element transport and
transformation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The capability to predict the observed
complex transport behaviors of colloids under environmental conditions (e.g.,
non log-linear profiles of retained colloids, extended tailing of low
concentrations, blocking, and ripening) is currently lacking. Empirically based
continuum-scale rate constants and scaling factors are employed in the
advection-dispersion equation to describe, and to a limited extent predict, the
observed complex transport behaviors. Whereas these descriptions are extremely
useful indicators of mechanisms, true predictive capability will be possible
only if the underlying physicochemical mechanisms/processes are identified and
parameterized at a more fundamental level. Pore scale (nanoscale) colloid-
surface interactions are well-demonstrated to exert profound influences on
colloid transport behaviors at the continuum scale (column and field). This
research aims to determine whether the continuum-scale rate constants and
scaling factors can be predicted, and the whether the observed complex
continuum-scale behavior will emerge, from pore-scale representation of surface
heterogeneity and network-scale representation of packing structure. This
investigation involves parallel experiments and simulations at pore (micromodel)
and continuum (column) scales. Coupled pore scale force/torque balance
simulations will be conducted to pore/grain network simulations in order to
develop mechanistic prediction of continuum scale rate constants and scaling
factors. New approaches will be used to represent surface heterogeneity
responsible for colloid attachment to bulk repulsive surfaces at the pore scale.
The proposed research will also capitalize on, and extend, recent understanding
of influences of topology at the continuum (network) scale where the transition
between molecular (diffusion-driven) and particle (trajectory-driven) transport
behaviors will be explored.