* 1547098
* Improving Understanding of Volcanic Eruptions
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2017
* Anne Linn, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 07/31/2017
* USD 150,000.00

This award will provide the funds to the National Research Council (NRC) to
conduct a study of the fundamental research needed to improve understanding of
the processes that initiate, sustain, and end volcanic eruptions and the
relationships between those processes and observed eruption precursors. Large
volcanic eruptions can have disastrous impacts on infrastructure, agriculture,
air and water quality, respiratory health, global air travel, and the economy.
Successful forecasts, such as the forecast of 1991 eruption of Mt. Pinatubo in
the Philippines, can save lives and lessen the adverse impacts of such events.
Use of the new interdisciplinary research approaches and innovative sensing
systems could make it possible to distinguish an impending eruption from mere
volcanic unrest, enabling more reliable warnings to affected populations. In
addition, this study could foster collaboration among researchers in different
disciplines, instrument developers, and government managers responsible for
monitoring volcanoes, warning the public, or mitigating volcanic hazards at
local, regional, and national levels. Such collaboration could both inform
future volcanology research and enhance volcano monitoring and warning
efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Because eruptions are commonly preceded by
precursors such as volcanic tremor, earthquakes, gas discharges, or surface
deformation, eruptions at some well-monitored volcanoes have been forecast
successfully. However, although our capability to provide useful warnings of
possible eruptions has improved, many aspects of volcanic systems are not fully
understood, and volcanic eruptions cannot be reliably predicted. Advancing the
field requires contributions from multiple scientific disciplines, including
volcanology, geodynamics, geodesy, seismology, meteorology, hydrology, and
remote sensing. This study would bring together experts from these disciplines
to identify priority research, modeling, and observations needed to better
understand the behavior of volcanoes and their future activity. The engagement
of these experts and the findings and conclusions from the study could advance
understanding of volcanic eruptions and inform the U.S. research agenda. In
particular, the NRC will convene a committee of 12 individuals in the field of
volcanology to compile information on the current scientific understanding of
magma storage, ascent, and eruption; new research on volcanic processes and
precursors that could lead to better forecasts; new observations or instrument
deployment strategies; and research and observation priorities to improve
understanding of eruptions and to inform monitoring and early warning. The
committee would hold 3 meetings and a workshop to gather information,
deliberate, and prepare a consensus report on the tasks listed above. The
published report would be shared freely and disseminated to the research and
technical community as well as to interested policy and decision makers at
federal, state, and local levels.