* 1547345
* I-Corps:  Takig Microfluidic Design, Fabrication, and Test to the Classroom Bench
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2017
* Raquel Perez-Castillejos, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Junhong Chen
* 07/31/2017
* USD 50,000.00

Through the NSF Innovation Corps for Learning Program (I-Corps L), this project
will develop ways to increase the scale and impact of a program that brings
inexpensive hands-on microfabrication laboratories into high school science
courses. Despite the dramatic and sustained increase of applications of micro-
and nano-components in commercial products such as cell phones, computers, and
home appliances, the US market progresses more slowly than others towards
generating the associated increase in micro-/nano-manufacturing jobs. The micro-
and nano-fabrication that thrives in universities and research centers
oftentimes does not translate into curriculum changes at the undergraduate or
high school levels. As a result, students tend to limit their view of the world
to theoretical rather than experimental/applied perspectives. This project will
creating educational routes to take microfabrication into high school. This work
will also enable high school teachers to produce ready-to-use micro- and nano-
educational materials. Through the implementation of this program, the design,
fabrication, and testing of microfluidic devices can be carried out in
conventional lecture rooms using benchtop materials and tools at a minimal cost
of about one dollar per student per experiment.

The tape-based fabrication method at the center of this project makes it
possible for students to design, build, and test their own microfluidic designs.
The technique is simple and inexpensive, and easy to implement. Additionally,
this project will help to reduce the practical barrier faced by high school
teachers by offering inexpensive and ready-to-use educational materials. Such
materials will facilitate the adoption of the technique by teachers by means of
experiments that relate directly to the high school curriculum (so they are easy
to integrate with the courses) as well as videos of the experimental procedure,
slides, pre- and post-activity questions (so that it is easy to replicate the
experiments). The technology in this I-Corps L has value to high school
educators in that it offers an inexpensive, accessible, and safe way to
introduce microfluidics to students. By exposing students to this process, they
will gain an appreciation for the possibilities of innovation, become confident
in the experimental design process, and begin to understand the importance of
working toward a scientific goal.