* 1547556
* Rheology of Lower Mantle Perovskites
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2019
* Donald Weidner, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 04/30/2019
* USD 480,000.00

The Earth is a dynamic evolving body, driven by heat sources deep within and
enabled by the plastic character of the materials that make up the Earth. As
observers on the outer skin of the Earth, even after four and a half billion
years, we see constant reminders of this evolution in the form of earthquakes
and volcanoes. Even the distinction between ocean and continent owes its origin
to this dynamic process. This study is focused on the enabler of this process -
the plastic nature of what we consider hard rocks. Over long times at elevated
pressure and temperature, rocks behave as liquids. In recent years, tools have
evolved that allow us to measure the viscous character of these hard objects at
pressures and temperatures that one finds deep in the Earth. These experiments
are built around a synchrotron facility that has been built at a national lab.
The investigators will use both the National Synchrotron Light Source II at
Brookhaven National Laboratory and the Advanced Photon Source at Argonne
National Laboratory. This study will help our understanding of this dynamic
evolution of the Earth. A graduate student will be supported and will
participate in this research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;MgSiO3 in the perovskite
crystal structure (bridgmanite) is the most abundant mineral in the Earth and
it's calcium counterpart (CaSiO3) is among the five most abundant minerals. The
plastic nature of these minerals defines the fluid character of the deep Earth.
These properties are both pressure and temperature dependent, and as of yet,
unknown. Knowledge of these properties along with proposed temperature models
can help constrain dynamics of the Earth evolution and current state. The
plastic properties of these minerals is particularly interesting because these
minerals are composed of silicon in six coordination with oxygen, while the bulk
of materials studied to date have silicon in four coordination with oxygen. The
investigating team proposes to study the mechanical properties of these minerals
at conditions of pressure and temperature appropriate to the deep Earth. They
will focus on defining a quantitative flow law that expresses the plastic
properties of these materials. The plasticity of lower mantle minerals at lower
mantle conditions of pressure and temperature has been beyond the experimental
reach. This has left us with little mineral-based knowledge of the effective
viscosity of the lower mantle at the conditions of the anticipated geotherm.
Development of new deformation equipment enables a new effort to characterize
the quantitative flow law of the high pressure phases at the extremes of
pressure and temperature of the top of the lower mantle. This proposal is to
study both the Mg and the Ca end-member silicate perovskite at these conditions.
This is made possible by a new facility being installed at the new synchrotron,
NSLS II, at the Brookhaven National Laboratories. The new facility will provide
world class synchrotron X-ray light for these experiments with a new DT25
guideblock in a 1000 ton hydraulic press with deformation capabilities. Using
standard X-ray diffraction and imaging tools, the team will be able to define
stress and strain rate in the sample at the extreme conditions.