* 1547679
* EAGER: Pathways to ecological generalism and the abundance-occupancy relationship in small-mammal communities
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2017
* Jacob Goheen, University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 06/30/2017
* USD 199,461.00

Understanding how small-scale experiments explain widespread patterns is a major
challenge in the field of ecology. While experiments reveal mechanisms, their
value is uncertain if these mechanisms cannot account for the large-scale
patterns that characterize the natural world. One such common pattern is that
widespread species tend to be abundant, while species with restricted
distributions are often rare. This project, from an early career investigator,
pursues a novel approach to determine how resource use by individuals can
explain this pattern. The project will integrate experimental data collected on
individuals with new models to extend individual results to populations and then
to communities across large landscapes. The research will engage undergraduate
students from Wyoming, who will participate in research along with Kenyan
students, and leverages current NSF support by using an ongoing experiment in
Kenya. Results will contribute to a reference library of savanna plants at the
Smithsonian Institution that is shared with museums in Kenya. Data from this
project will be publicly available. Correlations between abundance and occupancy
are among the most pervasive in ecology: species with expansive distributions
tend to be locally abundant, whereas those with restricted distributions tend to
be locally rare. This pattern has long captivated ecologists, but proposed
hypotheses to explain it have proved very difficult to test. This project
pursues the resource-breadth hypotheses by focusing specifically on dietary
breadth of individuals. Resource use will be quantified by sequencing fecal DNA
in a species-rich guild of small, herbivorous mammals. Individual consumer-
resource interactions will be integrated with estimates of fitness and
population growth for constituent species in large-scale communities to discern
whether ecological generalists are more abundant where they co-occur with
dietary specialists and to identify the pathways through which ecological
generalism is manifested in survival and recruitment rates. An ongoing herbivore
exclusion experiment provides a backdrop of shifting resource dynamics across
which a guild of small mammals is intensively monitored, and thus an excellent
opportunity to test the resource-breath hypothesis.