* 1547433
* RTG: Cross-Training in Statistics and Computer Science
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2020
* Marina Vannucci, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 07/31/2020
* USD 1,400,004.00

Data science is rapidly evolving as an essential interdisciplinary field, where
advances often result from combinations of ideas from various parts of
mathematics, statistics, computer science, physical sciences, and engineering,
as well as other disciplines. New types of (large) data have emerged, presenting
unprecedented complexities and challenges that require a new way of thinking.
The goal of this Research Training Group (RTG) project is to provide inherently
interdisciplinary training to undergraduate and graduate students, as well as
post-doctoral fellows, developing skills that transcend individual disciplines.
Training students through research involvement in areas that combine statistical
and computational modeling and inference will provide the intellectual
foundation for a new generation of scientists poised to make novel breakthroughs
in this exciting area, and contribute to the research and design efforts in the
private and public sectors.

This project will catalyze original research on modeling and inference for large
datasets. The program will involve three undergraduate students, six graduate
students, and two postdoctoral fellows at any given time. The undergraduate
component will be an integrated research experience, consisting of a seminar
course, where students will learn and present material on key topics, and active
participation in research projects, where these topics are put into practice.
Each trainee will work with at least two RTG faculty members to ensure a truly
interdisciplinary training experience. A new course in "data science" will be
developed, for education of trainees across traditional department boundaries.
Throughout the calendar year, the Research Training Group will sponsor advanced
courses and research lectures for the benefit of the graduate and postdoctoral
participants. The program builds upon the strengths and interactions of a
dynamic group of faculty, with expertise in the general area of probabilistic
models and methods for computational inference. Trainees will benefit from
individualized mentoring activities and participation in structured research
groups. The interdisciplinary nature of these activities will lead to a newly
trained generation of researchers capable of generating new approaches and
ideas. Resources and tools for cross-training will be developed and disseminated
to the community. Exposure to modern aspects of data science and computing will
enhance the professional development of the trainees. Cutting-edge research at
the interface between statistics and computer science will be enhanced.