* 1547368
* Improving the vertical and horizontal resolution of seismic anisotropy and heterogeneity using surface waves
* GEO,EAR
* 12/15/2015,11/30/2019
* Donald Forsyth, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 11/30/2019
* USD 107,678.00

Earthquakes and ocean waves generate seismic waves that travel along the surface
of the earth, but with vibrations that penetrate tens to hundreds of kilometers
into the solid interior. The velocities of these waves are one of our primary
means of measuring the structure of the tectonic plates (lithosphere) and the
underlying convecting mantle (asthenosphere). One of the best ways to measure
the velocity is with arrays of seismic stations, either on land or on the sea
floor, but the measurements are made more difficult due to multiple propagation
paths from the earthquakes to the stations and by uneven distribution of ocean
wave sources. In this project, we will develop new techniques to overcome these
difficulties to improve our measurements of seismic surface wave velocity and
therefore our knowledge of the structure of the lithosphere and asthenosphere.
One primary goal of the new measurements is to test whether deformation of the
oceanic lithosphere is fundamentally different than the asthenosphere, a
controversial hypothesis that a number of recent studies have supported.

The analysis of Love and Rayleigh wave dispersion within ocean-bottom-
seismometer arrays in the Pacific will test the hypothesis that radial
anisotropy within the oceanic lithosphere is distinctly different than within
the asthenosphere. Several groups of investigators have reported from global
tomographic studies that radial anisotropy in the upper lithosphere is either
small or characterized by SV>SH in contrast to the strong anisotropy in the
asthenosphere with SH>SV. This contrast has been interpreted as indicating
either the depth extent of the lithosphere or the depth extent of a depleted
layer, but is in disagreement with earlier studies that showed SH>SV decreasing
gradually with increasing depth. To improve the depth resolution and resolve the
ambiguity about the extent of lithospheric radial anisotropy and strength of
asthenospheric anisotropy, we will: (1) extend the measurement of fundamental
mode Love wave dispersion to shorter periods, (2) add measurements of higher
mode phase velocity for Love and Rayleigh waves, and (3) extend higher mode
analysis to short periods using ambient noise correlation to fill in the gap in
sensitivity to SV in the shallow lithosphere.