* 1547006
* Doctoral Consortium Support for Joint Conference on Digital Libraries (JCDL) 2015
* CSE,IIS
* 06/15/2015,05/31/2017
* John Downie, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 05/31/2017
* USD 15,126.00

This award supports the participation of 8 doctoral students in the disciplines
of computer science, informatics and library and information science in the
Doctoral Consortium (June 21, 2015) of the 2015 ACM/IEEE-CS Joint Conference on
Digital Libraries (JCDL 2015), to be held in Knoxville, TN, June 21-25, 2015
(http://www.jcdl2015.org). The selected PhD students will be in the early stages
of their dissertation work and will include several international students in
order to provide breadth in exchanging ideas. The goal of the consortium is to
help these students develop their dissertation proposals and research plans
through feedback and guidance from prominent professors and experienced
practitioners from the field of digital library research and development. The
JCDL Doctoral Consortium provides a forum for Ph.D. students to interact with
major figures in the digital library community. These leaders, who come from all
over the world, exemplify a broad set of expertise, diversity of perspectives,
and wealth of knowledge. The consortium provides students with an opportunity to
have broad audience and interact intellectually with professionals who would
otherwise be difficult to meet with. Participating students will be selected on
the basis of a paper describing their research. At the consortium, participants
will have approximately 40 minutes to present their research plans and receive
feedback from the panel. After the consortium the students will revise their
papers based on the consortium's feedback and then they will be published in the
IEEE Technical Committee on Digital Libraries publication "TCDL Bulletin"
(http://www.ieee-tcdl.org/mediawiki/TCDL/index.php/IEEE-TCDL).

The JCDL 2015 Doctoral Consortium will expose promising PhD students to a larger
community, extend their opportunities for intellectual engagement, and encourage
scholarly discourse and networking among new entrants into the field. An
intended outcome of the workshop is to help shape ongoing and future teaching,
research, and development projects in the field of digital libraries by
providing wider exposure for the students to innovative ideas which may generate
new research questions in the future, and to foster a sense of community among
these young researchers at a critical stage in their professional development.
Funded participants will be provided with complimentary attendance at the main
JCDL meeting to further strengthen the building of their personal research
networks and collaborations. The organizers will also take special steps to
solicit participation from institutions with underrepresented groups to extend
the potential benefits and broaden the horizon of expertise in the field.