* 1547734
* I-Corps:  Analytical Chemistry for Everyone Using CMV
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2016
* Jose Almirall, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 06/30/2016
* USD 50,000.00

The research in the areas of explosives detection and gunshot residue detection
has demonstrated a high sensitivity of the device making it applicable for the
collection of low concentration volatiles across a range of applications. The
proposed technology (Capillary Microextractor of Volatiles, CMV) was developed
for the detection of forensic related compounds including drugs, explosive
residues, ignitable liquid residues and gunshot residues. CMV is an inexpensive
way to bring sophisticated analytical chemistry capabilities to everyone.
Potential applications of the CMV include an active learning toolkit to teach
middle and high-school students the science of sampling and detection of small
quantities of volatiles in our environment and will include a social network
that connects users and provides air quality data around the world.
Environmental applications include the use of CMV to sample air suspected of
containing hazardous chemicals in the air we breathe, including carcinogens.
Biomedical applications include the use of CMV to sample human breath to detect
disease markers in a consumer kit, for the first time. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
CMV device is composed of sorbent-coated glass microfibers with an ultra-high
surface area that can absorb volatiles when air is dynamically sampled through
the device. The CMV is small (2cm x 2mm), inexpensive and very easy to use to
sample and pre-concentrate sub-ng quantities of volatile organic compounds
(VOCs) from air in less than 1 minute. The CMV is easily coupled to a gas
chromatograph mass spectrometer and the interpretation of the analytical results
can be standardized for specific applications including indoor air quality
monitoring, forensic analysis, monitoring of chemical exposure and analysis of
breath biomarkers for medical diagnosis and disease monitoring. The commercial
advantages of CMV include single-use, simple and inexpensive sampling of ambient
air or breath, where very low levels of target compounds are present. The CMV
will also be marketed as a research laboratory consumable to scientists for air
sampling. Specific applications will be developed for use by the general public
that include analytical services and interpretation of results in order to make
analytical chemistry more accessible to everyone interested in conducting air
sampling. This team plans to market very specific application test kits for
monitoring volatile compounds in indoor air, as educational tools to teach
chemistry and for human breath air testing.