* 1547055
* BIGDATA: EAGER: Deep Learning in Higher Education Big Data to Explore Latent Student Archetypes and Knowledge Profiles
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Zachary Pardos, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2019
* USD 289,888.00

BIGDATA: Deep Learning in Higher Education Big Data to Explore Latent Student
Archetypes and Knowledge Profiles&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Data science techniques
have revolutionized many academic fields and led to terrific gains in the
commercial sector. They have to date been underutilized in solving critical
problems in the US educational system, particularly in understanding Science,
Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (STEM) learning and learning
environments, broadening participation in STEM, and increasing retention for
students traditionally underserved in STEM. The goals of the Directorate for
Education and Human Resources (EHR), through the EHR Core Research program, for
the Critical Techniques and Technologies for Advancing Foundations and
Applications of Big Data Science &amp; Engineering (BIGDATA) program are to
advance fundamental research aimed at understanding and solving these critical
problems, and to catalyze the use of data science in Education Research. Deep
learning is a relatively novel method in machine learning (ML) that has shown
great improvements over prior ML approaches in successful classification with
very little a priori definitions applied to the data. For example, in image
classification, these techniques have a high rate of success at distinguishing
species and particular animals. This exploratory proposal will investigate the
possibilities of using this approach with educational data from Massive Open
Online Courses (MOOCs) and Learning Management Systems (LMSs). Research has
shown that it is often difficult to use traditional study designs with MOOC data
as enrollment is open and many different types of people enroll in MOOCs. This
factor has made it difficult to make these MOOCs adaptive to individual
learners, an optimal approach to improving learning. The Principal Investigators
will group people in MOOCs who are similar to each other to understand the
different types of people taking the MOOCs so that learning activities can be
tailored to them.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Principal Investigators will examine
a variety of data, from the micro-level of backend data on timing to complete an
exercise, or pauses between activities, to macro-level data such as course
history and grades. They will use deep learning techniques to identify groups of
learners with similar characteristics, the first step in making a learning
environment more adaptive. The proposed research is ambitious and risky. Deep
learning techniques show great promise and the Principal Investigators
demonstrate that they could be extremely helpful in solving key educational
challenges. The Principal Investigators have the technical and learning science
expertise to carry out this ambitious endeavor. As more and larger educational
datasets are developed, the field needs to expand its methodologies to learn
from them. This proposal is unique in its potential for catalyzing this
effort.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is supported by the EHR Core Research
(ECR) program. The ECR program emphasizes fundamental STEM education research
that generates foundational knowledge in the field. Investments are made in
critical areas that are essential, broad and enduring: STEM learning and STEM
learning environments, broadening participation in STEM, and STEM workforce
development.