* 1547417
* I-Corps L:  A Commercial Approach to Distribute Fused Research-Mentoring Modules
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2016
* Karen Burg, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Karen Crosby
* 07/31/2016
* USD 50,000.00

Through the NSF Innovation Corps for Learning Program, (I-Corps L), this project
will develop ways to achieve more widespread use of effective methods for
helping undergraduate students and faculty gain greater benefits from
undergraduate research experiences. Collaborating with faculty on research can
be transformative experiences for undergraduate students. Research participation
can increase students' confidence and enthusiasm leading to improved academic
performance and stronger career focus. Working with faculty on research also
helps students create credentials for future research and professional
opportunities. Some work also indicates that, for undergraduates, the personal
connections with faculty and graduate students are more important than the
actual research content. The quality of faculty mentoring has a significant
influence on the benefits of research participation for the student. However few
faculty are able to develop optimally effective mentoring practices on their
own. This project will use a set of effective practices about mentoring and have
been developed to help undergraduate students and the faculty with whom they
will collaborate. Topics address issues of recruiting, training, and
communication. The program is a series of units, for use by both the mentor and
mentee, that explain core topics and help build the type effective mentor-mentee
relationship essential to achieving the greatest benefit to the student for
undergraduate research. This I-Corps for Learning project will develop
approaches to enable this mentor-mentee training program to be easily
implemented across a wide spectrum of undergraduate institutions across the
United States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Relationships that undergraduate students in
Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics cultivate with a research
mentor have the potential to be among the most formative and influential
relationships of their lives. It is known that a students' educational and
career persistence is empowered by confidence and critical thinking skills
gained during hands-on experiences. Research mentors are a key to bolstering a
mentee's confidence and developing that mentee's critical thinking skills.
Immersive formal research programs, such as the NSF's Research Experience for
Undergraduates, are high-quality learning experiences that combine research and
career development activities in group settings. Universities may also have
their own formal research programs that also facilitate hands-on lab experience.
The mentoring experience (faculty member/undergraduate student, graduate
student/undergraduate student) can vary widely in quality and there is a concern
that research mentees often do not receive the quality of holistic mentoring
that is possible. This can be attributed to mentors not having access to, or
knowledge of, educational materials and a lack of time for mentors to develop
and assess their own program. By increasing the widespread implementation of
effective mentoring practices, this project will help to improve the
effectiveness of student-faculty research collaborations throughout STEM
education.