* 1547766
* I-Corps:  Market Evaluation for Credible Autocoding  (MECA)
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2016
* Eric Feron, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 06/30/2016
* USD 50,000.00

Automobiles, airplanes, and radio-therapy machines are all examples of safety-
critical cyber-physical systems, i.e., systems that bring together software and
physical artifacts to form intelligent systems of high functional value to
society. These systems are called safety-critical, because unanticipated
failures can rapidly lead to the loss of lives. This project is concerned with
investigating the needs of industry for the development of future generations of
cyber-physical systems, with a specific emphasis on software's impact on overall
system safety. By properly identifying industry's needs, the team will be able
to establish an effective and relevant safety-critical software development
process and formulate recommendations about the products that need developing in
support of this process. To do so, the investigators will engage into a series
of face-to-face interviews with industry representatives, and the findings of
the interviews will be shared with business development specialists. To support
the interviews, the team will rely on its experience with building a prototype
tool that automatically turns high-level safety-critical software specifications
into error-free computer programs. Credible autocoding, a term coined by the
project team, is the activity whereby cyber-physical software system
specifications are transformed into code, together with the verifiable assurance
that the code itself meets those system specifications. The hypothesis of this
project is that credible autocoding will contribute to reaching the very high
levels of safety these systems must achieve in order to be accepted by civil
society; the lower development costs enabled by credible autocoding will also
ensure that a broader share of the population will be able to enjoy the benefits
of the cyber-physical revolution, as this will allow small companies to compete
in a market where currently only big players can afford extreme costs of safety-
critical software certification. This study will consist of on-site interviews
with several decision-makers working with the markets in which credible
autocoding might be a necessity. The outcome of these interviews will be
presented in a structured fashion to experts accredited by the NSF I-Corps
management at regular intervals. A positive outcome would provide a solid base
upon which the I-Corps team can obtain funding and proceed with product
development activities meeting industry?s needs. No matter what the outcome,
these results will give the team an opportunity to adapt its product definition
effort. Such an adaptation may occur at all levels, ranging from product
packaging to the basic research options pursued by the team in the area of
safety-critical, cyber-physical systems. These activities will be supported by
Gene-Auto+, the team's credible autocoding prototype developed under prior
funding from NSF.