* 1547635
* 2016 Ocean Global Change Biology Gordon Research Conference
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2016,09/30/2016
* Gretchen Hofmann, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 09/30/2016
* USD 31,910.00

The study of global change biology in the oceans has emerged as a major area of
focus for marine sciences. This area of research is multidisciplinary,
encompassing biological, chemical and physical oceanography, along with marine
ecology and evolutionary biology. This research community has previously been
challenged in meeting to share data and advances made in this rapidly developing
field of study. However, the inaugural Gordon Research Conference (GRC) on Ocean
Global Change Biology in July 2014 created an opportunity for the U.S. science
community to discussion and share cutting edge results in the retreat-like
atmosphere of a Gordon Conference. The meeting was very successful, with
excellent attendance, particularly from early career scientists. This proposal
is a request for funding to support the second and upcoming 2016 GRC on Ocean
Global Change on to be held at the Waterville Valley Conference Center in
Waterville Valley, NH on July 17-22, 2016. Funding to the 2016 GRC on Ocean
Global Change Biology will support U.S. researchers in attending a meeting where
ideas can be exchanged and research directions can be improved and advanced.
These meetings are highly attended by scientists from other countries, thus
creating an opportunity for U.S. marine scientists to develop international
collaborations in this globally important field. During the GRC itself and in
the Gordon Research Seminar preceding it, awards will support interdisciplinary
training for graduate students and postdoctoral researchers. The project will
advance the science communication skills and insights of the U.S. scientists via
a special theme designed to address communicating the results of scientific
research to policymakers and managers&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This meeting will
facilitate the sharing of new results, often times unpublished material, from
investigators in Ocean Global Change Biology. The fist meeting served to
highlight exciting new areas of research in the field and the second GRC on
Ocean Global Change Biology will build upon these important emerging directions
in 9 themes that comprise the actual 5-day conference. These include the need to
focus on adaptation and evolutionary rescue as a possible response to climate
change and multistressors, the use of genomics tools and next generation
sequencing to facilitate the study of evolutionary response, the need to examine
species interactions in the context of environmental change, to continue to
explore the interaction of physical factors such as OA, temperature and
deoxygenation of coastal waters, and finally to also examine ecosystem-level
consequences where possible. Notably, in reviews of the first GRC, conferees
noted there a session on science communication. Such a session will be included
to discuss how the results of research in ocean global change research can be
made more accessible to policymakers and managers. In designing the new themes,
the Chair (Dr. Philip Boyd) and Vice Chair (Dr. Gretchen Hofmann) have attempted
to take into consideration a venue that will focus on these identified areas,
and to also report on progress in this rapidly advancing field of ocean global
change biology.&lt;br/&gt;.