* 1547502
* EAGER: Improving Incentives and Awareness, to Increase the Security Posture of Critical Infrastructures
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Alvaro Cardenas, University of Texas at Dallas
* Continuing Grant
* Shannon Beck
* 08/31/2018
* USD 163,956.00

The protection of cyber-physical critical infrastructures such as the power
grid, water distribution networks, and transportation networks against computer
attacks is a matter of national security, public safety, and economic stability;
however, most of these critical assets are owned and operated by private
companies with pressing operational requirements, tight security budgets, and
aversion to regulatory oversight. As a result it is not clear that market
incentives alone will create enough momentum to improve the security posture of
these systems. This project studies how to incentivize investments and risk
management for CPS security. A second related problem is that while current
cyber-physical infrastructures are monitored by an operations center, this
system does not currently help operators identify if a problem, alarm, or fault
was the result of a physical accident or if there is any indication that a
cyber-attack caused the problem. This second research focus aims to improve the
assessment of the security states of these systems by developing the foundations
towards an industrial security operations center to help operators identify the
root cause (accident or cyber-attack) of alerts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is a
large body of work focusing on interdependent security with models of firms
participating in protection and insurance markets. Most of the security models
and economic interdependent investment formulations focus solely on information
technology infrastructures, and are meant to model cybercriminal activities,
where attackers are rational profit-driven agents and defenders experience
constant security breaches allowing them to generate risk models based on data.
In contrast, computer attacks to critical infrastructure systems represent a
completely different set of malicious agents. These agents may not be profit-
driven and will attack only sporadically. In addition, interdependent physical
infrastructures are managed by federated agents, and cyber-attacks will have
physical consequences extending the domain of the single firm attacked. This
project leverages and extends the literature of investment in reliability for
large-scale critical infrastructures as well as insurance, contracts between
firms with interdependent assets, and extreme risk. The second research focus
leverages the interest of the CPS industry in analyzing the data collected by
sensor networks. Security Information and Event Managers (SIEM) solutions were
designed for enterprise IT, and do not include, aggregate, and correlate the
sensor data from the physical world. To mitigate this gap this proposal
investigates how to aggregate information for a new system incorporating the
data from control centers and those from security operations centers, laying
thus the foundation to create an Industrial Security Operations Center (ISOC).