* 1547396
* RTG: Computational and Applied Mathematics in Statistical Science
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2024
* Michael Stein, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Yulia Gel
* 06/30/2024
* USD 1,749,360.00

This Research Training Group (RTG) project supports creation of a dynamic,
interactive, and vertically integrated community of students and researchers
working together in computational and applied mathematics and statistics. The
activity recognizes the ways in which applied mathematics and statistics are
becoming increasingly integrated. For example, mechanistic models for physical
problems that reflect underlying physical laws are being combined with data-
driven approaches in which statistical inference and optimization play key
roles. These developments are transforming research agendas throughout
statistics and applied mathematics, with fundamental problems in analyzing data
leading to new areas of mathematical and statistical research. A result is a
growing need to train the next generation of statisticians and computational and
applied mathematicians in new ways, to confront data-centric problems in the
natural and social sciences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research and educational
activities of the project lie at the interface of statistics, computation, and
applied mathematics. The research includes investigations in chemistry and
molecular dynamics, climate science, computational neuroscience, convex and
nonlinear optimization, machine learning, and statistical genetics. The research
team is made up of a diverse group of twelve faculty, including researchers at
Toyota Technological Institute at Chicago and Argonne National Laboratory. The
RTG is centered on vertically integrated research experiences for students, and
includes innovations in both undergraduate and graduate education. These include
the formation of working groups of students and postdocs to provide an
interactive environment where students can actively explore innovations in
computation, mathematics, and statistics in a broad range of disciplines. Post-
docs will assume leadership roles in mentoring graduate students and advanced
undergraduates. Participants in the RTG will receive an educational experience
that provides them with strong preparation for positions in industry,
government, and academics, with an ability to adopt approaches to problem
solving that are drawn from across the computational, mathematical, and
statistical sciences.