* 1547414
* EAGER: Paleontological Proteomics Initiative: Developing Theory and Applications in Molecular Paleontology
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2015,01/31/2022
* Ross MacPhee, American Museum Natural History
* Standard Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 01/31/2022
* USD 283,823.00

Molecular paleontology is a new field that uses information derived from
biological molecules (biomolecules) to make inferences about evolutionary
relationships, in this case for extinct organisms. During life, living things
produce many kinds of biomolecules encoded by their DNA, and these may be
preserved for varying lengths of time after the organism's death. Proteins, for
example, are composed of amino acids, and each amino acid is specified by a
precise piece of genetic information that varies slightly from species to
species within an evolutionary group. Thus, by working out a protein's amino
acid composition, the genetic sequence that originally produced it can be worked
out indirectly, even in the absence of the DNA itself. This is significant for
paleontological research because structural proteins like collagen, which make
up almost all of the organic fraction of a bone, are very hardy and can last a
long time after an animal's death; at least 4 million years in favorable
circumstances, and possibly much longer. DNA, by contrast, degrades over a few
tens to a few hundreds of thousands of years, even in the best preservational
contexts. In recent years, instrumentation and lab techniques for acquiring
compositional information from ancient biomolecules have greatly improved,
enabling the researchers and their interdisciplinary collaborators in
geochemistry to undertake a focused range of experiments in molecular
paleontology. This research will advance the field of paleo-proteomics by
addressing two main goals. The first goal will be to explore the limits of the
technique and identify what kinds of fossils and what types of fossil
preservation conditions yield the best results for analyses of biomolecules of
extinct taxa. The second goal will apply the newly developed technique to
specific 'test cases' to highlight the feasibility of the methods and their
generality for application to diverse questions in systematics. Molecular
methods have already proven vitally important for improving knowledge of the
history of life on Earth, and the researchers' work will lead to both
theoretical and practical improvements in ancient proteomics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;How far back in time can ancient collagen proteomics
actually reach and yield high-quality sequence information useful for
phylogenetic studies? What are the best targets for preservation and systematic
interpretation? Proof-of-concept investigations designed to answer these
questions will focus on two areas of interest. (1) To establish fundamental
geochemical boundary conditions affecting collagen survival, experiments will be
conducted with a physically stabilized protein (collagen in fossil bone) and a
proteome with restricted reactants (eggshell proteome). Work will center on
assessing thermal age and controlling for mineral diagenesis, with analysis
conducted via state-of-the-art mass spectrometry and diagenetic modeling to
estimate the kinetics of key decay parameters (racemization, hydrolysis,
oxidation, deamidation). (2) To establish the practical value of collagen
proteomics for solving systematic problems, taxa from various temporal intervals
in North and South America, West Indies, Asia, and Antarctica will be sampled
for phylogenetic studies using the same instrumental approach as in (1). In
addition to providing phylogenetically useful information, these investigations
will further extend assessment of taphonomic conditions that enhance fossil
protein preservation. The overall aim is to create a network of collaborative
systematic paleontologists and protein geochemists interested in joint research
in areas of mutual interest.