* 1547062
* Bilateral NSF/BIO-BBSRC: Development of the Grass Leaf
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2021
* Sarah Hake, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 08/31/2021
* USD 500,000.00

Flowering plants exhibit two major growth strategies. One (called the dicot
strategy) is for the growing tip of the plant to climb upward by producing an
elongating stem below it. The alternative strategy (termed the monocot strategy)
is for the growing tip to stay protected at the base of the plant and produce a
series of leaves that rise above the plant and then grow around it. This latter
monocot strategy has the advantage of protecting the growing tip at the base of
the plant for much of its life. It enables grasses to survive extensive grazing,
and it is the growth strategy that is used by plants like wheat, maize and rice.
Despite its use by plants of ecological and agricultural importance, this
monocot strategy is not well understood. In this project, a collaborative team
of US (University of California, Berkeley) and UK (John Innes Centre)
investigators will use a combination of tools including high resolution imaging
and computational methods to test mechanisms that will develop predictive and
testable models. These models will describe the processes of growth and shape
changes in the monocot leaf. Because the position of the leaf blade has an
effect on the amount of light a plant can harvest for photosynthesis, this work
could significantly impact crop yield. Biotech industries will benefit from the
work, through greater fundamental understanding of processes involved in tissue
development. The investigators will be actively engaged in education at all
levels, including K-12 and public education, through the development of hands on
training activities, YouTube videos, and more traditional methods of diffusion
of research findings.

Computational modeling has led to preliminary hypotheses of monocot leaf
development. A key idea is that growth is oriented by a polarity field, which is
analogous to the way a magnetic field can be used to orient directions of
navigation. The observed growth and shape changes of the monocot leaf can then
be explained by simple changes in the polarity field and the pattern of growth
rates it orients. The aim of this project is to test and further build upon this
model and determine whether the polarity fields and the growth rates the model
predicts are correct using the maize monocot system (which has the advantage of
well-developed genetics and associated technologies.) By looking at markers that
highlight the presumed polarity fields and by determining the growth rates in
different regions of the leaf, predictions of the model can be tested. Models
will also be tested by analyzing mutants in which key transitions of development
are disrupted. These studies will be made quantitative by writing computer
programs that automatically extract the relevant measures. New computational
methods will also be developed and applied to this system so that the processes
can be understood at different levels, i.e. from cellular to tissue scale.

This collaborative US/UK project is supported by the US National Science
Foundation and the UK Biotechnology and Biological Sciences Research Council.