* 1547723
* CREST Center for Energy and Sustainability at California State University, Los Angeles
* EDU,EES
* 04/01/2016,08/31/2022
* Frank Gomez, California State L A University Auxiliary Services Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Luis Cubano
* 08/31/2022
* USD 5,299,996.00

Center for Energy and Sustainability&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With National Science
Foundation support, the California State University, Los Angeles Center for
Energy and Sustainability will engage in research on energy and energy-related
materials and technologies. The overarching purpose of the Center is the
development and production of novel materials with renewable energy
applications. Center researchers plan to develop a novel fuel cell and assess
its efficiency; address several key issues that have precluded development of
more efficient solar cells to harvest solar power for electricity generation;
and help reduce energy loss in power transmission. Center activities include the
establishment of core materials and characterization facilities as well as a
Master's degree program in Materials Science and Engineering. The Center will
increase the number of student participants; as well as the number of CREST
trained underrepresented minority students accepted into doctoral
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Center's research agenda addresses both
fundamental and applied problems in energy science and technology. The
"Microfluidic-based Fuel Cells and Optimization" subproject will develop chip-
based fuel cells and efficient catalysts for powering portable devices. Research
focuses on developing and accessing paper microfluidic fuel cells. Paper-based
devices have attracted widespread attention due to their low cost, portability,
and minimal sample and reagent volume requirement. Research also focuses on the
development of formic acid, methanol, and hydrogen fuel cells on
polydimethysiloxane platforms using Nafion membranes. In the subproject on
"Advanced Materials for Photovoltaic Cells," new inorganic and organic
nanomaterials are integrated into photovoltaic cells so that electricity can be
generated in an efficient and environmentally friendly manner. Research focuses
on ruthenium dye-sensitized cells, as well as on perovskite cells. The
subproject, "Properties and Applications of Overdoped High-Temperature
Superconductors," correlates the structures to functions of both low- and high-
temperature superconductors. The goal is to discover superconductivity at
temperatures high enough to revolutionize energy related technologies. This
subproject also involves applied research on high-temperature superconducting
tapes to enhance their critical densities and irreversibility fields for high-
current applications such as power cables and high-field magnets. Synergy among
the three subprojects stems from their thematic overlap and complementarity.