* 1547908
* EAGER: Fundamentals of Wireless Networks using Metamaterial-enhanced Magnetic Induction
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2015,02/28/2018
* Zhi Sun, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Thyagarajan Nandagopal
* 02/28/2018
* USD 158,515.00

Existing wireless networks do not perform in many hostile and complex
environments, including the underground, underwater, oil reservoirs, groundwater
aquifers, nuclear plants, pipelines, tunnels, and the concrete buildings. The
wireless networking capability in such environments can enable important
applications in the environmental, industrial, homeland security, law
enforcement, and military fields, such as monitoring and maintenance of
groundwater and/or oil reservoirs using wireless sensor networks, damage
assessment and mitigation in nuclear plants using robot swarms, or real-time
projection of information to and from military squads in unknown tunnels and
bunkers, among others. However, the harsh wireless channels prevent the direct
usage of the electromagnetic (EM) wave-based techniques due to the high material
absorption when penetrating the lossy medium. Moreover, since practical
environments can be complex combinations of air, water, soil, concrete, and
metal, solutions only applicable for one single medium, e.g., acoustic wave
based networking for underwater medium, do not work. To this end, this project
investigates the wireless networks based on a new communication mechanism, i.e.,
metamaterial-enhanced magnetic induction (M2I), which can establish reliable
wireless connections in the aforementioned hostile and complex environments. The
project can eliminate the environmental barriers to existing wireless
applications and radically change current communication and sensing systems.

The project will explore the fundamentals of M2I-based wireless networks through
a closed-loop combination of mathematical modeling, simulations, and
experimental evaluation. M2I uses magnetic induction (MI) as the physical signal
carrier for best penetration. Different from the very limited range in most MI
techniques, M2I takes advantage of a metamaterial layer outside each antenna to
achieve reasonable communication range for practical applications (tens of
meters with pocket-sized devices). Moreover, all the nodes in the wireless
network as well as the conductive objects in the environments are strongly
coupled together (due to M2I), forming a Meta-environment, which enables unique
networking functionalities, such as the passive relaying and environment-aware
localization. The core contributions are in four main thrusts: (i) M2I antenna
modeling and design; (ii) channel, interference, and capacity analysis under the
new networking paradigm; (iii) environment-aware localization algorithms based
on the M2I-enabled cognition capability; (iv) performance evaluation and
prototyping through a cross layer simulator based on Comsol Multiphysics and
NS-3, and a testbed based on software-defined radios and lab-fabricated
metamaterials.