* 1547229
* Digitization:  iDigBio: Integrated Digitized Biocollections Phase 2
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2023
* Gregory Riccardi, University of Florida
* Cooperative Agreement
* Steven Ellis
* 08/31/2023
* USD 16,454,662.00

Integrated Digitized Biocollections (idigbio.org) at the University of Florida
(UF) and Florida State University (FSU) is the national resource for Advancing
Digitization of Biodiversity Collections (ADBC). The ADBC program was developed
in response to the need for a sustained effort to digitize, and make available
online, the vast amount of information in the nation's biodiversity collections,
which may contain up to 1 billion specimens. For biological specimens,
information digitized include names of species, localities and dates of
collection, digital photographs, sound, video, and 3-D models created from a
variety of sources. This community digitization effort is supported by ADBC
through Thematic Collections Networks (TCNs), groups of institutions that
digitize specimens to address a major research topic such as the relationship
between agricultural crops and insects or the impacts of invasive species on
natural ecosystems. iDigBio assists in coordinating activities of the TCNs by
facilitating development of standards and workflows for digitization of
specimens and related information, providing cyberinfrastructure resources to
enable long-term preservation of digital data, promoting novel and traditional
uses of collections data in research and outreach, and working with the
collections community to plan for the long-term sustainability of the national
program and the resources that program has produced. The availability of
digitized information about specimens greatly enhances the ability to conduct
research on biological diversity and to address some of the most fundamental
questions in biology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the past five years, the national
effort to digitize information in the nation's biodiversity collections has been
successfully catalyzed by funding from NSF and advanced by activities of
iDigBio. Collaborations with data providers and users have been developed, goals
and priorities defined, and best practices related to digitization identified.
Cyberinfrastructure resources, including a national search portal, have been
provided. These community-driven activities have led to improved digitization
practices, increased involvement in digitization and training, and adoption of
instruments and informatics tools that improve the efficiency and scalability of
digitization and research workflows in all types of biodiversity collections.
iDigBio works with staff in more than 450 collections in 270 institutions
distributed in all 50 states. Communication among stakeholders to increase
access to collections data has been established through workshops, webinars, and
the use of social media. iDigBio has sponsored attendance of more than 2,200
participants from 511 institutions to over 65 workshops and symposia that
targeted digitization. iDigBio has ingested more than 670 record sets containing
48 million records and 13 million images. All data ingested are indexed so that
queries and other types of index-based access are supported. Searches for data
can be done through a Web-based graphical interface or through programmatic
APIs. Search and analytical tools enable users to mine diverse data such as
taxonomy, location, images, traits, and vocalizations. Funding for another five
years, will allow iDigBio to continue its successful strategies with an
increasing emphasis on data improvement and use in research and outreach. This
national resource created by the ADBC program is increasingly recognized as an
essential resource for information on biodiversity and digitization. As the
scientific and societal benefits of validated collections data are realized,
digitization will become a common and sustained practice in natural history
collections.