* 1547476
* Passive Optical Remote Sensing of Wind Velocities and Turbulence by Spatiotemporal Analysis of Image Distortions of Random Scenes
* GEO,AGS
* 02/15/2016,01/31/2020
* Andreas Muschinski, NorthWest Research Associates, Incorporated
* Continuing Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 01/31/2020
* USD 599,958.00

The goal of the project is to develop, apply, and field-test methodologies to
exploit spatiotemporal distortions of dual-telescope, optical image sequences of
naturally illuminated, random scenes for the retrieval of range-resolved cross-
wind velocities and turbulence statistics. The investigators will use random,
natural surfaces with rich optical texture, such as bare mountain faces,
hillsides, and canyon walls, which are ubiquitous in the American West. The sun
and the moon will serve as light sources by day and by night, respectively. The
availability of inexpensive, scalable, multi-purpose techniques and systems for
passive optical remote sensing of the atmospheric boundary layer will benefit
society in several areas, including weather monitoring and forecasting; air-
quality monitoring and forecasting; cross-wind monitoring at highways, airport
runways, and rocket launch sites; and wind sensing in support of wind-farm
operations. The project will provide resources for mentoring a postdoctoral
researcher and a graduate student, contributing to science, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM) education and educator
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study will use pairs of synchronized image
sequences collected with two digital cameras mounted at two, laterally spaced,
large-aperture telescopes pointing at the same target area. Target distances
will range from hundreds of meters to tens of kilometers. Limited-visibility
effects due to Rayleigh and non-Rayleigh scatter will be negligible for short
ranges but are expected to play an important role for longer ranges. The
proposed research will combine observational, computational, and theoretical
methodologies from (1) atmospheric turbulence and boundary layer meteorology;
(2) wave propagation through atmospheric turbulence; (3) atmospheric radiative
transfer of visible light; and (4) imaging physics of coherent and incoherent
light. The research will integrate, apply, and test concepts and hypotheses that
are traditionally addressed separately in different science and engineering
disciplines.