* 1547155
* EARS: Millimeter Wave Massive MIMO: A New Frontier for Enhanced Radio Access
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Arnold Swindlehurst, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 08/31/2019
* USD 632,998.00

It is estimated that there are more wireless devices in use today than people on
the planet. This explosive growth has created a capacity crisis for mobile
operators whose impact goes well beyond the inconveniences experienced by casual
users. Wireless communication is now a commodity, like roads, water, and
electricity, on which the nation's economic development and government services
rely. Emergency services, medical information systems, environmental monitoring,
smart-grid energy distribution, smart transportation systems - all of these
technologies depend on reliable access to high speed broadband wireless. It is
clear that dramatic improvements in spectral access and capacity will be needed
soon to accommodate the multitude of users who need broadband services anytime,
anywhere. This proposal aims to address this critical need by determining how to
harness potential gains from three new technologies: (1) the use of very high
frequency bands, 10-20 times higher than those used in today's wireless
networks, (2) decreasing the size of wireless "cells" to allow frequencies to be
reused in a more dense fashion, and (3) the adoption of massive arrays of
hundreds of antennas in order to handle the inevitable increase in interference
and need for user selectivity. There appears to be considerable symbiosis among
these new technologies that could potentially be exploited to achieve
transformative gains in network speed and connectivity - increasing them by a
factor of 1000 - although numerous challenges would have to first be vercome.
Given the ubiquitous need for improved broadband access in industry, government,
medicine and the home, the progress made by this research in overcoming these
challenges will have a broad impact on all walks of life.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A potential remedy for the shortage of spectrum is the use
of millimeter wave frequency bands, which offer significantly more bandwidth
than today's systems. Other approaches for increasing wireless capacity are also
rekindling interest in the potential use of millimeter wave frequencies for
cellular communications, such as using pico- and femto-cells with ranges on the
order of 10-200 meters to increase frequency reuse, and the idea of basestations
equipped with a very large number of antennas that can simultaneously
accommodate many co-channel users, an idea referred to as massive multi-input
multi-output wireless. These ideas work well in combination with each other:
smaller cells are attractive for operation at millimeter wave frequencies where
radio frequency path loss is significantly higher, the shorter wavelength
associated with higher frequencies is appealing for massive multi-input multi-
output wireless designs since the physical dimensions of the antenna array and
associated electronics are reduced, the large beamforming gains achievable with
very large antenna arrays can extend coverage to help overcome the high
millimeter wave path loss, and the reduction in channel coherence time at
millimeter wave frequencies is offset by the lower mobility and hence the higher
channel coherence bandwidth due to operation in small cells. If the individual
gains in capacity offered by these approaches could be achieved in combination
with one another, then one could envision realizing the orders-of-magnitude
increases in throughput that are predicted to be required in coming years. The
goal of this proposal is to investigate the feasibility implementing a
millimeter wave massive multi-input multi output system incorporating in excess
of 100 antennas, addressing issues associated with millimeter wave signal
propagation, communication system design, the impact of communication and signal
processing requirements on the hardware design, and how practical hardware
limitations affect achievable performance. Ultimately, this research effort will
demonstrate the degree to which millimeter wave small-cell massive multi-input
multi-output wireless systems can achieve their potential for dramatically
enhanced access to the radio spectrum. No prior work has fully addressed the
interdisciplinary issues associated with implementing a complete millimeter wave
massive multi-input multi-output wireless transceiver, covering crucial aspects
such as the impact of antenna array geometries, demodulation, baseband
processing, sampling and multichannel data aggregation. Prior efforts have been
restricted to scenarios with a small number of antennas, lower frequencies, or
hybrid architectures in which full beamforming flexibility is not available.
There are many interdisciplinary challenges that must be addressed before a
system that jointly exploits millimeter wave frequencies, massive multi-input
multi-output wireless and small cells could be analyzed and its potential for
providing enhanced spectrum access quantified. The enormous gains in capacity
and spectral efficiency that could be provided by a millimeter wave massive
multi-input multi-output wireless system could have a revolutionary effect on
wireless applications. This impact includes not only consumer applications, but
those involving emergency services, medical information systems, environmental
monitoring, smart-grid energy distribution, smart transportation systems - all
technologies that rely on access to high-speed broadband wireless services.