* 1547768
* I-Corps L:  Interactive Stem Cell Demonstration Activity
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2015,12/31/2016
* Robert Nerem, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Karen Crosby
* 12/31/2016
* USD 50,000.00

Through the NSF Innovation Corps for Learning Program (I-Corps L), this project
will develop ways to increase the scale and impact of interactive activity to
help high school students and the general public understand the foundational
principles of stem cell biology. The project focusing on stem cells is an
interactive activity and demonstration developed to educate the public about key
principles of stem cell biology and stem cell research. As stem cell research
advances, there is a critical need to develop a solid foundational understanding
of stem cells in both the next generation of scientists and the general public.
Currently, there is a lack of interactive engaging activities and demonstrations
available for use in the classroom to engage students on the topic. Most
materials are limited to static presentations or non-interactive videos. This
stem cell activity is unique in that the students begin to understand key
concepts while engaging in an interactive activity. A prototype has been tested
in high school biology classrooms and science festivals, with very positive
results. Students involved are engaged throughout the interactive demonstration,
rather than merely receiving information passively. The activity improves
students' understanding of what stem cells are and the challenges of stem cell
research. This I-Corps for Learning project will develop approaches to enable
this engaging activity to be easily implemented by other educators throughout
the country.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The basic biological principles taught though
this activity and apparatus include self-renewal, pluripotency, and
differentiation. Additionally, students learn about growth factors and
inhibitors through the use of the available tools to guide their pluripotent
stem cell down the desired path. The equipment is currently available in two
different sizes. A table-top sized unit is available for teachers to use in a
classroom setting. A larger board version provides a tool for STEM outreach
volunteers and STEM advocates to use when participating in STEM outreach events.
Through I-Corps L, implementation in public school systems and STEM outreach
organizations will be expanded with the goal of achieving broader impact in a
sustainable manner.