* 1547164
* CICI: Data Provenance:  Collaborative Research: Provenance Assurance Using Currency Primitives
* CSE,OAC
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2019
* Richard Brooks, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 12/31/2019
* USD 321,519.00

Data provenance is the ability to track data history including things such as
where the data resided, who handled it, and what systems stored, forwarded and
processed it. This research builds on the architecture of the digital currency
Bitcoin. It develops distributed data ledgers - similar to bookkeeping ledgers -
that maintain data history so it can't be manipulated by hackers trying to hide
their activities. Data consistency guarantees that everyone gets the right
answers about where, who, and what regardless of which ledger is read. This
software advances the security of computing systems by making data accountable,
especially for online commerce and big data ("the cloud''). It secures forensic
information taken from compromised computers for further analysis. It validates
whether privacy requirements are being met for medical records. The key outcome
is a software prototype that implements the complete system and illustrates the
ability to store, maintain, and update provenance information for real data.

A data provenance framework will be designed, prototyped, evaluated and then
delivered as an Application Programmer Interface, software library, and
distributed service. This work will produce a reusable distributed service
architecture achieving scalability by using distributed services that maintain
ledger information. The system leverages Bitcoin cryptocurrency by building on
Bitcoin's block-chain architecture to maintain provenance metadata securely. It
leverages existing tools for provenance data exploration and visualization.
Digital signatures from both the server/system as well as the user creates dual
information about possession, while distributed ledgers remove control and
maintenance of metadata from the user who creates it. The prototype enables
research into long-term provenance creation, maintenance, and utilization for
workflows in the area of cybersecurity as well studies of how to integrate and
secure provenance into existing file systems and network services. Opt-in and
passive (involuntary) provenance systems will be enabled using the API, library,
and distributed ledgers prototyped, enabling data provenance for systems where
needed, notably high assurance cloud computing and scientific workflow systems.
The tool can be used to enable reproducibility of published results from
archived data and artifacts.