* 1547475
* Creating a Global Network of Mountain Observatories: A workshop to be held in September 2015 in Crested Butte, CO
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2016
* Jeffrey Brown, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 07/31/2016
* USD 25,000.00

The goal of this workshop is to plan a global network of mountain observatories
by linking and aligning existing mountain observatories. Mountains are high-
value features within the Earth system. Mountain regions are currently
experiencing profound environmental changes, which translate into serious
challenges to society. Bringing science to bear on these challenges requires
more comprehensive, long term data on mountain systems around the world. A
global network of observatories on mountain social ecological systems is a key
step toward obtaining these data and promoting comparative analyses.
Observatories of various types exist already in mountains around the world; the
key is to bring them into communication with each other and to move toward
congruent observing methodologies that reveal the complexity of these social
ecological systems. Such a network of observatories accelerates innovation and
aligns methodologies. A network promotes exchange on questions and methods by
promoting transparency and breaking barriers between disciplines and cultures. A
network can also develop data analysis and management policies and procedure to
support collaboration. Members within the network build stronger contacts, see
different solutions, and learn whom they can work with to find help with their
challenges.

The workshop will convent an international panel of representatives from
research, government, and education to address the motivating science questions,
the structure of the network, the key variables now and for the future, the
management of data, and communication. It will define objectives to bring
together data from many different sites, modeling approaches that could help
extend observations and best practices with respect to the engagement of
stakeholders and the co-production of knowledge. Many of the environmental
issues facing mountain regions have serious social implications. The participant
list includes stakeholders that can make the network more effective at informing
decision making and policy. Observatories can serve as active sites where
researchers can engage with and learn from advocates, business, and elected
officials. Such a network will also encourage active engagement with local
stakeholders, K-12 education, governmental and non-governmental organizations,
and institutions of higher learning.