* 1547071
* Collaborative Research: Multi-scale validation of earthquake source parameters to resolve any spatial, temporal or magnitude-dependent variability at Parkfield, CA
* GEO,EAR
* 03/15/2016,02/28/2021
* Xiaowei Chen, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 02/28/2021
* USD 224,262.00

Improved estimates of seismic hazard are necessary to reduce the major human and
financial losses suffered in earthquakes every year. The stress released during
an earthquake (called the stress drop) controls the ground accelerations
produced by the earthquake waves, and hence the damage potential. The stress
drop is also fundamental to understanding and modeling the physics of the
earthquake source, because it defines the energy budget. It is important to know
whether stress drop varies from region to region, and with earthquake magnitude.
This is because earthquake parameters and ground shaking measurements in regions
of high seismicity are often used to estimate hazard in other regions that may
have lower historic seismicity rate, for example regions with induced
seismicity. However it is currently unknown how much stress drop really varies
between earthquakes. The observed variability ranges over a factor of 100 to
1000, which poses significant challenges in interpreting stress drop results. It
is often not clear how much of the variability comes from measurement
uncertainties, and how much represents real regional variations in fault
properties. The investigators will focus on the section of the San Andreas Fault
near Parkfield, in central California, where there is a high rate of
earthquakes, including distinct sequences of small repeating earthquakes, and
the fault also creeps slowly. It is one of the best-instrumented sections of
fault in the world. The award will aid the development of a new geophysics group
at the University of Oklahoma by supporting a beginning-career female PI, and a
graduate student. The student will have the opportunity to be an active
participant in the research communities in both Boston and Oklahoma. The
research activities will help to establish earthquake research in Oklahoma, a
state with increased awareness of earthquake hazard due to dramatic increase in
seismicity, and will be integrated into classroom
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The large number of earthquakes and the long-
term dense networks of seismometers make this region a natural laboratory for
understanding earthquake source physics. The multiple-scale dense observational
networks provide on-scale recordings for a wide magnitude range; the existing
detailed research provides a well-defined context in which to interpret the
results. The Investigators propose to apply multi-scale (both large- and small-
scale) analysis methods to the dense dataset of earthquake waveforms aimed at
resolving the continuing controversy regarding earthquake scaling and
variability. The investigators will calculate the stress release for a large
number of earthquakes in multiple ways, using different subsets of the data. The
work will focus on three distinct questions: (1) Is the apparent scaling of
stress drop an artifact of poor data with limited bandwidth, limited magnitude
range, and inadequate correction for site and propagation effects? (2) Do the
stress drops of repeating earthquakes at Parkfield change with time as a result
of the change in strain rate from the 2004 M6 Parkfield earthquake? (3) What
data quality and analysis requirements are needed to confirm that spatial and
temporal variations observed here and in future studies are real? The proposed
research will increase understanding of the earthquake source process, both at
Parkfield, and beyond. The methods developed, and the greater understanding of
their limitations and constraints should enable a higher resolution of
earthquake source parameters, and hence seismic hazard maps, worldwide.