* 1547958
* SBIR Phase I:  Topological Interlocking Manufactured Concrete Block
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2016,01/31/2017
* Peter Roberts, Spherical Block LLC
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 01/31/2017
* USD 164,936.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research project will be in availability of high performance, affordable
structures made from manufactured concrete block. These structures include
roofs, such as domes, arches, cylinders, spheres, and more. The high efficiency
of concrete block manufacturing will be used to create an entirely new range of
products from concrete block. This novel technology will help grow the block
manufacturing industry, the construction industry, and will provide the end user
with a high performing, affordable, low maintenance, and attractive and
efficient construction system suitable for multiple applications. The
applications for this construction method include significant public
infrastructure works, such as bridges, tunnels, levees, breakwaters, and sea
walls. This technology is expected to benefit homeowners, businesses, and local,
state and federal government agencies. The innovation will enhance the use of
manufactured block by optimizing the strength of articulated interlocking
features created during production. This system will optimize the high
compressive strength of manufactured concrete block in robust and easy to
install applications. The introduction of vaulted arches, domes, spheres and
cylinders made from concrete block will provide great economic value for society
and economic growth for the country.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small
Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will research manufacturing
of the interlocking block design on a standard block machine, using a baseline
standard mix. The mix design will be changed along 3 variables: (1) amount of
cement used; (2) amount of pozzolanic material used ;(3) and size and amounts of
aggregate used. These variables will be used to provide high and low settings
for a Taguchi array, for analysis of properties measured, including any combined
effects. These variables will have the effects of their high and low settings on
evaluation of microstructure; examination of the effects of aggregate
segregation within the Concrete Manufacturing Unit (CMU) at critical locations;
and evaluation of how microstructure varies with cement type and cement content.
This will be achieved by taking a critical piece of the interlocking key and
keyway features mechanical testing rig. The results of this testing will allow a
statistical analysis of stress concentration as a function of 3 variables on
mold-filling. This data will determine the properties of bend strength and crack
growth at the critical location within the CMU's. This information will allow
the block-maker to implement any slight adjustment to their concrete mix design
to ensure optimum block strength.