* 1547045
* I-Corps:  Market Analysis and Customer Needs Identification for the Commercialization of a High-Speed Disconnect Switch
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2015,12/31/2015
* Lukas Graber, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Rathindra DasGupta
* 12/31/2015
* USD 50,000.00

The electric power distribution grid enables us to have a convenient and
reliable access to electrical power for our daily needs. Electric power is used
for lighting, HVAC, communication, transportation, medicine, manufacturing,
defense, and many other vital applications. For the United States to remain
competitive, there must be a secure, reliable, and adaptable electrical power
grid. Aging systems, hardware failures, and interruptions in service have
immediate and severe impacts on our economy and quality of life. It is for these
reasons among others that there is a push from the community to improve these
aging systems and provide the society with next generation electrical power
distribution grids. However, for this to be viable, it is imperative that new
enabling technologies, on which these systems can be built, are developed. A
critical design problem in any power system is how to handle electrical faults
within the system that come from internal failures or external environmental
causes, e.g. trees falling on power lines. Due to requirements in the next-gen
power systems being developed, the conventional methods and technologies, such
as conventional circuit breakers, are insufficient and poorly suited to the
demands of future highly adaptable and flexible power grids as they are
currently envisioned. The high speed disconnect switch that this team has
developed has the potential to fill this need and provide a foundational
technology on which these next-gen electric power distribution systems can be
built.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A novel ultra-fast low-loss switch, for which this
proposal seeks to perform commercialization research, has been developed in
response to the paradigm shift currently occurring in how terrestrial domestic
distribution power systems are designed. Ultra-fast low-loss switches are seen
as a key enabling technology for these dynamic and highly flexible systems. The
ultra-fast disconnect switch invented by the team presents a novel, compact, and
elegant solution for a problem that is fast becoming more and more relevant in
power grid design. With its novel design, the switch is able to accomplish the
several key requirements necessary for it to be a viable solution. Due to smart
material selection and a thermally efficient design, the switch is able to carry
load currents of several hundred amps with very low losses while closed. With
its unique use of integrated piezoelectric actuators the switch is able to open
and electrically isolate within several hundred microseconds. The use of vacuum
technologies gives it the ability to withstand distribution level system
voltages less than a millisecond after opening without interrupting current
(current interruption is done by the power electronic converters in the next-gen
systems). In preliminary discussions with major industry players who supply the
electric utility market, the novel design was met with interest. By
participating in the I-Corps program, the team hopes to understand how to best
act upon this interest from the primary market and to also determine if there
are secondary markets that can be explored and served.