* 1548676
* SBIR Phase I: Software for High-Throughput Combinatorial Design and Curation of Novel Proteins
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2016,06/30/2016
* Justin Farlow, Serotiny, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2016
* USD 149,960.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project is to enable scientists to design protein constructs
using high throughput protein engineering to obtain the exact biological tools
they need for a particular experiment by purchasing synthetic DNA coding for
these proteins from a DNA synthesizer easily and economically. Currently,
researchers using proteins as biological tools in their experiments expend
significant time, effort and money to design and manually build these proteins -
and too often that cost is so high that researchers settle for using a tool that
is less than optimal for their experimental purposes. Ensuring broad biological
applicability of an experiment requires correct controls, both positive and
negative, as well as multiple interrogation strategies that must each be
validated. Without satisfying these requirements, an experiment's applicability
may be narrower than desired. In today's experimental landscape where proteins
are used as biological tools, there are technical hurdles that make broad
applicability difficult to achieve. This proposal aims to reduce these technical
barriers by enabling scientists to design and economically obtain a logically
complete set of protein tools in a way that allows them to logically optimize
their experiments. Further, by functionally annotating these designs, a
scientist will be able to rapidly disseminate those details to other scientists.

This SBIR Phase I project proposes to develop software for scientists to design
and curate combinatorial libraries of novel proteins so that DNA can be directly
ordered from DNA synthesis companies. The purpose of this software is to enable
a scientist to design and purchase a logically complete set of proteins that
promotes the broad biological applicability of their experiment. Today,
synthetic DNA suppliers are developing the ability to manufacture combinatorial
libraries of DNA sequences at economical prices. However, there is currently no
efficient means to design such a library for manufacture that matches the DNA
synthesizers' capabilities with a protein engineer's experimental requirements.
This software aims to structure the scientist's designs as a computationally
complex recipe for amino acid products that can be expressed to a DNA
synthesizer in a way that matches their manufacturing capabilities. This
software will follow computational rules for generating biologically reasonable
proteins from a recipe of components. It will then transmit the resulting data
to DNA synthesizers. In addition, it will provide a straightforward user-
interface for researchers to evaluate and designate the functionality of the
generated proteins so that others may learn from their designs.