* 1548292
* An Instructional Complexity Approach to the Science of Learning by Analogy
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Osnat Zur, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Soo-Siang Lim
* 08/31/2018
* USD 299,988.00

Mathematics teaching that is flexible, transferrable, and connected across
topics is crucial to high quality instruction. This exploratory project
addresses this goal by a potentially transformational approach that leverages
and extends science of learning research on analogy, a promising mode for
supporting flexible and connected mathematical thinking. This study proposes an
approach different from much of lab-based research designed to focus on
isolating specific mechanisms of learning for study. Instead, the researchers
will intentionally examine multiple learning processes combinatorially and as
situated in classrooms. Many mechanisms of learning operate simultaneously in
naturalistic classroom situations, and may either augment or undermine each
other. Therefore, more theories that explain how students learn from the
interaction of cognitive principles/processes is urgently needed. Research that
is better aligned with learning in classroom settings will also make research
findings more applicable for use, enabling teachers to more easily adopt
research-based recommendations for classroom practice. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
investigators will test this approach by leveraging a set of "translation ready"
principles" for spatially supporting analogy during STEM learning. These are
principles that produce high learning outcomes and for which there is classroom
evidence for their usability and efficacy. As these principles are implemented
in naturalistic classroom settings, this study takes seriously the diverse ways
in which they may be realistically enacted (or not) in the classroom, in
different combinations and sequences that may change the expected outcomes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The principles for supporting mathematics classroom
analogy in this study were developed by the NSF supported Spatial Intelligence
and Learning Center (SILC), and they include: simultaneous visual
representations, spatial alignment, linking gesture, and sensitivity to
children's cognitive resources. Study 1 is a new analysis of existing data to
compare how teachers in the U.S. versus two higher achieving regions: Hong Kong
and Japan, use and combine these principles when teaching 8th grade mathematics
by analogy. Study 2 will be deep interviews with a set of expert teachers for
dissemination of these principles and the results about their combinatorial
frequencies. Teacher feedback on these alternatives will be elicited, as well as
their input regarding best practices of analogy for their own students. Study 3
will experimentally compare three versions of a video-based lesson - one
involving multiple support strategies as modal in the high achieving regions,
one involving the modal U.S. combination of supports or violations, and one with
the optimal combination predicted by SILC. WM and EF measures will also be
administered to explore whether combined supports increase or reduce processing
load. Together, these studies will provide rich data on the way spatial analogy
principles are 1) typically combined in practice, and 2) optimally integrated to
support students' learning in mathematics classrooms. This data will support the
generation of theory that addresses how cognitive mechanisms interact to support
students' mathematical thinking.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The
project has the potential for broad impact on mathematics teaching as well as on
research in the science of learning. The project takes an innovative approach to
shifting the focus of theory driven research to incorporate complexity without
losing rigor, making learning theory better able to explain and inform teaching
practice within the complexity of everyday classrooms. A broad dissemination
plan for best practices of analogy instruction is in place.