* 1548648
* SBIR Phase I:  Feasibility of estimating musculoskeletal injury risk of material handling workers with novel wearable devices
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2016
* Haytham Elhawary, One Million Metrics Corp
* Standard Grant
* Rick Schwerdtfeger
* 12/31/2016
* USD 179,999.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project consists of three major pieces. First is the
reduction of musculoskeletal injuries for manual laborers, which already affects
600,000 workers each year. This will improve the quality of life of laborers,
since an injury at work affects both their work life and their personal life.
Second is to reduce the high costs associated to these injuries that need to be
paid by employers, and which are estimated to be $15.2bn a year. These costs
challenge the competitiveness of these companies. Thirdly, the worker injuries
affect employee morale, absenteeism, productivity loss and employee turnover,
all of which are challenges to the efficient running of a company.

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will study the
feasibility of automatically evaluating the risk of musculoskeletal injury in
the workplace using smart wearable devices. These injuries affect hundreds of
thousands of workers per year in the US, and cost US companies more than $15bn
in direct costs. This research goal depends on the achievement of two technical
objectives (i) to prove that the sensors and developed algorithms can
differentiate lifting events from other worker activities, and (ii) to
demonstrate that the data collected by the sensors can be used to accurately
predict the output of the NIOSH lifting equation, an ergonomics risk model
widely accepted in industry. Estimations of the outputs of the equation
performed by our device will be compared by those computed manually by a
certified ergonomist. These wearable devices can quantify the risk of
musculoskeletal injuries continuously over time, providing a deeper
understanding of the factors that affect risk and the ability to take measures
to reduce that risk before an injury occurs.