* 1548215
* RAPID:  Forensic Hydrological Field Investigation of the Blanco River Flood - May 2015, Wimberley, TX
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2016
* Chad Furl, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Torgersen
* 06/30/2016
* USD 26,531.00

This project will investigate the Texas floods of May 2015 in an around the
Blanco River. The unprecedented flood occurred in the towns of Wimberley and San
Marcos. Hundreds of homes were damaged or destroyed, two reinforced concrete
bridges were washed off their piers (a third received heavy damage), and nearly
100 high water rescues were made. In addition to severe loss of life and
infrastructure damage, Texas A&M Forest Service estimates as many as 12,000
trees were damaged or uprooted in the lower portion of the basin. The project
will document the extent of flooding and the impact of large woody debris
(trees) as a feedback mechanism that may have additionally raided water levels.

This project will investigate the Texas floods of May 2015 by 1) documenting
high water marks (stage heights) in upland tributaries and along the main stem
as well as 2) characterizing the geometry of selected river cross sections
containing large woody debris piles. These geographic characterizations will
better define floodwave timing, velocity, and stage height. This study will be
used in a full forensic hydrological investigation seeking to understand the
meteorological, hydrologic, and hydraulic intricacies of the event. The
investigator will coordinate his activities among the USGS, Texas A&M Forest
Service and the Guadalupe Blanco River Authority.