* 1548870
* SBIR Phase I: Global Scientific Sensor Network and Data Infrastructure for Hands-On Science Learning
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2016,06/30/2016
* Clifton Roozeboom, Myriad Sensors
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 06/30/2016
* USD 150,000.00

This SBIR Phase I project will develop a Global Scientific Sensor Network
(GSSN), which is a web-based interface that enables students and educators to
analyze experimental sensor data, publish experiments and results, and
collaborate on global science projects. Educational researchers have identified
that scientific equipment operation can lead to mechanical tasks characteristic
of the work of laboratory technicians rather than the creative endeavors of
scientists. This project will apply innovations in consumer electronics, user
interface design, and web-based tools to lower technological barriers and enable
users to explore science questions that inspire them. The GSSN will (1) engage
students about the relevancy of science concepts in the real world, (2) prepare
students for open-ended problem solving, (3) introduce students to innovative
and interactive lab equipment, and (4) involve students in global science
research. These skills and experiences will better prepare students to solve
emerging challenges in the aeronautics, physics, connected Internet of Things,
global climate, and other scientific research
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this SBIR Phase I project, the database
infrastructure and user interface that comprise the key elements of a Global
Scientific Sensors Network (GSSN) will be developed. The project will
demonstrate an end-to-end experimental platform that connects physical
measurement equipment, wireless connection devices, database infrastructure, and
web-based user interfaces. The technical innovation of the GSSN will be (1) the
development of database infrastructure that can organize many types of data from
students and educators with low technical demand and (2) smart user interface
tools to extract scientifically relevant information from raw sensor data. For
example, a student will be able to measure parameters like barometric pressure,
transmit the data wirelessly to an app for visualization, compare his
experimental measurements to other data sources, and collaborate on global
weather research with users around the world through web-based tools. The
proposed project is designed for ease-of-use and will help students be more
scientifically literate, connect students across the globe to work on common
goals, and encourage problem-solving skills that apply to emerging societal
challenges. User testing with students at the middle school, high school, and
college levels will be conducted to gather feedback on the interface design and
system functionality.