* 1548297
* Center for cellular construction
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2026
* Wendell Lim, University of California-San Francisco
* Cooperative Agreement
* Charles Cunningham
* 09/30/2026
* USD 31,458,435.00

The goal of the Center for Cellular Construction is the transformation of the
field of cell biology into a quantitative discipline that uses tools from
engineering, physical and computer sciences to enable both a greater
understanding of the rules that govern cell behavior and the ability to design
cells to have useful functions. The Center will 1) develop the practical and
computational tools to predict, design and experimentally test the impact on
cellular function of designed changes in the internal organization of cells, 2)
create the experimental tools for building multicellular and multi-organism
structures, and 3) develop living "bioreactors" that will generate products of
commercial value. To achieve this vision, integration is required at many
levels. Scientists trained in cell biology, physics, engineering, mathematics
and computer science will work together, and practical scientists who experiment
in the laboratory will work together with computer modelers and theoreticians.
In order to develop cellular machines with real-world applications, university
researchers will work with their counterparts in commercial companies, and to
train a new generation of researchers at undergraduate, graduate and
postdoctoral levels in this emerging field, institutions with strong
undergraduate programs will work together with research intensive universities
and industrial partners to develop new interdisciplinary courses and training
methods. The Center will take advantage of "incubator space" at the University
of California-San Francisco to encourage the formation of start-up companies.
Partnered with UC-San Francisco in this Center are San Francisco State
University, UC-Berkeley, Stanford University, IBM Almaden, and the San Francisco
Exploratorium. Education and Human Resource Development (including an emphasis
on increasing diversity) will be integrated into the Center through multiple
activities; high school students and teachers from San Francisco Unified School
District and across the Bay Area will be recruited to participate in summer
instructional "Boot Camp" experiences, and 10-20 undergraduate research
internships will be offered to students (especially under-represented
minorities) from San Francisco State University, City College of San Francisco,
and UC Santa Cruz. Public engagement with Center activities will involve Science
Festivals, Maker Faires, Hackathons and (through partnership with the
Exploratorium) Science Museum Exhibits.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The Center will
focus on five projects, from basic research to real-world applications,
integrated to permit the Center to implement iterative "design-build-test"
cycles of living cellular machines. The first project, a Cellular Machine
Shop/Core, will create an inventory of high throughput and modular tools for
cell engineering that will enable the "build" step of the engineering "design,
build, test" cycle. A set of core resources and instruments for the Center
community will be assembled, including high throughput and quantitative imaging
systems, gene synthesis, and next generation sequencing. These will be used to
assemble modules for cellular engineering in other Center projects. The second
project, Computer Aided Design, will generate tools to implement a computational
"design" platform for engineering cells with predictable and desired internal
structure, as well as to design multi-cellular structures. The third project
will create the molecular tools necessary to program multiple specialized cell
types or organisms into multicellular structures capable of executing complex
functions. The fourth project "Living Bioreactor" will specify the organization
of intracellular and multi-cellular structures to implement new approaches to
metabolic engineering by tuning organelle size to improve yield, and by creating
multi-layered self-assembling/self-healing multi-kingdom cell aggregates capable
of withstanding harsh conditions, resisting contamination, and facilitating
harvesting of the desired products. The fifth project "Cell State Inference
Engine" will create a software platform for converting images of cells into
estimates of cell environment and signaling state, permitting e.g. the use of
cells as living sensors of environmental conditions for real-world applications,
and also providing a framework for predicting how cells transition between
phenotypic states, one of the great challenges in cell biology