* 1548234
* EAGER: Using Learning Algorithms to Morph Product Behavior for Specific Task Contexts and Cognitive Styles of Users
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Erin MacDonald, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Rich Malak
* 08/31/2018
* USD 226,768.00

People have different ways of learning and thinking, termed cognitive styles.
Past research in website design has shown that there is a link between cognitive
style and user behavior. This project takes this promising foundation and
applies it to the design of physical products. This EArly-concept Grant for
Exploratory Research (EAGER) project investigates whether or not it is possible
to use sensor data and morphing algorithms, a type of learning algorithm, to
design a faucet that can "know" what a person wants to do, and how they prefer
to do it, via an underlying relationship between cognitive style and behavior.
If so, can the faucet be designed in a way that its behavior is adaptable and
pleasing to distinct cognitive styles, while also reducing water consumption.
Faucets and showers account for 20% of household water usage, yet have received
no "smart" design improvements to curtail water use. On the contrary, research
shows that current automatic on/off faucets use more water than conventional
faucets. If successful, this research will advance the design of household
appliances that decrease water consumption.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
objective is to create a design method that uses morphing algorithms to design
generative, customized product behavior that responds to the user's cognitive
style and the task they are performing. This involves: (1) Reworking existing
morphing/learning algorithms to make them generate a customized product
behavior, instead of serving-up predetermined design permutations; (2) Creating
a protocol to identify meaningful independent variables (sensor data) that serve
as the parameters for controling morphing; (3) Incorporating feedback from
users, in the form of faucet manual adjustments, to the behavior updating
process; and (4) Balancing exploration of the behavior space and exploitation of
knowledge gained. The sensor data used in this initial research will be
simulated based on a pilot study. The research advances the state of the art in
learning algorithms, increasing their usefulness in design by allowing for
continuous-space design exploration in response to manual human-in-the-loop user
interaction behavior. If successful, it will result in a physical product that
is capable of testing the relationship between cognitive style and user
interaction. This product will be used in future human-subject experiments,
potentially building new cognitive models of user/product interaction.