* 1548013
* I-Corps Sites:  Ohio State University
* TIP,TI
* 03/15/2016,09/30/2022
* Stephen Camp, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 09/30/2022
* USD 199,998.00

This project creates an I-Corps Site at the Technology Entrepreneurship and
Commercialization Institute (TEC) at Ohio State (OSU).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NSF
Innovation Corps (I-Corps) Sites are NSF-funded entities established at
universities whose purpose is to nurture and support multiple, local teams to
transition their technology concepts into the marketplace. Sites provide
infrastructure, advice, resources, networking opportunities, training and modest
funding to enable groups to transition their work into the marketplace or into
becoming I-Corps Team applicants. I-Corps Sites also strengthen innovation
locally and regionally and contribute to the National Innovation Network of
mentors, researchers, entrepreneurs and investors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TEC at
OSU has a track record in commercializing university technologies and training
STEM and business students and is the primary market intelligence and business
modeling entity, working with the Office of Research and the Technology
Commercialization Office and partnering with more than a dozen colleges,
department, research centers, and funded programs across campus. TEC has trained
more than 500 graduate students and more than 40 research faculty using the Lean
Startup curriculum, generating 27 new ventures that raised more than $40
million. TEC recently established a new initiative to support technology
commercialization ? the Faculty Certification Program in Technology
Entrepreneurship and Commercialization. This certification program uses an
innovative pedagogy to train research faculty and their startup teams in the
principles and techniques of commercialization via startup.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The combined impact of the TEC Institute?s I-Corps@Ohio
program and the new Faculty Certification Program is important for Central Ohio
and across the state. The specific impact of the NSF I-Corps Sites funding is
realized in:&lt;br/&gt;1) An increase in the number of Ohio State teams that
participate in the training program, &lt;br/&gt;2) A greater number of STEM
graduate students that matriculate to entrepreneurial leads in technology
startups, and &lt;br/&gt;3) More new technology startups that raise capital and
launch in Ohio. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Secondary outcomes that provide broad
impacts are:&lt;br/&gt;1) An increase in the number of inventions resulting from
federally-funded research that are screened for commercial
potential,&lt;br/&gt;2) More new products and services providing innovative
solutions to problems in healthcare, environmental sustainability, national
security, food safety, etc., and &lt;br/&gt;3) Greater return on innovation
investment for Ohio State. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As successful ventures make
their way to market, an additional outcome with big market impact is the number
of research scientists that seek out training in advanced principles for
commercialization because they recognize commercial markets on par with federal
and state grants for career advancement and sustained funding for technology
development.