* 1548882
* SBIR Phase I:  Production of alkoxysilanes directly from biogenic silica
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2016
* Vera Popova, Mayaterials Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 12/31/2016
* USD 164,796.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research Phase I project is that it offers the potential for a new process
technology to produce silicon using a sustainable, natural resource as the
starting material. Currently, all silicon used in solar cells and computer
chips, and all silicon used in the manufacture of silicon containing chemicals
including silicone rubbers, oils, lubricants and fumed silica (paints, paper)
etc. is produced in an energy, equipment and CO2-intensive process. Biogenic
silica includes diatomaceous earth and many kinds of agricultural waste
including rice hull ash, inorganic waste from bioethanol production, corn
stover, and wheat chaff. The objectives of this project are to develop
economical routes from these silica sources to high purity, high value silica
products at significantly lower cost than currently available by using a green
and sustainable technology. Key markets include electronic, optical, and
photonic applications, specialty chemicals, and consumer products.

The technical objectives of this Phase I project are to successfully
depolymerize biogenic silicas at temperatures ¡Ü 200¡ãC to produce distillable
alkoxysilanes. The primary silica source is rice hull ash (RHA), a sustainable,
heavy metal free, silica rich agricultural waste. This process uses catalytic
base to dissolved RHA silica in antifreeze at ¡Ö 200¡ãC followed by exchange
with alcohol to produce alkoxysilanes. In contrast, traditional alkoxysilanes
are made from silicon metal produced by carbothermal reduction of silica with
carbon at 1900 ¡ãC in an electric arc furnace; a high energy, capital equipment
and CO2 intensive process. A further advantage to this process is that the
silica depleted RHA offers direct access to high purity (99.9999 %) photovoltaic
grade silicon at multi-kg/day scales. If successful, the proposed project could
change how high purity alkoxysilanes, precipitated silica, and fumed silica are
produced as multiple RHA sources are available worldwide. The alkoxysilane
products can be distilled to very high purity at very low cost compared to the
same product made from Silicon metal. The initial goal is to produce
tetraethoxysilane to compete against Silicon metal derived product and move
thereafter to high purity precipitated silica for electronic and optical
products applications.