* 1548968
* SBIR Phase I:  SSD In-Situ Processing
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2016,06/30/2016
* Vladimir Alves, NGD Systems, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 06/30/2016
* USD 149,977.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project will fundamentally change what a storage device
can do, and give storage a third capability that was not addressed by existing
storage technology - the ability to actually process the data under the explicit
control of the user. For the computation to take place, only the computational
request and the resulting data need to transfer over the storage interface,
reducing the interface traffic and the required power. The advent of Big Data
and the increasing use of Hyperscale Server technology have resulted in the
creation of an additional storage tier that is different from traditional
enterprise storage. This new tier requires significantly larger capacity with
lower cost and lower operating power, and yet must still exhibit enterprise
reliability. This combination of characteristics cannot be serviced by existing
technologies, and execution with large data sets typical of Big Data results in
inefficient solutions. The information being stored represents the large,
unstructured data mined by today's companies for key information and trends that
help dictate corporate direction, advertising, and monetization. Future
applications include real-time distributed video and image processing, genome
sequencing and mining of any unstructured Big Data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project explores the Big Data
paradigm shift where processing capability is pushed as close to the data as
possible. The in-situ processing technology pushes this concept to the absolute
limit, by putting the computational capability directly into the storage itself
and eliminating the need to move the data to main memory before processing. The
technology innovation begins with a solid foundation of an enterprise SSD
tailored for the needs of modern Data Centers. Key technology that will be added
to support these capabilities include hardware-assisted quality of service
control, low-cost TLC/3D-TLC NAND Flash enablement through the use of advanced
ECC, and a proprietary elastic Flash Translation Layer to support extremely
large capacity drives. The final element added to this foundation will be the
ability to perform computations directly on the data with the addition of
specialized in-situ processing aided by hardware accelerators. To make this
disruptive solution as non-invasive as possible, a level of system software is
needed to make adoption as seamless as possible.