* 1548568
* SBIR Phase I:  A Miniaturized Spectral Imaging Sensor for Biomedical Diagnostics
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2016
* Russell Barbour, Advanced Microcavity Sensors LLC
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 12/31/2016
* USD 164,458.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is in the commercial market space known as
hyperspectral imaging. The products that result from this project will have
applications in many important industries for identifying and characterizing
materials and tissues through their unique spectral (color) characteristics. One
important application is biomedical imaging, for example in the early detection
of skin cancer. Early detection (and excision) of melanoma is the only effective
treatment. Survival decreases 20-fold and treatment costs increase 100-fold from
earliest to latest stage, and misdiagnosis is a leading factor in malpractice
suits that also increases the overall cost of healthcare. The research and
development performed on this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project will be key to the development of a novel optical filter based approach
to hyperspectral imaging. This technology will allow for an affordable
diagnostic tool for accurate, early detection of skin cancer and other medical
conditions. There is also strong demand for a robust and high performance-to-
cost ratio spectral imaging sensors in many other industries and applications
including: pharmaceutical manufacturing, geographical imaging and remote
sensing, analyzing mineral and chemical specimens, and currency or drug
counterfeit detection.

The proposed project will address engineering, manufacturing, and calibration
challenges of a high performance-to-cost ratio hyperspectral imaging system.
This technology bypasses the limitations of existing commercial spectral imaging
technology with a dramatically different approach. The technology aims to
utilize established wafer-based fabrication technology to integrate large arrays
of curved-mirror microcavities as high finesse tunable filters in a compact and
low cost-of-manufacture hyperspectral imaging sensor. The proposed project will
address potential scalability of manufacturing the concave micro-mirrors,
investigate the optical characteristics of the system for optimal performance,
and compare our device with competing technologies in the field of biomedical
spectral imaging. The project will develop the electrical control, data
acquisition, and calibration techniques required to build a fully operational
prototype. Improvement to the laser based fabrication process of the curved
micro-mirrors will be researched in this project. The work plan is designed to
investigate these key components, subsystems, and fabrication to determine
feasibility by carrying out experimental investigations into each potential
hurdle. The technology approach offers an attractive solution to realizing a
state-of-the-art spectral imaging device that improves the performance-to-cost
ratio, size and weight, and spectral resolution for a diverse set of
applications.