* 1548689
* SBIR Phase I:  Bioabsorbable Scaffold for Tension-Free Laparoscopic Fascial Defect Closure
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2016,06/30/2016
* James Su, LAP IQ, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 06/30/2016
* USD 150,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is a bioabsorbable scaffold that not only
rapidly closes laparoscopic fascial defects, but also eliminates clinical
complications such as trocar site herniation. This device is intended to replace
suture repair of all laparoscopic trocar ports, representing over 7 million
trocar port openings and an addressable market of over $400 million annually in
the U.S. alone. Laparoscopic bariatric surgery is a promising initial market due
to the increased risk of herniation and the difficulty of using hand suturing
and/or needle based closure methods in obese patients. There are over 0.2
million laparoscopic bariatric surgeries performed in the US each year, with an
estimated annual growth rate of 36%. This device represents a superior fascial
defect closure technology by validating a new material/mechanical design that
facilitates surgical repair and tissue healing of trocar port defects. The
development of this novel device holds broad applications for additional
abdominal wound closure indications such as umbilical hernia, congenital
abdominal wall defects, single port access, and robotic defects.

The proposed project aims to develop a bioabsorbable scaffold system for closing
laparoscopic trocar port fascial defects. Current suture-based trocar port
closure technologies are limited in their ease-of-use and support for wound
healing. Patients undergoing laparoscopic bariatric surgery in particular face
increased risk of herniation, increased operating time due to difficulty of
using curved needle hand suturing or suture-based port closure devices, and
increased wound healing time due to high suture tension at port sites. The
scaffold system holds fascial defect edges together without risk of bowel
laceration or applying high suture tension. The overall project goal is to
validate the bioabsorbable scaffold device concept in Phase I and preclinical
chronic evaluation during Phase II. The objectives of this Phase-I project are
to: 1) conduct design refinement by iteratively modeling, fabricating, and
testing prototypes to rapidly and securely close fascial defects, and 2)
demonstrate protected wound healing with tension-free fascial defect edge
alignment. Ultimately, this Phase-I design refinement and proof-of-concept
project will lead to Phase-II activities focused on developing a select
bioabsorbable scaffold device design suitable for pre-manufacturing studies,
including statistically-powered in vivo degradation profile studies in chronic
animals.