* 1548401
* SBIR Phase I:  Music Education Through Composition on Mobile Devices
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2016
* Zachary Sulsky, Edify Technologies, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 12/31/2016
* USD 165,000.00

This SBIR Phase I project will culminate in an application which teaches
beginners to compose their own music. Music is traditionally taught using
physical instruments and sheet music, both of which are complex and present
imposing financial and practical barriers to creativity. As a result, even
though parents value music education highly and research has shown that studying
music is beneficial to cognitive and emotional development, the majority of
beginning music students drop out during the first year of instruction, before
having a chance to express their creativity through music. By using mobile
devices as modular teaching tools, the proposed solution will make composition
accessible as a first step in learning music. Increasing creativity in beginning
music education will decrease the dropout rate for people already studying
music, and also make music education accessible for the millions of families
nationwide who value music but cannot afford private lessons. By expanding a
market for lessons that is already roughly $3 billion per year in the United
States, this project has significant revenue and growth potential, in addition
to increasing the accessibility and quality of education in the U.S. and
worldwide.

This project uses an intuitive gestural composition interface to make it
possible for beginners to compose music visually and hear it played back in real
time. By using simplified representative block notation, the proposed software
makes composition accessible even to those with no knowledge of music notation
and no experience on an instrument. Using a musical system based on music theory
and arranging concepts, the complexity of music composition is reduced at the
beginning to make a user's first compositions sound good to them, encouraging
them to explore further. More complexity is gradually introduced through a
scaffolded, project-based curriculum as users learn musical concepts through
creative exploration and engaging games. This curriculum includes a gradual
step-by-step transition between simplified block notation and full traditional
music notation. The curriculum will be developed in two phases: 1) piloting a
modular teaching tool that allows music teachers to increase the creativity and
individualization of their assignments by incorporating composition into their
teaching, and 2) developing an autonomous teaching tool for the consumer market
that combines free creation with educational games to teach musical concepts
with or without the aid of a teacher.