* 1548905
* SBIR Phase I:  Vivid pixel array for reflective, full-color digital signage
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2016,06/30/2016
* Roger Diebold, Solchroma Technologies Inc
* Standard Grant
* Rick Schwerdtfeger
* 06/30/2016
* USD 149,999.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project has three outcomes. Commercially, the
introduction of the developed technology will capture a significant fraction of
the $12.6B billboard and sign manufacturing market, contributing to its
expansion and that of related markets such as indoor signage and architectural
aesthetics. Environmentally, significant reductions in greenhouse gas emissions
 will be realized as the technology will consume up to 100x less energy relative
to existing LED array-based digital signage. Additional reductions in physical
waste will be considerable for locations switching from conventional printed
materials to digital. Scientifically, advancing dielectric elastomer processing
and fabrication with a commercial focus will contribute to overcoming
technological hurdles preventing their commercial adoption in other fields.

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project evaluates the
feasibility of constructing prototype dielectric elastomer-based display modules
on a commercially relevant scale. Processing and fabrication constraints
currently inhibit rapid commercial growth of dielectric elastomer technology in
the marketplace at a time when it is beginning to prove itself in niche markets
such as audio-related haptics and laser speckle reduction. Through studying the
feasibility of constructing a redesigned pixel, its ability to scale to array
sizes acceptable for large-area digital signage, and its performance, a clearer
determination of customer acceptance will be obtained. Successful completion of
these objectives will result in a scalable, full-color, reflective display
module, and de-risk the fabrication processes involved in manipulating
hydrostatically-coupled dielectric elastomers on scales relevant for large-area
applications.