* 1548194
* Seed Dispersal Workshop Proposal; Annapolis, MD - Spring, 2016
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Noelle Beckman, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Betsy Von Holle
* 08/31/2019
* USD 49,939.00

Dispersal is a key process in the spread of populations, in biodiversity
patterns from local to global scales, in gene flow and potential adaptation in
novel environments, and in species responses to global change. Global change
processes, such as climate change and fragmentation, alter local habitat
conditions of species, and also the ecology and evolution of dispersal. These
changes affect the ability of species to move or adapt in response to these
processes. This workshop will assemble a diverse group of ecologists and
mathematical biologists who study dispersal across scales, methodologies, and
systems and who will bring together knowledge of existing empirical information,
theoretical concepts, and mathematical approaches. The primary outcome of the
workshop will be an evaluation of how data can be integrated with theoretical
predictions and novel analytical, computational, and statistical advances for
studying dispersal. The outcome will contribute to the ability to respond to
global change. Collaborations among scientists will also be
fostered.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A workshop will identify current gaps in our
understanding of the role of seed dispersal in plant populations and determine
how to address these outstanding gaps in order to move towards a predictive
understanding of plant populations under global change. Seed dispersal ecology
is largely based on short-term, local-scale empirical studies for a small number
of species or on theoretical dispersal models that often make simplified
assumptions. These factors limit generality the ability to make quantitative
predictions. By integrating data with models, the workshop will lead to computer
experiments to a) gain a mechanistic understanding of the role of dispersal in
plant population dynamics; b) test theoretical predictions using empirical data;
and c) conduct sensitivity analyses to determine the robustness of conclusions
to the type of available data, to missing data, and to different types of
models. Gaps in knowledge and obstacles to progress will be identified, and
scientific networking will be enhanced.