* 1548385
* Value Creation through Sustainable Manufacturing; September 24 and 25, 2015; Lexington, KY
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2015,12/31/2016
* Fazleena Badurdeen, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 12/31/2016
* USD 20,000.00

1548385 (Badurdeen). "Value Creation through Sustainable Manufacturing" is the
theme for the 5th International Forum on Sustainable Manufacturing (IFSM)
organized by the Institute for Sustainable Manufacturing (ISM). It will be held
24-25 September 2015 on the campus of the University of Kentucky, Lexington,
Kentucky. Sustainable manufacturing, with its emphasis on increasing
sustainability performance in the product, process and systems domains, is now
recognized as an enabler for increasing competitiveness through innovation.
However, to make the business case for sustainable manufacturing, there is a
need to identify and mobilize opportunities for value creation through
sustainable manufacturing from economic as well as environmental and societal
perspectives. The 5th IFSM will focus on this theme and bring together industry
practitioners and academic researchers to discuss opportunities and challenges
to enable value creation through sustainable manufacturing.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This forum will feature invited speakers, tenure-track
faculty presentations in a "Emerging Researcher Showcase" and a panel
discussion. In addition, a poster session will be held to highlight research
achievements in sustainable manufacturing by students and young faculty. NSF
funding will be used to provide travel support to U.S. based invited speakers,
particularly tenure-track Assistant Professors conducting research in related
areas as well as selected graduate students to attend the 5th IFSM.