* 1548737
* SBIR Phase I:  Affordable Three-dimensional Microscopic Imaging
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2016
* Sarah Lukes, Agile Focus Designs, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 12/31/2016
* USD 165,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will provide affordable,
three-dimensional (3D) microscopic imaging through the use of an electronically-
controlled, focusing element. Scientists desire to observe biological phenomena
in intact, living cells or animals that occur on fast time scales. Recent
advances in fluorescent markers have significantly improved tracking of drug
delivery and observation of dynamic events in cell membranes. However,
laboratories often need expensive scanning microscopes, such as confocal or two-
photon, with 3D fluorescent imaging capability to observe such events. The
proposed technology will increase accessibility of 3D, high-resolution imaging,
thereby enabling advancements in science. It will also improve the speed of
image acquisition, reduce photobleaching and photodamage of specimens, extend
longitudinal studies capabilities, and reduce agitation and damage of sensitive
samples. It is expected to lead to new discoveries with regard to biological
phenomena, physical phenomena, and novel fluorescent imaging modalities. The
value of the immediate addressable market is $50 million. The technology also
promises to benefit 3D imaging systems for manufacturing or machine vision,
miniaturized optical disk pick-ups, confocal and two-photon microscopes, optical
coherence tomography, and endoscopic imaging systems by providing high speed and
agile focus control.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this project
centers on the demonstration of the feasibility of a novel 3D, high-resolution
imaging technology. The project includes development of microelectromechanical
mirrors and a novel optomechanical design. Gross electronic focus control
capability has only recently become available. As such, standard optical design
practices to best utilize these elements do not exist. The goals of this project
are three fold: 1) to advance optical design methods for varifocus elements, 2)
to develop a novel optomechanical design, and 3) to further
microelectromechanical systems (MEMS) mirror technology. The research and
development to be undertaken in Phase I will determine feasibility of the
optomechanical design and of the MEMS mirror performance to meet 3D biological
imaging needs at a cost less than one quarter of currently available technology.
Technical results will include analysis of the new optomechanical design and
characterization of the MEMS mirrors.