* 1548845
* SBIR Phase I:  Hardness Strength and Ductility Tester for Field Assessment of Structures
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2016,06/30/2016
* Simon Bellemare, Massachusetts Materials Technologies LLC
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 06/30/2016
* USD 149,877.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will support
commercialization of a portable instrument capable of probing the hardness,
strength and ductility of existing infrastructure without service interruption.
Catastrophic failures of pipelines, buildings and bridges result in loss of life
and billions of dollars in repair, remediation, and liability. The Pipeline and
Hazardous Materials Safety Administration (PHMSA) estimated the total cost
incurred to remediate pipeline failures at $7 billion over the past 20 years.
The new portable instrument will enhance the ability of those responsible for
integrity management and condition assessment to prevent accidents and failures
by determining the pressure capacity of pipelines for which original quality
records are unavailable. It will be a safer, less invasive, and more economical
alternative to removing a sample of material for laboratory testing. It will
supersede existing in-field surface mechanical assessment based on indentation
hardness testing. The initial market size for characterization services to oil
and gas pipelines is $25 million per year. Additional applications for condition
assessment of transportation, energy and naval infrastructures are expected. The
instrument may also serve in quality control testing for imported steel products
and for advanced manufacturing industries including aerospace.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this project includes the
transfer from laboratory to field service of a contact mechanical test of
frictional sliding to measure mechanical properties of materials. Measurements
from the new instrument serve as an input into non-empirical predicting
equations for the material stress strain curve. The equations are adapted from
previous academic research where parametric finite element and dimensional
analysis provide a unique material stress strain curve from measured
characteristics of the residual surface profile. Unlike indentation hardness,
frictional sliding allows for continuous characterization of gradients in
properties through welded joints, a frequent location of field failures. This
project improves upon existing concepts of stylus self-alignment and field
surface profiling techniques with the objective to validate accuracy of the
instrument for the pipeline integrity market. The main effort includes
integrating instrumentation to measure the material response with the action of
sliding the stylus on the surface. Also, a dual-stylus unit will be implemented
to improve the instrument accuracy through acquiring the material response to
two different geometries of contact. Through this research, a prototype field
testing unit will be implemented for further validation testing of the method
for use on pipeline infrastructures.