* 1548805
* SBIR Phase I:  The LumiShield Process:  A Cost-effective, Environmentally-responsible Alternative to Chromium Plating
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2016,06/30/2016
* Hunaid Nulwala, LumiShield Technologies Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 06/30/2016
* USD 149,988.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will address a
pressing need for more environmentally-responsible coatings in the anti-
corrosion market. If successfully commercialized, the proposed aluminum
electroplating process will displace multiple existing anti-corrosion coatings,
which are based on toxic metals. The adoption of this new material will
eliminate the release of toxic metals into the environment. By decreasing the
cost of corrosion-resistant coatings, it may also be possible to reduce the flow
of plating jobs to less environmentally responsible areas overseas. The current
United States market for these coatings is valued at $6 billion annually. In
addition to its environmental benefits, the proposed process is also expected to
be less expensive than the incumbent technologies. The reduction in cost arises
from decreases in plating solution, waste treatment, and energy costs. For the
aerospace industry, which is the initial target market, the availability of the
process will mean safer conditions for workers, less environmental impact, and
lower costs. This Phase I effort will result in the full understanding of the
process necessary to scale-up to a commercial demonstration.

The intellectual merit of this project is associated with its exploration of
non-aqueous electroplating of highly active metals in the presence of
atmospheric moisture and oxygen. Typically, electroplating of aluminum has taken
place from organic solvents such as toluene at elevated temperatures under an
inert purge. The difficulty in scaling this technology has prevented its
adoption for many applications which might otherwise make good use of aluminum
coatings. The research will examine phenomena associated with aluminum
electroplating and optimize the coating process for several substrates. It will
be necessary to more fully understand the effects of variables such as electrode
configuration, plating solution composition, temperature, and current density on
the phenomena. Each of these parameters will be mapped to performance, and the
process will be fully optimized for mild steel substrates. Finally, this Phase I
research effort will also help to elucidate a variety of interesting phenomena
associated with non-aqueous plating of highly active metal species.