* 1548232
* STTR Phase I:  Novel Colorimetric Amplification Technology
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2016
* Aswini Pradhan, Morphix Technologies, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 12/31/2016
* USD 225,000.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I project has the potential
to improve health and safety of individuals in society. The ability to detect
harmful substances and disease is critical to human health and safety. Multiple
detection technologies are currently used to detect harmful substances and
disease. Colorimetric methods are preferred for field detection because they are
low-cost, easy-to-use, and field-rugged; however, their utilization is limited
by a lack of sensitivity. While more complex detection technologies have
excellent sensitivity, their field usefulness is limited by their high cost,
complexity of use, and fragility. The proposed innovation enables amplification
of colorimetric detection, thereby improving the perceived sensitivity of the
technology. As a result, the proposed innovation has the potential to enable new
low-cost devices that detect harmful substances and disease. The results of this
effort will also provide further insight into the understanding of both
fundamental and applied aspects of nanostructured materials. This multi-
disciplinary effort involves transformative research which will further the
integration of composite materials into real-world sensor applications.

The intellectual merit of this project is the demonstration of a color
amplification strategy which would improve the detection limits of any
colorimetric chemistry by one to three orders of magnitude. The main objective
of this effort is to demonstrate colorimetric response amplification via the use
of synergistic composite materials from nanomaterials and colorimetric thin film
sensors. Methods to be employed include thin-film deposition and electron beam
lithography for the production of nanostructured materials. A composite approach
involving nanomaterials and thin-film coatings potentially offers significantly
enhanced colorimetric sensing capabilities through color amplification. The
intrinsic absorption efficiency of a colorimetric indicator defines the maximum
potential performance of that indicator in a passive sensor. The proposed
innovation aims to artificially increase the absorption efficiency of
colorimetric indicators, and thus render sensors made from these materials
significantly more sensitive to chemical analytes of interest. Nanomaterial-
functionalized flexible substrates will be designed and fabricated, on which
thin-film colorimetric sensing coatings will be deposited. The colorimetric
response of these thin-film composite sensors will be evaluated as a function of
exposure to chlorine gas. Colorimetric response enhancements will be assessed
based on spectroscopic reflectance data.