* 1548936
* SBIR Phase I:  Consumer Food Allergen Detection Instrument
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2016
* Adi Gilboa-Geffen, DOTS Devices
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2016
* USD 179,999.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project is to develop the first consumer hand-held instrument
for the accurate and immediate detection of allergens in food. This technology
will enable people to test their food immediately prior to consumption for the
presence of food allergens that they need to avoid. The target market is the 15
million people in the US and 150 million people worldwide who have food
allergies. It is anticipated that this technology will have a significant impact
on health and quality of life of these individuals. The novel detection platform
under development enables instant detection and has many intrinsic advantages
including the ability to be modified using a fast, reproducible, and scalable
process. It is small and inexpensive to manufacture, is easily mass produced and
is stable over a range of chemical and environmental conditions. All of these
make this detection platform optimal for immediate detection in a consumer
device. By incorporating this detection platform into an instrument and
disposables that will sample food in a controlled way, extract proteins, detect
target protein levels and clearly display the result, it is believed that this
is a disruptive technology that will fundamentally change how people manage
their food allergies.

This SBIR Phase I project proposes to develop a food allergen detection platform
that is a hand-held consumer instrument that samples food, extracts protein, and
detects the presence of an allergen at a clinically defined threshold in under a
minute. It is based on designed signaling allergen-specific small molecules that
bind with high specificity and selectivity, and are utilized for testing minute
concentrations of food allergens. In addition, all subsystems of the detection
instrument that can sample food, extract protein by chemical and physical
homogenization and test for the presence of food allergens are included in the
design. In this Phase I study, the sampling, homogenization, and detection
mechanism will be integrated into a hand-held consumer instrument. The three
major challenges to be addressed will be 1) Optimize the design, and test the
fully functional instrument; 2) Integrate the detection platform with the
instrument; and 3) optimize the food sampling mechanism. Successfully addressing
these three goals and creating a fully functional prototype will not only enable
the commercialization of a consumer product that can instantly detect food
allergens but also may serve as proof-of-concept for future point-of-care
diagnostic capabilities.