* 1548093
* EAGER: Collaborative Research: Memristive Accelerator for Extreme Scale Linear Solvers
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2016
* Jack Dongarra, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 07/31/2016
* USD 31,250.00

Computer models of physical systems are a vital part of modern scientific and
engineering research and development. Large scale computational models of the
Earth?s weather, climate, and geological activity; models of biological systems;
astronomical models of galaxies; and even macroeconomic models require immense
computing resources. These simulations run on many thousands of processors for
several months at a time, utilizing tens or hundreds of millions of CPU hours
before completion. This project takes a radically new approach to the design and
implementation of next generation, exascale supercomputing by leveraging recent
developments at the intersection of conventional integrated circuit technology,
and emerging resistive random access memory (RRAM) devices. The goal of this
project is the acceleration of solvers for large linear systems, which form the
backbone of modern scientific computing. In this project a novel set of digital
and analog hardware primitives is co-designed with a new class of algorithms
that exploit the proposed accelerator. A small-scale prototype is being
designed, fabricated, and tested through the EAGER program to demonstrate the
feasibility of the fundamental building blocks. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;RRAM is a
non-volatile memory technology that avoids the scalability challenges of static
and dynamic random access memories (SRAM and DRAM), and is a promising
"universal memory" candidate, offering read speeds as fast as SRAM and DRAM, and
densities comparable to FLASH memory. Beyond simply relying on RRAM for storage,
the project integrates circuit, architecture, and algorithm level innovations in
developing a qualitatively new hardware accelerator with orders of magnitude
greater performance per watt than classical digital computers. Digital
memristor-based circuits avoid data movement by performing bitwise matrix vector
multiplication in parallel across an entire dataset. Analog hardware quickly
provides an accurate, initial seed to an iterative solver, wherein error free
digital circuits refine the initial estimate to solve a system of linear
equations. A novel, iterative solver algorithm uniquely adapted to the proposed
hardware compensates for the inaccuracies and random variations introduced by
the analog circuits, systematically reducing the error through a small number of
digital iterations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This combination of digital
computation and analog memristor circuits, within high-density RRAM
configurations, is expected to have a transformative effect on high performance
computing. The system under investigation has the potential to reduce execution
time from months to hours, enabling solutions to scientific problems heretofore
beyond the reach of modern HPC systems. The project brings together researchers
in computer architecture, high performance integrated circuit design, numerical
algorithms, and scientific computing to accomplish this multi-disciplinary
effort. Algorithm, architecture, and circuit level innovations are being
disseminated to the broader research community through published papers, as well
as tutorials on the simulation tools. The educational component of the project
involves 1) training students in VLSI, architecture, and optimization; and 2)
incorporating resistive memories into the architecture and circuits curricula.
The PIs are also personally involved in local programs promoting the
participation of women and underrepresented minorities in computer science and
engineering, and will initiate an effort to increase the enrollment of local
minorities in the University of Rochester CS and ECE programs.