* 1548000
* I-Corps Sites:  Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2016,06/30/2023
* Jason Kuruzovich, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2023
* USD 359,912.00

This project creates an NSF I-Corps Site in the Capital Region of Upstate NY at
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute (RPI). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NSF Innovation
Corps (I-Corps) Sites are NSF-funded entities established at universities whose
purpose is to nurture and support multiple, local teams to transition their
technology concepts into the marketplace. Sites provide infrastructure, advice,
resources, networking opportunities, training and modest funding to enable
groups to transition their work into the marketplace or into becoming I-Corps
Team applicants. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;I-Corps Sites also strengthen innovation
locally and regionally and contribute to the National Innovation Network of
mentors, researchers, entrepreneurs and investors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The RPI
I-Corps Site includes participation from students and faculty from the
Accelerate518 institutions: Siena College, Skidmore College, Albany Law School
and Albany Medical College. Accelerate518 is a consortium of regional
universities with the common goal of teaching experiential learning in
entrepreneurship and innovation. RPI?s I-Corps Site takes advantage of existing
Accelerate518 collaborations in the areas of co-curricular, curricular,
competitions, and research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;RPI brings takes advantage of
several resources in building their I-Corps Site. The Severino Center for
Technological Entrepreneurship at RPI has a supports student and faculty teams
in bringing highly technical solutions to the marketplace. Within RPI, the
Center for Automated Technology has rapid prototyping capabilities. The Center
for Biotechnology and Interdisciplinary Studies has resources for biotechnology
and medicine innovators. And, the Rensselaer Center for Open Source Software is
a leader for testing and developing software projects.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;RPI's I-Corps Site enables increased formalization and
acceleration of existing programs with a focus on supporting student teams
directly. Student teams are funded with modest amounts for software for
collaboration and instruction, infrastructure, transportation and building an
MVP to enable teams to transition into commercialization or an I-Corps national
Team applicant. The mentors, expert advice, and networking opportunities are
provided by the Accelerate518 schools for all teams. The I-Corps Site experience
directly supports the development of formal, active, local innovation ecosystems
for faculty and staff that contribute to broader national innovation ecosystem,
increasing the interest in innovation and commercialization as well as increased
numbers of educated students in the lean startup systems and processes of
entrepreneurship.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The RPI region is experiencing growth in
a number of high technology areas with Albany, Rensselaer, Saratoga and
Schenectady counties becoming centers for technology companies and knowledge
workers. Further strengthening a culture supporting entrepreneurship in the
region could have a meaningful economic impact and encourage both graduates and
recently formed companies to stay in the region.