* 1548417
* EAGER: Modeling Intent Communication Pathways for Human-Autonomous System Collaboration
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2017
* Mary Cummings, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 08/31/2017
* USD 299,990.00

Autonomous systems show great promise for enhancing safety, however previous
research in human-automation interaction has also demonstrated that adding
automation improperly may actually result in highly undesirable dynamic
interactions. Furthermore, automating a task within a larger system may transfer
the operator's workload from one physical or cognitive resource to another,
thereby merely changing the task, rather than improving it. Thus it is crucial
when designing new technologies to consider carefully how the operator will
interact with system automation, particularly with autonomous systems that are
based on stochastic, as opposed to deterministic, reasoning. This EArly-concept
Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) project will determine how to design safe
autonomous systems that have awareness of the intent of humans in and around the
system, with reciprocal relationships for those same humans. Previous work in
human-centered design focused on interactions between an engineered system and a
human operator. This project adds consideration of interfaces designed to
communicate with nearby humans, with an emphasis on designing autonomous systems
that consider the intent of both the external individual and internal operator.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This objectives of this project are as follows: (1)
perform a comprehensive analysis of human-system interactions to identify
methods for representing intent in interactions between an engineered system and
individuals within and outside the system; (2) develop models for computer
interpretation of human intent, including the intent of the system operator and
exogenous actors; and (3) identify methods to communicate system intent to the
operator and to exogenous actors. The resulting models will be verified by
adapting the model to the driverless car domain -- an area where technology has
outpaced understanding of how humans integrate into the system. The project will
also extend the modeling approach to the manufacturing domain using a pick-and-
place Baxter robot. In both settings, the researchers will study how elements of
the environment, the computation systems of the robots, and unique traits of
humans can be modeled to represent intent communication pathways that need to be
instantiated in the system or in the world around the system. The effort will
also study the needs of stakeholders including endogenous and exogenous actors
(e.g., pedestrians and workers in a plant near a robotic forklift). Applying the
models across multiple domains will determine the extent to which the models of
both entities can be generalized.