* 1548556
* I-Corps L: Novel Instructional Wireless Sensor Network Kit for STEM+C Training
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2016
* Gangbing Song, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Karen Crosby
* 07/31/2016
* USD 50,000.00

Through the NSF Innovation Corps for Learning Program, (I-Corps L), this project
will develop ways to achieve more widespread use of a teaching laboratory that
helps undergraduate engineering students learn to design and program state-of-
the-art sensors and smart devices. This project, developed at the University of
Houston, is called the mySmart kit. The basic mySmart kit includes sensor nodes
to measure temperature, light, noise, orientation, and acceleration. the kit
combines integrated wireless capability with basic mobile apps that monitor the
sensors. The kit can be used for applications such as monitoring the environment
and home security. A variety of systems can be designed and built that utilize
input from the wireless sensors to control devices such as lightning or heating
and cooling systems wirelessly. The mySmart kit provides engineering students
with hands-on experiences on smart sensor networks to develop and enhance their
knowledge and understanding of the design principles and practices needed to
create the next generation of smart devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The basic
mySmart kit is developed around the theme of creating a smart home. Basic
competence is developed through twenty-two hands-on projects. The projects make
use of the types of capabilities available to students in commonly-owned devices
such as smartphones. These capabilities include embedded sensors such as
microphones, accelerometers, cameras, and GPS. The projects also utilize
connectivity such as cellular, Wi-Fi, and Bluetooth. In addition to engineering
design principles, the smart home project covers a variety of STEM topics
including mechanical design, materials, electrical circuits, networking, and
computation. The mySmart kit is based on industrial wireless sensor network
standards. The projects include the flexibility needed to ensure individualized
learning and provide an intuitive, easy to use platform. Three critical
capabilities allow students to develop their own prototype designs: sensing/
actuation, connectivity/communications and computing. In the I-Corps L program,
the project team will interact with potential users of this technology to better
understand the needs of various users of the kit, and will develop ideas for
increasing the number programs that adopt these projects. Given the important
role of smart devices in current and future technology, the project has the
potential to help US engineering graduates continue to be leaders in developing
innovative technology to meet societal needs.