* 1548011
* I-Corps Sites:  Maturation of Innovations from Idea Generation to Commercialization at the University of New Hampshire
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2016,01/31/2022
* Andrew Earle, University of New Hampshire
* Continuing Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 01/31/2022
* USD 358,106.00

This is a project creates an I-Corps Site at the University of New Hampshire
(UNH).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NSF Innovation Corps (I-Corps) Sites are NSF-funded
entities established at universities whose purpose is to nurture and support
multiple, local teams to transition their technology concepts into the
marketplace. Sites provide infrastructure, advice, resources, networking
opportunities, training and modest funding to enable groups to transition their
work into the marketplace or into becoming I-Corps Team applicants.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;UNH's I-Corps Site enables faculty researchers and
trainees to explore the commercial potential of their discoveries. The
application of the Lean Launchpad (LLP) curriculum, intellectual networking
events, access to business and scientific mentors, and funding mechanisms help
participants in identifying the critical path to commercialization and ways to
reach the market with innovative ideas more efficiently. UNH Innovation, which
is the unit primarily responsible for entrepreneurial activities and technology
commercialization at UNH, hosts the I-Corps Site.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;UNH's
existing commercialization infrastructure is coordinated to increase the
likelihood that research can be quickly exposed to the I-Corps program. At least
30 I-Corps Teams are trained each year and participate in the UNH Flywheel
process. Highlights of this innovative process include:&lt;br/&gt; (1) Exposure
to a four-week Lean Launch Pad (LLP) course focusing on customer discovery and
value proposition; &lt;br/&gt; (2) A 10-week LLP course with exposure to the
entire business model canvas; &lt;br/&gt; (3) A demo day to showcase ideas; and
&lt;br/&gt; (4) Twice-yearly Sandpits, where multiple subject matter experts are
invited to an open discussion on a general topic to promote interdisciplinary
and trans-disciplinary conversations. &lt;br/&gt;Promising projects are
connected to business mentors, are eligible for new translational funding, and
are provided access to local incubator and angel/venture capital networks to
accelerate market entry of ideas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Implementation of this
I-Corp Site constitutes a redesign of the ecosystem in such a way as to increase
interdisciplinary and trans-disciplinary collaboration throughout UNH's $110MM
research portfolio, and develop connections to available resources necessary to
ensure that discoveries fulfill their economic and social potential.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To assess the impact of this redesign, this proposal
contains an innovative approach to program assessment. While tracking well-
established metrics such as invention disclosures, licenses, and startup
activity, UNH also tracks qualitative and social network measures to help assess
deeper changes in UNH?s innovation ecosystem. This more robust measurement
approach not only assists in future improvements in UNH's innovation ecosystem,
but also increases the scalability and transferability of lessons learned and
insights gained at UNH?' I-Corps Site to the national innovation
network.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The UNH Site impacts transcend exposure to and
access by faculty and students to LLP coursework. Startup formation and job
creation are expanded as a direct result of UNH research and an improved culture
of commercialization on campus. The UNH Flywheel process (1) exposes the
regional and national business communities to UNH?s research capacity, (2)
increases research collaborations between faculty and industry; and (3) improves
connections between graduate students and the local business community. The
program works with existing organizations on campus like the Society for Women
Engineers, Luna Cats, UNH ADVANCE, UNH chapter of the National Society of Black
Engineers, and the Associate Vice President for Community, Equity, and Diversity
to ensure recruitment and enrollment for programs is well advertised and
broadens the participation of underrepresented cohorts in commercialization.