* 1548846
* RAPID:  Woody Plant Responses to Extreme Drought in California:  Characterizing Species-Level Drought Survival and Mortality Mechanisms
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2017
* Louis Santiago, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 07/31/2017
* USD 187,165.00

The current California drought is in its fourth year and represents the driest
three-year record in California History, with 46% of the state currently in the
category of exceptional drought. The drought is causing mass mortality of trees
and shrubs throughout the state so quickly that scientists are scrambling to
document the impacts to forests and watersheds. This research project provides
an opportunity to study trees and shrubs where the California chaparral
shrublands meet the Mojave Desert - an area with rapid changes in vegetation.
The physiological and ecological characteristics that promote survival during
this extreme drought will be identified and used to predict how continued
drought is likely to further affect California ecosystems. The work will support
the mission of NSF by promoting the progress of science towards the health of
forests and watersheds, and will specifically promote progress in research on
plant drought resistance, climate change, and natural resource management. The
research will be overseen by the principal investigator, and will utilize
undergraduate and graduate students at a minority serving institution, training
these students in scientific approaches, analyses, and dissemination of results.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the project is to associate species-specific
mortality and survival with physiological mechanisms so that further responses
to the current extreme drought in California can be approached with predictive
power. The study will be conducted in a series of permanent plots at the
intersection of two major North American biomes, the California Floristic
Province and the Mojave Desert, where there is great potential for changes in
species composition due to climate change. The biogeographical origin, drought
resistance, and hydraulic traits of all of the woody species at the sites have
already been characterized. Based on the current physiological knowledge of this
community, the link between mortality and actual physiological processes can be
measured in real time. The project will also allow evaluations of the role of
biogeographic origin of study species to understand the nature of local
extinction and range contractions within the research system. Mortality rates
from the 2007 drought at the primary research location in Morongo Valley in
southern California exist, and in 2009 three 0.125 ha circular plots were
established, with all woody species identified and marked. Long-term permanent
plots will be re-censused, and two additional sites at higher altitudes will be
established to monitor future changes. Dendrometer bands will be installed on
stems within the research plots for finer scale measurements of growth in
response to climate. Finally, measurement of stable isotopic composition of
plant xylem water and soil water will be used to monitor changes in the depth of
water uptake and changes in water sources. The research will be supervised by
the principal investigator and will be conducted with the help of undergraduate
and graduate students at a minority serving institution, stimulating student
interest in local ecosystems. The study area is highly biodiverse, with large
numbers of endemic species. The expected outcome of the project is to increase
the ability to predict how species with contrasting drought response strategies
will fare as climate change-type drought continues or intensifies in
Mediterranean-type ecosystems in the future, and provide opportunities for
students to work with critical ecological issues that can be linked to global
processes.