* 1548177
* Collaborative Research: The Confluence of Music, Art and Science at Long Term Ecological Research Sites
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2018
* Michael Casey, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Colette St. Mary
* 07/31/2018
* USD 76,780.00

Practitioners of the arts, humanities, and sciences all seek solutions to
complex problems, suggesting that collaborations across these disciplines could
yield new insights into societal challenges and needs. Deep cultural and
practical divides limit these collaborations. This project will bring together
ecologists, artists, musicians, neuroscientists, computer scientists, educators,
and science communicators to design research using new visualization and
sonification tools. Project goals are to stimulate creative thinking, to allow
for advanced forms of pattern recognition, and to facilitate a diverse and
cross-disciplinary approach to environmental research needs, questions, and
results. The project has the potential to expand significantly the participation
of diverse cultural, ethnic, and economic groups in scientific research by
allowing these groups to co-develop research questions at the outset. Inclusion
of educators and science communicators will provide opportunities for students
and the public to interact with high frequency environmental data in novel ways,
allowing them new ways to comprehend complex data and processes. These new ways
of experiencing complex natural phenomena may be particularly beneficial for
individuals who have special learning needs, who learn better visually or
acoustically, or who are disaffected by traditional numerical presentations of
data and results. The project is risky, but promises very high
rewards.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The major goal of this project is to encode high-
volume and high-frequency ecological data in new ways in order to discover
underlying patterns and processes. Online digital visualization and sonification
tools will be developed to display multi-dimensional real-time ecological data
generated from environmental sensor arrays at two Long Term Ecological Research
sites. A novel partnership with neuroscientists will explore how stimulation of
different neural circuitry in the human brain allows large datasets to be
understood, perhaps in new ways. A current visualization tool, Waterviz, will be
re-designed in collaboration with artists, neuroscientists, and computer
scientists. Hydrologic data captured with sensors will drive a computer model
that calculates all components of a water cycle in real time. These data in turn
will drive artistic and musical simulations of the water cycle. The models will
be used to test hypotheses that multi-sensory experiences simultaneously engage
reasoning, visual, and acoustical brain centers such that large-scale patterns
and processes are easier to apprehend; that neurological tools can provide a
mechanistic understanding of improved comprehension; and that the engagement of
artists directly in the research will stimulate new ideas and insights into
complex problems. External evaluation of the project will determine whether
artists and scientists are equitably engaged, whether new relationships result,
and whether this process stimulates new ideas and insights.