* 1548339
* SBIR Phase I:  Development of a novel, high-sensitivity diagnostic for bone disease, enabling early-stage diagnosis and precise monitoring of therapy effects.
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2016,06/30/2016
* Kristin James, bioProtonics, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 06/30/2016
* USD 150,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase l Project, if successful, is the introduction of a new
diagnostic paradigm that can significantly increase the ability of clinicians to
diagnose early stage bone pathology resulting from age, osteoarthritis, and
cancer therapy. While the current standard of bone care relies on a measurement
of overall bone density, this new technology assesses the microstructure within
bone, a measure that correlates much more strongly with fracture risk and
disease stage. Along with providing an accurate measure of fracture risk, this
technology will enable sensitive measure to: 1) target patients for inclusion in
therapy trials, and 2) enable monitoring of the efficacy of these therapies
towards amelioration of an excruciatingly painful pathology with a dire
prognosis (half of people suffering hip fracture never regain their ability to
live independently, and are at significantly increased risk of further
fractures). As such, the commercial market, driven by pharmaceutical companies
and diagnostic equipment manufacturers, is large. While the focus of this SBIR
project is to develop a diagnostic for bone disease, the development will inform
future application of the diagnostic technology to a large range of diseases for
which no non-invasive, early-stage diagnostic currently exists.

The proposed project is designed to validate the ability of this new magnetic-
resonance based diagnostic to provide a sensitive measure of trabecular bone
morphometry parameters, in a clinically relevant environment. Direct measurement
of the changes in trabecular bone microarchitecture that are the harbinger of
bone disease is outside the capability of current magnetic resonance imaging,
resolution being limited by patient motion over the long times needed to
generate an image. The new diagnostic will have the ability to acquire the
requisite data with immunity to patient motion, increasing resolution
significantly, and enabling sensitive measurement of trabecular bone morphometry
parameters. Validation of this ability will be through application to a set of
3D-printed phantoms of increasing textural complexity and cadaver vertebrae,
with use of a purpose-built apparatus capable of inducing clinically relevant
motion profiles during data acquisition. The major focus of this effort is
optimization of the acquisition and analysis software so as to achieve the high
resolution needed to measure trabecular element width in osteoporotic bone.