* 1548387
* SBIR Phase I:  Enhanced delivery of bioactive compounds for aquaculture
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2016
* F C Thomas Allnutt, BrioBiotech, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 12/31/2016
* USD 150,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research Phase I project will be to improve the availability of aquaculture-
raised fish and shellfish while improving their welfare when grown under
intensive management. Oral delivery of bioactive compounds or biologics (such as
vaccines, drugs and nutraceuticals) is challenging in aquaculture due to a
number of factors: 1) heating damage during manufacturing, 2) feeds often face
high temperature and humidity during storage that degrades their biological
activity, 3) materials are delivered in water, and 4) materials must pass
through challenging conditions in the gastrointestinal tract and then locate
effector sites. This project develops formulations and methods to orally deliver
and protect the activity of bioactive compounds and biologics, which are used to
protect animals from disease. The methods developed in this project will reduce
the amount of these materials necessary to provide protection. Since bioactive
compounds and biologics are high cost materials, delivery of the same activity
using a much reduced amount of the material will lower the cost for their use in
aquaculture. More effective control of pathogens and improved animal health in
aquaculture due to more affordable application of these high value compounds
will improve aquaculture sustainability. Successful deployment of more
affordable biologics in these formulations will be a boost to aquacultural
production that can decrease the world's reliance on wild-catch fisheries. The
technical objectives of this Phase I research project are focused on the
development of oral delivery formulations and methods for improved delivery of
oligoribonulceotides, polysaccharides and proteins that can be applied to other
bioactive compounds and biologics of commercial importance for the aquaculture
industry. Aquaculture presents a difficult environment to effectively deliver
high cost biologics and bioactive compounds due to the high moisture conditions
during manufacture, storage and delivery. During Phase I, the project?s focus
will be on optimization of the components of proprietary delivery formulations
to improve and validate their ability to protect and deliver different classes
of compounds (oligoribonulceotides, polysaccharides, and proteins). A successful
Phase I will complete the initial development of the delivery system and begin
validation of the immunostimulatory abilities of two oral delivery products
based on the improved delivery of oligoribonucleotides and free beta-glucan
products that have already demonstrated immunostimulatory ability.