* 1548499
* BIGDATA: EAGER: Infrastructure and Analytics for Data Intensive Research in Open-Ended Learning Environments
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Gautam Biswas, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* John Cherniavsky
* 08/31/2018
* USD 299,983.00

BIGDATA: Infrastructure and Analytics for Data Intensive Research in Open-Ended
Learning Environments&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Data science techniques have
revolutionized many academic fields and led to terrific gains in the commercial
sector. They have to date been underutilized in solving critical problems in the
US educational system, particularly in understanding Science, Technology,
Engineering and Mathematics (STEM) learning and learning environments,
broadening participation in STEM, and increasing retention for students
traditionally underserved in STEM. The goals of the Directorate for Education
and Human Resources (EHR), through the EHR Core Research program, for the
Critical Techniques and Technologies for Advancing Foundations and Applications
of Big Data Science &amp; Engineering (BIGDATA) program are to advance
fundamental research aimed at understanding and solving these critical problems,
and to catalyze the use of data science in Education Research. As more open-
ended learning environments are being employed in schools, it is critical to
understand how they affect learning, motivation and engagement in STEM. The most
widely used methods in educational research are inadequate for addressing these
questions because they do not address the scale and complexity of the data
provided from these environments. This Early Concept Grant for Exploratory
Research (EAGER) will advance the understanding of how promising new technology
environments affect these outcomes by developing a data repository and open-
source analytical tools. The PI will show proof of concept by using these tools
with data from three different types of online learning environments.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main goal of the proposal is to develop an open-ended
learning environment (OELE) educational dataset repository and novel integration
and analysis techniques that tap the potential of both theory driven and bottom-
up data mining for understanding learning in OELEs. In addition, the Principal
Investigator will develop an analysis environment incorporating common tools to
support researchers and practitioners in conducting analyses. The proposed data
integration challenge is ambitious and risky. However, the PI has the expertise
to complete the project. Both the exploration of data science methods in open-
ended learning environments and of the use of bottom up approaches to data
analysis are greatly needed in educational research. Most computer based
learning environments are more open ended than those for which the majority of
the methodologies used in educational data mining and learning analytics have
been developed. The use of bottom up methods of data mining has produced
phenomenal results in the commercial sector and in academic fields such as
biology. There are almost no other similar efforts currently underway in
education in the academic setting, and most in the commercial sector are not
open source projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is supported by the EHR
Core Research (ECR) program. The ECR program emphasizes fundamental STEM
education research that generates foundational knowledge in the field.
Investments are made in critical areas that are essential, broad and enduring:
STEM learning and STEM learning environments, broadening participation in STEM,
and STEM workforce development.