* 1548924
* Science and Technology Center on Real-Time Functional Imaging (STROBE)
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2026
* Naomi Ginsberg, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Cooperative Agreement
* Z.  Ying
* 09/30/2026
* USD 31,386,867.00

Understanding the structure and evolution of matter at the nanometer and atomic
scales is central for discovery and innovation in science and technology,
accelerating advances in materials science, condensed matter physics, chemistry,
biology, engineering, geology, and medicine. This Science and Technology Center
(STC) aims to advance and integrate different imaging modalities using electron,
X-ray, optical, and nano-probe microscopy to collectively tackle major
scientific challenges. It brings together an interdisciplinary team from
University of Colorado at Boulder; Universities of California at Berkeley, Los
Angeles, and Irvine; Florida International University; and Fort Lewis College,
in partnership with national laboratories, US industries, and international
collaborators.&lt;br/&gt;Education and Diversity: This STC develops, implements,
assesses, and disseminates new programs to educate a diverse group of students
to be innovative and globally competitive in imaging science and technology. It
focuses particularly on two signature efforts: (i) new multidisciplinary
graduate certificate and degree programs and (ii) multi-year, cross-
institutional undergraduate, master's, and Ph.D. degree programs. The center's
education activities are designed to realize the following version of the
future: K-12 students will apprehend the exciting opportunities of science and
engineering careers. Undergraduate students will appreciate the connections
between different areas of science and engineering, as well as the relation
between these fields and industry. Ph.D. graduates will acquire expertise with
depth and breadth to innovate, lead team research, and create new technologies
through entrepreneurship.&lt;br/&gt;Knowledge Transfer: This STC aims to
manifest through national and international leadership in cutting-edge imaging
science, highly-needed diverse graduates trained in multidisciplinary science,
and a plethora of hybrid/adaptive imaging modalities and tabletop systems,
enabling new science to emerge in the upcoming decades, as well as technology
transfer to industry and emerging startups. Faster, higher-resolution and more
sensitive imaging techniques will benefit a wide range of scientific disciplines
as well as various industrial sectors, which can directly translate
technological advances to improving the economy and the standard of
living.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description of the Center
Research:&lt;br/&gt;A major goal of this STC is to address key cross-cutting
challenges common to all imaging modalities and tackle science grand challenges
across different disciplines. When advances in high-speed direct detectors,
advanced algorithms, big-data manipulation methods, new light and electron
sources (including tabletop coherent X-ray sources), and
spectrally/spatially/temporally structured illumination are integrated, they can
fundamentally transform imaging science to enable real-time three-dimensional
functional imaging. In addition, by combining electron with optical imaging, or
coherent X-ray imaging with ultrafast lasers, or coherent infrared
spectroscopies with nano-probe imaging, scientists in this center investigate
new hybrid and adaptive imaging modalities that far exceed current capabilities.
An expected outcome is creation and integration of a new set of powerful and
broadly applicable real-time imaging modalities that can image non-crystalline
systems and implement dynamic imaging with a large field of view with chemical
and magnetic contrast and with atomic/molecular/nanoscale resolution. Each
imaging technique will be brought to reach its fundamental limits and integrated
in hybrid/adaptive modalities that surpass the sum of the parts.