* 1548901
* EAGER:  Deterioration of Stormwater Filter Media by Deicing Salts: X-ray Micro Computed Tomography (ÂµCT)
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2017
* Sai Kakuturu, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 07/31/2017
* USD 99,548.00

1548901 Kakuturu

This project proposes to explore an innovative use of x-ray micro computed
tomography to investigate the effect of deicing salt on stormwater filter media.
Stormwater filters are critical in preventing floods and protecting the
environment by allowing stormwater to infiltrate to ground and entrapping the
pollutants. Prior studies have raised concerns about the deicing salts' role in
deterioration of stormwater filter media and environmental contamination. This
project outlines a plan to conduct flow tests, using NaCl as a deicing salt, and
to evaluate the pre- and post-salt-application pore structures' in stormwater
filter media using x-ray micro computed tomography.

This project will explore x-ray micro computed tomography to examine stormwater
filter media pore structure. The data will be analyzed using computer
simulations for developing an understanding of deterioration, a critical
research need. Two hypotheses are to be tested: (1) There is a statistical
correlation between "flow rate" and "ratio of active porosity to total
porosity." (2) Given that the total amount of NaCl is similar, differences in
stormwater filter media degradation (the ratio of "active porosity" to "total
porosity") will not be significantly different at three different NaCl
concentrations. The results of this research will address two scientific
questions: (1) How does the pore structure of a SFM change due to application of
NaCl? (2) Is there a relationship between the "ratio of active porosity to total
porosity" and infiltration rate? This project's goal is to explore and test this
radically different research approach for addressing the critical need to
scientifically understand the deterioration of stormwater filter media. The PI
proposes to achieve this goal by using state-of-the-art of x-ray micro computed
tomography, and a combination of discrete element and lattice Boltzmann methods
simulations. This approach has demonstrated success in other research fields,
for example, medicine, biology, agriculture, geology, industrial, etc. The PI
has successfully conducted a pilot study using x-ray micro computed tomography
for visualization of SFMs' pore structure. The same samples will be scanned
before and after salt application. The three dimensional image data will be used
for constructing three dimensional pore structures of stormwater filter media.
The three dimensional pore spaces will be used in morphological analysis and
model simulations. Results (distribution of porosity, gradients, etc.) will help
us in understanding the mechanism of SFM deterioration. This project will
establish x-ray micro computed tomography as a suitable method for studying
porous media, and will transform the scientific understanding of different
porous media.