* 1548521
* EAGER: Hybrid Socio-Technical Teams: A Theoretical Framework for Modeling and Design of Hybrid Networks of Human and Autonomous Agents
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Babak Heydari, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Rich Malak
* 08/31/2018
* USD 229,902.00

Many critical systems in the future will rely on coordinated teamwork of a
hybrid group of humans and smart, decision-making, autonomous agents. Such
hybrid teams are becoming increasingly common in a wide variety of socio-
technical systems. Members of such teams are highly heterogeneous, work in
rapidly changing and uncertain environments, have different goals and
motivations, and are often spatially distributed with little direct face-to-face
interaction. This creates serious challenges for team-level coordination and
cooperation, and can result in decreased efficiency, or even disastrous failure,
in some critical cases. This award supports fundamental research to provide
needed understanding of dynamics, behavior, and coordination mechanisms of
human-agent networks. Outcomes of this project will result in better
understanding of the behavior of such networks, and more efficient design of
future intelligent systems for disaster response, energy and transportation, all
of which will in the future rely on efficient, dynamic coordination between a
group of people and a network of autonomous agents.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding hybrid teams and addressing their
coordination challenges require an interdisciplinary approach that combines
computational and behavioral sciences. To this end, this research will combine
multi-agent computational methods such as complex network analysis and game
theory with social psychology of team behavior. The research team will create
parametric, context-dependent, analytical and computational models to understand
how team-level coordination and cooperative behavior are affected by variables
such as composition of team members, communication network structure among
nodes, distribution of humans and machines on networks nodes, and key parameters
in the environment. Analytical methods, such as game theory on graphs, and
verifiable agent-based simulations will be used to draw causal inferences from
the network structure and agent compositions to overall team-level performance
parameters. The research will also test the hypothesis that the connectivity
structure of the team network can be used as an effective control parameter to
dynamically steer the cooperative behavior of hybrid socio-technical systems. To
validate the developed models, the research team will perform a data-driven
study of disaster response teams. It will investigate the impact on overall
coordination and efficiency when introducing autonomous agents into human
disaster-response teams.