* 1548838
* SBIR Phase I:  Methods for Creating Passive Solar Window Film using Using Novel Dyes for Improved Energy Efficiency in Buildings
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2016,06/30/2016
* William Bernier, ChromaNanoTech
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 06/30/2016
* USD 150,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research Phase I project will be the development of an effective approach to
energy reduction in residential and commercial settings using film materials on
building windows. Windows coated with passive solar film created in this project
will help limit the amount of infrared and ultraviolet light entering a
building. This lowers the amount of heat accumulating within the building and
reduces the need for air conditioning. Importantly, this approach can be used in
both new buildings and old buildings. The proposed materials can yield up to 50%
energy savings for air conditioning. The novel process used in this project
enhances the thermal stability of cyanine dyes up to 300 degrees Celsius,
allowing for incorporation of the these dyes into inks, polymer pellets and
films with protection from thermal degradation. This thermal stability would
allow the nanomaterial to be incorporated into high-density polymers such as
polycarbonates, polyimides and Teflon, which would allow use of inexpensive dyes
to take advantage of the enhanced polymer structural stability for versatile and
durable applications. The dyes are significantly less expensive than the
porphyrin dyes or sputter-coated Indium-Tin oxide-Silver-Gold materials, and are
potentially simpler to process into functional products for passive solar
applications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical objectives of this Phase I
research project are to develop low-cost, thermally stabilized organic dyes to
absorb specific wavelengths of ultraviolet and near-infrared for passive solar
application on windows in commercial and residential facilities. This will be
accomplished by adding a functional group at the end of an organic dye chain of
carbon groups in order to strategically bind the dyes to a metal oxide
nanoparticle. The chemical functional groups reside on side chains that are
easily modified by simple chemical reactions, and the change has no effect on
the chromophore so the dyes? ability to filter specific wavelengths of light are
not disturbed. This has been demonstrated with several model dye compounds with
various binding chemical functional groups. These modifications thermally
stabilize organic dyes so they can survive high polymer extrusion temperatures
without the need for hazardous organic solvents. The research objectives include
the incorporation of dye bound to ZnO nanoparticles into polymers through melt
extrusion; development and modification of dyes to absorb in specified
wavelength ranges; binding of model dye(s) to ZnO nanoparticles and
determination of optical and thermal stability; and scaling up the
electrochemical process.