* 1548201
* EAGER: Advanced Capacity Allocation Methodology: Time-sensitive Appointments in Congested Service Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* MARK VAN OYEN, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 08/31/2018
* USD 242,072.00

Healthcare and other appointment-based service industries tend to struggle with
long waits for service visits. It is increasingly important to model pathways,
or itineraries, of patient visits over time from various service providers.
Current practice emphasizes the basic first-come-first-served rule when setting
appointment dates. This fails to enable appointment setting that gives
relatively lesser waits to relatively more urgent patients. This EArly-concept
Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) project addresses this gap by creating
methods that allow organizations to service multiple classes of patient types
while offering each the expectation that their waiting time will be close to
some target level (with high probability) that is appropriate to the patient's
urgency. In settings with service resources shared in common, the methods
created will optimize trade-offs involving the utilization of key resource,
staff overtime, volumes of services fulfilled, and waiting times for
appointments. The potential impact of these new methods includes improved cost
control through efficiency, better ability to coordinate a patient's care across
providers over time, and improved health outcomes as a result of more timely
visits. The work will help broaden participation of underrepresented groups in
research and improve the content of engineering
courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will address the above challenges
surrounding appointment scheduling with emphasis on optimization based planning
models for resource allocation. The methods will optimize complex admission
control policies for multi-class stochastic queueing network models. Itineraries
of care involving multiple visits from multiple service types over time will be
treated to increase the value and relevance of the models. The research advances
approaches that include mixed integer programming optimization methods that
exploit effective linear approximations to model controlled multi-class queueing
networks. The approaches will estimate performance metrics such as means,
variances, and delay constraint violation probabilities. The methods will
optimize the admission control plans over a finite or an infinite time horizon.
The approach addresses the above challenges with new methods which can treat
realistic problem features that include, but are not limited to (1) the
incorporation of historical system data, (2) itinerary flowtime metric models
allowing for service bundles and stochastic visit itinerary processes over time,
and (3) linear approximations of key performance metrics such as the means and
standard deviations of waiting times and delay constraint violation
probabilities.