* 1548144
* Travel Support for the 4th International Workshop on the Mechanics of Jointed Structures; Dartington, United Kingdom
* ENG,CMMI
* 11/15/2015,08/31/2016
* Matthew Allen, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 08/31/2016
* USD 15,000.00

Jointed structures are pervasive throughout manufactured systems and their
presence in high consequence applications (such as in aerospace, defense, and
civil infrastructure) has been tied to high profile failures that have cost
billions of dollars per year. Therefore, the prediction of the interfacial
stiffness, dissipation and nonlinear response of a jointed connection is one of
the greatest challenges in structural dynamics. Over the past several years, the
efforts of researchers in this important area have been focused and coordinated
through a series of triennial workshops. Significant advances have occurred
during this period both in macro- and micro-scale modeling and experimentally
characterizing joints, and these workshops have been especially valuable in
coordinating the efforts across various disciplines and countries. The upcoming
workshop of this series will be held in October 2015, in Dartington, UK. This
award will help offset the costs of travel for researchers and graduate students
from the United States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop will bring together
researchers from academia, major laboratories, and industry, as well as
representatives from European funding agencies. Research funding in the United
States on dynamics of jointed structures currently lags that in the European
Union. This workshop will allow US researchers to be exposed to
competing/complimentary methods in more depth than is possible in a conference
setting and will stimulate collaboration. This will ensure that research focuses
on the areas of broadest impact, and will enable the assessment of progress
towards grand challenges. Specific topics that will be promoted by US
researchers participating to the workshop include implementation/integration of
prediction methods in finite element codes, formulation of a round
robin/benchmark exercise for measurement and prediction of dissipation in
standard joints , and the investigation of epistemic and aleatoric uncertainty
modeling and measurements.