* 1548757
* SBIR Phase I:  Couragion STEM Career Literacy
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2016
* Melissa Risteff, Couragion Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 12/31/2016
* USD 179,999.00

This SBIR Phase I project will improve the awareness and perception of careers
that require science, technology, engineering, and math (STEM) competencies.
Career influencers such as parents, educators, and counselors are often not in
the position to inform students of potential options and expose unnecessary
bias. If kids understood the opportunities, they could pursue academic pathways
to amass skills that better prepare them to enter the workforce. STEM
competencies are in high-demand and many high-skill jobs sit vacant for long
periods of time. This results in lost productivity and exorbitant recruiting
fees to pluck qualified candidates from existing jobs. Our nation could be more
successful with access to highly skilled resources, especially in the face of
the retiring baby boomer population. Career exploration and readiness focused on
helping individuals select rewarding and suitable degrees, training, and careers
will increase the likelihood that individuals stay in those careers, exhibit
greater creativity, and decrease the number of people who invest in education
they never use. As more individuals are inspired to pursue STEM, taxpayers will
benefit from increased innovation which in turn will provide tax dollars to
invest in such things as healthcare, national security, education, or
humanitarian assistance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will combine big data,
perceived capacity building, continuous STEM programming, and self-reflection to
create a commercialized STEM career and self-discovery application and companion
data visualization tool. Together, the career application and visualization tool
will boost the intent of students to pursue STEM competencies and careers and
improve the retention, productivity, and innovation of STEM workers. The project
will address the technical hurdles of amassing and managing massive amounts of
structured and unstructured data, designing a notification and tracking
mechanism to deliver students ongoing programming, developing a smart
recommendation engine to drive the best fit STEM careers for students,
performing database mining and predictive modeling and creating data
visualizations to derive meaningful workforce development insights. The research
team will design survey tools and conduct controlled experiments and usability
tests to collect student data and business/education entity feedback. The team
will analyze experimental, historical, and survey data to validate and refine
the data models, scoring algorithms, and application content and functionality.
The ultimate goals of the R&amp;D and experiments are to validate that the
resulting application, predictive models, scoring algorithms, and data
visualizations have the desired result of boosting student outcomes regarding
STEM intentions and pursuits.