* 1548003
* I-Corps Sites:  Oklahoma State University
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/2016,12/31/2023
* Richard Gajan, Oklahoma State University
* Continuing Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2023
* USD 297,055.00

This project creates an I-Corps Site at Oklahoma State University
(OSU).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NSF Innovation Corps (I-Corps) Sites are NSF-funded
entities established at universities whose purpose is to nurture and support
multiple, local teams to transition their technology concepts into the
marketplace. Sites provide infrastructure, advice, resources, networking
opportunities, training and modest funding to enable groups to transition their
work into the marketplace or into becoming I-Corps Team applicants. I-Corps
Sites also strengthen innovation locally and regionally and contribute to the
National Innovation Network of mentors, researchers, entrepreneurs and
investors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the Oklahoma State University (OSU)
I-Corp Site is to increase the number of STEM-related startups and licensing
opportunities emerging from the OSU campus. Recently, emphasis at this
institution has been placed on the facilitation of business startups and tech
transfer on campus resulting in an ecosystem that includes the School of
Entrepreneurship, the Riata Center for Entrepreneurship, The Oklahoma State
University Research Foundation, the New Product Development Lab, the College of
Engineering, Architecture and Technology's Fab Lab, and the Center for Sovereign
Nation Engagement. The OSU I-Corp Site accelerates startup activity on campus
not only by providing funding and training to startup teams, but also by helping
create a faculty and student population that is familiar with the business
startup process. It also provides a pathway for underrepresented students to
participate in STEM-related business startups. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Site
grant provides 90 teams (over a three year period) $3,000 in funding per team
along with training in the startup process, creating a culture of business
startup and technology commercialization activity on campus that will remain in
place long after the three year I-Corp grant is completed.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The OSU I-Corp Site impact includes the creation of STEM-
related startups, licensing opportunities, jobs in Oklahoma and beyond, and
incentives that attract underrepresented student groups to participate in the
program. Business startups are particularly important for Oklahoma because the
state has few Fortune 500 companies and other large employers. An increase in
STEM-related jobs in Oklahoma bolsters the economy and improves the educational
experiences of the students that are involved, increasing their competitiveness
not only as STEM students but as citizens of our state and nation.