* 1548562
* XSEDE 2.0:  Integrating, Enabling and Enhancing National Cyberinfrastructure with Expanding Community Involvement
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2023
* Robert Sinkovits, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Cooperative Agreement
* Robert Chadduck
* 08/31/2023
* USD 131,836,772.00

This award supports the continuation and evolution of NSF project 1053575 -
XSEDE: eXtreme Science and Engineering Discovery Environment. The goal of XSEDE
is to accelerate open scientific discovery by enhancing the productivity and
capability of researchers, engineers, and scholars, and by broadening their
participation in science and engineering. It does so by making advanced
computational resources easier to use, integrating existing resources into new,
powerful services and building the community of users and providers. XSEDE is a
virtual organization that provisions complex distributed infrastructure, support
services, and technical expertise. A prominent opportunity for XSEDE is the
growing, diverse collection of advanced computing, high-end visualization, data
analysis, and other resources and services available to researchers, engineers,
and scholars; these resources have the potential to help understand and solve
the most important and challenging problems facing the nation and world. The
challenge for XSEDE, as a virtual organization, is to organize these disparate
resources, creating integrated services and a coordinated environment that
serves the end user needs. The challenge also includes fostering awareness of,
and training for, full utilization of the capabilities offered by XSEDE and its
associated resources, as well as catalyzing workforce developments. All these
tasks need to be accomplished in light of evolving user requirements, resources,
and NSF strategies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The XSEDE 2 project will be executed by
the principal investigator (PI) and staff of the National Center for
Supercomputing Applications (NCSA) at the University of Illinois at Urbana-
Champaign and by the co-PIs and staff of the partner organizations at the
Pittsburgh Supercomputing Center (PSC, Carnegie Mellon University and University
of Pittsburgh), San Diego Supercomputing Center (SDSC, University of California
San Diego), and Texas Advanced Computing Center (TACC, University of Texas at
Austin), as well as 15 other partner organizations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For the
next five years, in pursuit of its overall goals of enhancing user productivity
and broadening participation of the CDS&amp;E community, XSEDE 2 will provide an
adaptive and streamlined framework that anticipates the opportunities afforded
by advances in technology, responds to users' abilities to make effective use of
new capabilities, and enables the current and next generation in using these
technologies to advance their fields. The three strategic goals remain unchanged
from the original XSEDE project:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;* To deepen and extend use
of the ecosystem of national cyberinfrastructure (CI) by both existing
computational researchers and new communities of scientists and students where
the use of computation and large-scale data is transforming their respective
fields;&lt;br/&gt;* To advance the national CI ecosystem by creating an open and
evolving infrastructure, and by Â enhancing the array of technical expertise and
support services offered; and&lt;br/&gt;* To sustain the national CI ecosystem
by maintaining a secure, reliable and efficient
infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;XSEDE 2 will reorganize into five goal-
driven focus areas that will provide a more agile and responsive program
designed to accelerate progress toward the strategic
goals:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;* The Resource Allocation Service (RAS), led by the
National Center for Atmospheric Research (NCAR) and four other partners, will
continue to manage the process of receiving, evaluating and awarding proposals
for computational resources. In doing so, it will fulfill XSEDE 2's crucial role
of neutral arbiter in allocating resources from the service-provider ecosystem
to the research community. RAS will also identify new opportunities for
allocation innovations by increased transparency, open reporting of user trends,
and adapting the allocation process to new technologies.&lt;br/&gt;* The revised
XSEDE Community Infrastructure (XCI) service, led by Cornell University and six
other partners, will identify, evaluate, test, and make available new software
capabilities. Governance is in place to ensure that these activities are driven
by the needs of both users and providers of cyberinfrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;*
Community Engagement &amp; Enrichment (CEE), led by the University of Texas and
12 other partners, will build on the XSEDE tradition of outstanding user
services, and engage a new generation of diverse computational researchers. In
addition to education, training, and outreach activities, CEE will connect to
campus HPC communities, to help researchers access both local and national
resources.&lt;br/&gt;* The Extended Collaborative Support Service (ECSS), led by
the San Diego Supercomputer Center, the Pittsburgh Supercomputing Center and
eight other partners, will maximize the effectiveness of HPC resources through
its large staff of computational experts who will directly participate in
research teams, providing advanced assistance to science projects.&lt;br/&gt;*
Finally, XSEDE Operations, led by the University of Tennessee and five other
partners, will maintain and evolve an integrated HPC capability of national
scale. Operations provides a "one-stop-shop" experience for users across the
XSEDE-coordinated HPC ecosystem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While continuity in
providing these services is essential for the large and further-growing user
community, XSEDE 2 will also respond to the evolving needs and opportunities of
science and technology. To this end, XSEDE 2 will develop novel ways to connect
to and collaborate with other national, regional and campus cyberinfrastructure
organizations. The project will continue to innovate the use of "e-science
portals" (also known as Science Gateways). Science gateways provide interfaces
and services that are customized to a domain science and have an increasing role
with facilities and research centers, collaborating on large research
undertakings (e.g., Advanced LIGO, Polar Geospatial Center). This approach
facilitates broad community access to advanced compute and data resources.
Science gateways are now serving more than 50% of the user community. XSEDE 2
will also incorporate new methods to serve users interested in cloud computing
resources and big-data projects. Furthermore, by analyzing trends in usage and
technology, the renewal project will be even better positioned to respond to the
evolving needs of its stakeholders and to emerging opportunities in new compute
and data resources.