* 1548779
* EAGER: Privacy Compliance by Design: Ideation Techniques to Facilitate System Design Compliant with Privacy Laws and Regulations
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2015,03/31/2017
* Sameer Patil, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Ralph Wachter
* 03/31/2017
* USD 190,926.00

The explosion in data gathering has greatly exacerbated existing privacy issues
in computing systems and created new ones due to the increase in the scale and
the scope of available data as well as the advances in the capabilities of
computational data analysis. Software professionals typically have no formal
training or education on sociotechnical aspects of privacy. As a result,
addressing privacy issues raised by a system is frequently an afterthought
and/or a matter of compliance-check during the late phases of the system
development lifecycle. To tackle this challenge, this research aims to bridge
the gap between policy makers and regulators and system designers by making
privacy laws and regulations understandable and actionable by software
professionals. Specifically, this research designs and develops a deck of
privacy ideation cards based on US privacy laws and regulations. The privacy
ideation cards produced by this research can potentially transform how privacy-
relevant aspects are handled in real-world software solutions built by industry
and inform how students are taught these issues in undergraduate software
curricula.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A critical contribution of this research is a
deck of ideation cards to facilitate the design, development, and deployment of
systems that take into account relevant US privacy laws and regulations at every
step of the system building process. The cards are designed based on input from
legal scholars and experts in the domain of US privacy laws. The design is
geared toward promoting an understanding of privacy regulation by software
professionals as well as students. This research involves applying the cards to
the design of real-world solutions in industry as well as at a university (in a
software project course). These applications enhance the knowledge of how
privacy-related ideation techniques can be effectively employed in professional
software development as well as software education. The findings facilitate the
design and development of systems that comply with privacy laws and regulations
and are sensitive to the privacy needs of their users, thus promoting and
extending the Privacy by Design approach.