* 1548275
* Meeting: GO-FAANG, a Gathering on Functional Annotation of Animal Genomes, October 7-8, 2015, Washington DC
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2016
* Christopher Tuggle, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* William E. Zamer
* 07/31/2016
* USD 14,628.00

Biology is transitioning from a descriptive science to a predictive science,
where rules for outcomes (phenotypes) given specific genomic starting points
(genotypes) can be developed and tested. The biological challenge is to
understand the instructions encoded in genomes and to predict the resulting
phenotypes, i.e., the "genotype to phenotype" question. A nascent project named
the Functional Annotation of ANimal Genomes (FAANG) with over 300 members has
been developed at the grassroots level to initiate annotation of domesticated
animal genomes and eventually the genomes of other species (www.faang.org)
because these experimental systems offer great potential to address the genotype
to phenotype question. This award partially supports a workshop to discuss the
coordination of the FAANG initiative. This Gathering On FAANG (GO-FAANG)
Workshop will have an emphasis on small and large group discussions designed to
develop policies and practical approaches to maximize the probabilities of
success of this crucial next phase in animal genomics. Participation of both
academic and government scientists at various stages of their career will be
encouraged by providing diverse opportunities for interaction in small and large
group settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A slate of diverse speakers has been
developed that will provide a glimpse into the incredible opportunities
available in animal functional genomics as well as a perspective on integrating
such vision with the status of the FAANG project. This approach will provide
clarity as to the specific needs for success of FAANG. Community discussions
will be focused on accomplishing the initial goals of FAANG, which include (a)
establishing priorities for research efforts; (b) planning the management
structures required for efficient use and sharing of samples, data and
computational tools; and (c) identifying resources needed to accomplish these
goals. Outcomes from the workshop will be published in peer-reviewed journals
and posted for public dissemination on the FAANG www-site.