* 1548978
* SBIR Phase I:  Development of Osteogenic Pedicle Screws for Posterolateral Spinal Fusion
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2016
* Matthew MacEwan, OsteoVantage, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 12/31/2016
* USD 150,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is a dramatic
improvement in the clinical success of spinal fusion surgery, decrease in the
risk of catastrophic complications and secondary procedures, improvement in
quality of life post-operatively, and reduction in the growing cost of spinal
surgery and spine care. Between 1998 and 2008, the annual number of spinal
fusion surgeries increased 137% from 174,223 to 413,171 and the national bill
for spinal fusion increased 7.9 times. OsteoVantage?s osteogenic spinal
instrumentation has the potential to dramatically improve the rate of
posterolateral fusion following surgery. By inducing focal bone formation in
areas critical to spine stability, the novel instrumentation reduces the risk of
non-union, and thereby the risk of costly secondary surgeries and procedures.
Preliminary animal model data suggest that OsteoVantage instrumentation can
double the rate of fusion, which translates to a more successful fusion in over
95% of cases, and potentially a 4X-8X reduction in the risk of failed fusion.
Subsequently, OsteoVantage?s unique spinal instrumentation is targeted at
eliminating &gt;75% of secondary surgical procedures (approximately $50,000 per
case) and reducing the need for chronic pain management and palliative care. In
future iterations, OsteoVantage?s technology may provide significant benefit to
additional patient populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business
Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will focus on the development of a
novel electroactive pedicle screw capable of facilitating therapeutic DC
electrical stimulation of the lateral gutter and zygapophyseal joints and
thereby enhancing bone formation and posterolateral fusion of the human spine.
Focal delivery of microelectric impulses into human vertebrae has the unique
ability to accelerate focal bone formation and enable intersegmental union. Yet,
the design of spinal instrumentation capable of delivering DC electrical
stimulation to the spine remains a critical factor to end surgical use and
effective clinical translation. The present project aims to construct and
implement a computational electrophysiological model of the human spine and
evaluate optimal pedicle screw designs which facilitate focal DC electrical
stimulation of the posterior spinal anatomy. Selectively-anodized pedicle screws
will be evaluated as a means of routing and focusing therapeutic electrical
stimulation to posterior anatomical regions of the instrumented spine.
Development of a unique electroactive pedicle screw optimized for posterolateral
fusion will improve the clinical utility the present system of electroactive
instrumentation and significantly de-risk further commercialization of the
technology. The expected outcome will be the identification of an optimal
pedicle screw design for use in pre-clinical animal testing.