* 1548710
* SBIR Phase I:  3D Printed Clothing Utilizing Novel Techniques in Electrospinning
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2016,06/30/2016
* Aaron Rowley, Electroloom Inc
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 06/30/2016
* USD 150,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is in enabling a new
method of prototyping textiles, particularly clothing. By allowing the automated
manufacturing of clothing through an electrospinning desktop device, this
technology can empower more people to design and create clothing in the same way
consumer 3D printers have done for other objects. As the related material
science evolves over the coming years, this technology has the potential to
actually allow consumers to print wearable clothes from their home or business.
As the technology matures, such robust, industry-specific devices will have
impacts well beyond clothing, including medicine and
filtration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project will focus on the development a desktop device
to make clothing that uses electrospinning as an advanced textile prototyping
method. The electrospinning process is capable of conforming fibers onto unique
3D shapes. The proposed Phase I project will make considerable improvements to
the electrospinning process so that textile prototyping will be faster, more
reliable, and less wasteful. It will also support material science work to
increase the strength and durability of electrospun materials such that they can
be satisfactorily used as prototyping textile materials.