* 1548251
* SBIR Phase I:  Development of a scalable soil nitrogen measurement system for efficient nitrogen fertilizer management
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2016,08/31/2016
* Saeed Khan, Soil Diagnostics, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 08/31/2016
* USD 150,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project will be to enhance the
economic feasibility of site-specific, variable-rate nitrogen fertilizer
management and to increase profitability for corn growers in the U.S. Midwest.
This R&amp;D project will lead to new commercial opportunities for implementing
site-specific nitrogen recommendation services to approximately 36 million
hectares annually under corn production. The simplified soil testing system will
enable crop advisers to recommend appropriate nitrogen fertilizer application
rates in contrast to non-site-specific recommendations that often exceed crop
requirements. There will be a growing demand for independent agronomists and
crop consultants who utilize this system to expand the market for precision
agriculture, creating employment and business opportunities in the agricultural
sector and rural communities. Equally important, the resulting reduction in
fertilizer application will reduce non-point source nitrate pollution of natural
water resources.The proposed technology development will directly contribute a
rational basis for resolving existing and potential legal conflicts arising out
of non point source nitrate pollution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business
Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project addresses a Grand Challenge
articulated by the National Academy of Engineering, namely to ?Manage the
Nitrogen Cycle?, by providing an actionable soil test that has the potential to
reduce fertilizer application by 35% ($70/hectare) on average without impacting
corn yields in the Midwest, for annual potential savings of $1.9 bn. This
project will lead to a site-specific and industry-transforming alternative to
the existing system for nitrogen fertilizer management. The proposed system is
based on an established and independently validated soil organic nitrogen assay
that currently has limited commercial viability due to labor, skill, and
resource requirements. The goal of the project is to increase the economic
feasibility of site-specific fertilizer management, by developing, evaluating,
and validating a redesigned assay system that allows routine use in a commercial
setting and thereby provides a quantitative basis for site-specific nitrogen
management. Anticipated technical outcomes include a significant increase in
throughput capacity for soil organic nitrogen testing, lower test costs, and
reduced capital, space, and skilled labor requirements.