* 1548523
* Planning Grant for a STEM Broadening Participation Research Center Initiative
* EHR,HRD
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2017
* Lycurgus Muldrow, Morehouse College
* Standard Grant
* Claudia Rankins
* 07/31/2017
* USD 200,096.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities - Undergraduate Program (HBCU-
UP) provides support to undertake an institutional self-analysis in preparation
for a Broadening Participation Research Center. Broadening Participation
Research Centers are expected to serve as a national hub for the rigorous study
and broad dissemination of the critical pedagogies and culturally sensitive
interventions that contribute to the success of HBCUs in educating African
American STEM undergraduates. The project at Morehouse College seeks to plan the
essential research questions, experimental designs and programmatic activities
for creating a large-scale STEM broadening participation research innovation
center designed to research "how HBCUs can best understand and activate the
particular brand of genius within a given student."

The goal of the project is to employ this asset-based approach in partnership
with HBCUs, industry, and nonprofit organizations to plan a research center that
will in part utilize STEM innovation as a tool for student empowerment.
Activities of the project include: networking with other HBCUs and forming
partnerships with Morehouse College; soliciting involvement from innovation
centers, industry and non-profit organizations; developing well defined research
questions and experiments; planning a dissemination program to include a
comprehensive web portal, workshops, faculty sabbaticals, summer internships for
students and faculty, conferences and possibly a journal. The project will be
guided by an external advisory committee.