* 1548096
* I-Corps L: The E-Prime Curricula for Discovering Research Methods
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2017
* Sandra Webster, Westminster College
* Standard Grant
* Heather Watson
* 07/31/2017
* USD 50,000.00

Through the NSF Innovation Corps for Learning Program (I-Corps L), this project
will develop ways to increase the scale and impact of an experiment authoring
system to guide students in designing, conducting, analyzing, and reporting
their own experiments. The Behavioral Research Instruction Through E-Prime
(BRITE) project is designed to integrate research methods, design, and analysis
instruction in a series of modules that build upon one another. The key feature
of the project is that each module provides students with hands-on experiential
applications of behavioral research. Each module includes the activities of
research according to the scientific method culminating in the students
designing, conducting, analyzing, and reporting their own experiments. The
application of the E-Prime® experiment authoring system provides students with a
high-powered research tool that they need to produce high quality, current
research to answer questions they will find interesting. The curriculum
integrates the different parts of behavioral research and carefully sequences
them to build skills and understanding in an appropriate timeline. Having
students conduct current research using E-Prime helps them gain competence and
develop positive attitudes toward experimental behavioral
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The BRITE research modules to be scaled to a
larger user base will promote flexibility of implementation so that faculty in
universities, small colleges, and community colleges can apply them over one or
two semesters, with or without a formal laboratory. Online delivery is
anticipated and modules will be supported by a student access to E-Prime and
possible textbook bundles. In addition to the student materials, there will be
online support materials, and a help system for course instructors. The project
is innovative in that is integrates the necessary skills for research making
them current, accessible, hands-on, and interesting for students. The E-Prime
software gives students the tools needed to precisely manipulate variables via
computational resources widely available to students and accurately measure
behaviors including reaction times. An engaged student learning method such as
the BRITE program help students to apply the concepts they learn, solidifying
learning gains and helping students to become competent research scientists.