* 1548029
* SBIR Phase I: Conceptual Math Learning for Elementary School Children using Manipulatives in Tactile Games
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2016,06/30/2016
* Ana Redmond, Infinut Software Inc
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 06/30/2016
* USD 150,000.00

This SBIR Phase 1 project will develop games that teach math conceptually to
young school children in kindergarten. The games, built for touch devices,
simulate a part of the real world, to make math learning deep and interesting.
The project will also study how these games impact children's understanding of
mathematics. Given that 80 percent of the fastest-growing occupations are
dependent on knowledge of mathematics and science, schools in the US need
research-driven math learning software to use in the classrooms. US taxpayers
pay for all the resources used in schools through local, state and federal
taxes. The games developed with this SBIR project will cost schools less than
typical math learning software available to them. With 1% of approximately 20
million elementary school students in US public schools using the software, the
savings to taxpayers will be between $1.5 to $3.5 million per year. The games
will provide deep, engaging math learning for students. As a result, more
students may choose to pursue science and engineering occupations in the future.
The long-term returns will be through the accomplishments of the students.

Game-based math learning has the potential to revolutionize education. But, most
games are focused on media and gaming elements rather than learning. On the
other hand, gamification of education, with rewards on top of existing multiple-
choice tests and drills, does not improve depth of learning. This project will
build visual and interactive math exercises that explain and exemplify
elementary math concepts. For example, students will learn addition of 2+2 by
moving 2 strawberries into a box, adding two more strawberries, and counting the
strawberries in the box to figure out the answer. The project will build 25
lessons with 20 interactive games for kindergarten school children. Students
will manipulate simulated objects on screen using touch. Voice instructions will
guide the students. To guide learning, each game will provide contextual voice
hints, and feedback when students make mistakes. The software will also include
a dashboard that teachers will use to see how their students are progressing
with the lessons. With the goal of improving the games so that they are
intuitive for learners to use, researchers will gather feedback as the games are
played in a typical school classroom a few times a week for many weeks.