* 1548136
* SBIR Phase I:  Software Analysis Tools for Field Specialization of Database Management Systems
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2016,08/31/2016
* Rui Zhang, Dataware Ventures LLC
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 08/31/2016
* USD 174,955.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is the development of a set of software tools
that can demonstrate the feasibility of a patent-pending technology for
dramatically boosting the performance of a wide range of software systems, on
very large and complex commercial-scale database management systems (DBMS). The
accelerating growth in data-driven approaches to business decision-making,
together with the rapidly growing volume of data being used, makes the speed of
data processing an important consideration in today's business world; interviews
with industry CIOs indicate that DBMS performance is a significant pain point
for businesses. The commercialization of the technology developed in this
project will greatly improve data processing capacity and thereby permit faster
and better business decision-making. Given the central role played by DBMSs in
enterprise IT systems, this can be expected to have a significant positive
impact on businesses large and small. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business
Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will demonstrate the feasibility of
applying field specialization technology to large commercial database management
systems (DBMSs), with the objective of significantly improving the performance
of these systems, by developing a highly precise and scalable software analysis
tool to identify field specialization opportunities in commercial DBMS software.
The primary challenges to be addressed are those of scale and complexity
(commercial code bases run to many tens of millions of lines of source code in
size, and contain significant amounts of legacy code as well as more complex
data structures and source language constructs). The project will address these
challenges by developing an automated software tool that is both (a) highly
precise in its analysis of DBMS software properties, and (b) highly scalable in
its ability to process large software systems.