* 1548199
* 2015 Sustainable Nanotechnology Organization (SNO) Conference; Portland, Oregon; November 8 - 10, 2015
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2016
* Gregory Lowry, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 08/31/2016
* USD 30,000.00

Nanotechnology will play a key role in achieving sustainability in the global
society. However, nanotechnology must itself be integrated into these solutions
in an economically and environmentally sustainable manner, and with full public
awareness and acceptance. Many existing nanotechnologies are currently not
sustainable due to their dependence on large quantities of energy, water, and
solvents, the use of non-renewable resources to develop them, or unwanted
environmental impacts. The 2015 Sustainable Nanotechnology Organization (SNO)
conference program will address these critical aspects of sustainable
nanotechnology. The program will be built around selected important systems
including agricultural, environmental. health, and energy systems. The systems
focus for the meeting brings together researchers from different disciplines
studying fate, effects, lifecycle assessment, and analytical challenges in a
particular system (e.g. water) into the same sessions to cross-fertilize ideas
between them. This is a different approach from most meetings which have
separate sessions on these topics, irrespective of the system of interest. The
aim of this organization is to provide researchers in a specific system the
tools needed to understand how their work fits into achieving sustainability in
the larger integrated system. Additional cross-cutting sessions will include
manufacturing and industrial ecology, solid waste and e-waste reduction and
recycling, modeling, data management, standardization of methods and data
reporting, and legal and regulatory aspects. The conference will also better
engage health professionals researching and testing novel nanomedicines. Three
forum discussions will be: sustainability, nanoinformatics including data
reporting and standardization,&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The SNO Conference will draw
attention to the role of nanomaterials in achieving integrated systems-level
sustainable solutions to society's most pressing problems including natural
limited resources, greenhouse gas releases, access to clean water and food, and
environmental degradation. Societal issues will be addressed in sessions on
Education and Social Systems/Governance. It is anticipated that 250 participants
from industry, government, academia, and NGO stakeholders will participate. The
conference will attract the leading interdisciplinary scientists and will
include at least 30 participants who are junior scholars (doctoral and
postdoctoral students), with 20 student travel awards (5 specifically for URM
students) available to encourage their participation. Thus, the conference will
provide networking opportunities for scientists at different career stages. The
two and half day schedule will include a number of forum discussions that will
foster interactions between young investigators and more established
researchers. The SNO Conference is of particular importance to new investigators
as there are few if any similar conferences that address the broad topic of
Sustainable Nanotechnology. In addition, scientists from underrepresented groups
in science will play key roles in the conference. Specific travel awards are
available for these faculty and industry participants. Participants will come
from not only the U.S., but around the globe, ensuring a diverse and
international expert group to facilitate stimulating discussions.