* 1548948
* SBIR Phase I:  Laser activated viscosity reduction and upgrading of bitumen for transportation to refineries
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2016,06/30/2016
* Partha Dutta, Lunas Power Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 06/30/2016
* USD 149,770.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will develop a
revolutionary new technology for upgrading and reducing the viscosity of
bitumen, an oil sands feedstock. Bitumen is a major source of heavy crude oil
for the US, but has 10,000-100,000 times higher viscosity than traditional
crude, requiring producers to decrease its viscosity prior to transport to
refineries, using highly volatile and costly additives (diluents). This
requirement adds $9-14 of cost per barrel and consumes valuable transport
capacity (the diluent occupies a third of a barrel of raw bitumen), intensifying
the need for additional rail/pipeline transport capacity. This Phase I project
will develop fundamental knowledge about a new, patent-pending, laser-based
process that has recently demonstrated significant reduction in bitumen
viscosity without the use of diluent or other chemicals. This effort constitutes
a critical step in commercializing the process and realizing turnkey equipment
for use by bitumen producers in Canada and beyond. It is estimated that
processing 100,000 barrels/day (BPD) via this process could save producers
approximately $400 million annually. If implemented, this process would also
drastically decrease the environmental risk associated with diluent transport.

The intellectual merit of this project lies in the photo-activated
disintegration of chemical bonds using a nonlinear optical, multiphoton
absorption process, coupled with fluid rheology control in viscoelastic fluid.
The photonic technology in this project utilizes the absolute minimum energy
necessary to selectively crack large hydrocarbon molecules into smaller
molecules and requires no chemical additives. In laboratory-scale research, this
process has successfully reduced the viscosity of raw bitumen by three orders of
magnitude and enhanced the American Petroleum Institute (API) gravity, taking
the feedstock from an immobile complex molecular ensemble to an upgraded, free-
flowing fluidic state. The nonlinear optical process provides enhanced optical
absorption in the material, thus resulting in better energy utilization for the
chemical bond breaking process and associated viscosity change, in comparison to
thermal visbreaking, the current industry-standard process. This Phase I project
will develop fundamental understanding of the experimental parameters (such as
wavelength, irradiance and exposure time of optical radiation) necessary to
maximize the basic cracking process efficiency and to control the aklyation,
aromaticity and polymerization processes needed to premium-quality petroleum
products. In turn, the fundamental knowledge acquired will guide the future
development of commercial-scale equipment with this process.