* 1548082
* SBIR Phase I:  Web Application to Host Individual-based, Online Academic Competition
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2016,06/30/2016
* Timothy Kelley, Interstellar Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 06/30/2016
* USD 149,925.00

This SBIR Phase I project represents a new approach to online academic
competition, one that may perhaps incite a shift in the market-based reform
movement's present focus on increasing competition at the institutional level
toward cultivating it at the grass roots level, that is, at the level of the
individual student. Prevailing academic theory suggests that academic
competition, well-structured, not only can lead to healthier peer dynamics but
also to significant improvement in learning outcomes. Given the importance of
mathematics to all fields of fundamental science and engineering, and the
tendency of mathematics competitions to attract participants in greater number
than other subjects, this project may well become a vital ally to the NSF
mission. And if the structure of competition contemplated here proves sound, if
students increasingly replace the remote/joystick in their hands with a
textbook, or a Chromebook more specifically, the benefit to society in terms of
a more educated populace could be substantial. Moreover, the commercial
potential of this product may be greater than almost any other approach
imaginable. From connecting two U.S. first graders studying arithmetic in a 1-1
match to hosting a Physics championship where high school students from around
the world take part, the possible reach of this application is
remarkable.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical innovation contemplated in this
proposal will mark a fundamental advance on existing, generally available web-
based technology focused on the delivery of academic competition in two ways.
First, it will allow students to identify opponents of similar academic ability
and then schedule mutually convenient competitions with them fueled by multiple
choice and fill-in-the-blank questions stored in the system, a content database
eventually spanning every grade level and course. In addition, it will make
possible the hosting of massive online competition events where potentially
millions of students might log in simultaneously to compete for the title of
champion of any given subject, first nationally and eventually world-wide. Going
forward, special emphasis will be placed on mobile optimization in anticipation
of the growing trend toward such devices, especially given the likelihood that
student utilization of the proposed functionality will more often occur outside
the classroom. The ultimate goal of this project is to emerge with a platform
that leverages classic game mechanics to motivate students to learn.