* 1548964
* SBIR Phase I:  Novel Device for Maintaining Continuous Fluid Drainage in Small-Bore Chest Tubes after Cardiothoracic Surgery
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2016
* Evan Luxon, Esculon LLC
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 12/31/2016
* USD 179,999.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to improve outcomes for cardiothoracic
surgery patients by ensuring proper post-surgical drainage and allowing for use
of small-bore chest tubes. In the United States, approximately 750,000 major
cardiothoracic surgeries are performed each year. These patients receive at
least one chest tube to drain fluid and facilitate proper healing, but
approximately 36% of chest tubes become clogged. Patients with clogged chest
tubes are more likely to experience post-surgical complications, which can
result in life-threatening conditions and significantly increase the cost of
care. To mitigate the risk of clogging, surgeons typically use large-bore chest
tubes, which are more likely to be misplaced and to cause injury to surrounding
organs. The novel device under development addresses these issues by preventing
clog formation in small-bore chest tubes, thus maintaining proper fluid
drainage. Anticipated impacts of the device include reduced time to ambulation
and discharge, hospital readmissions, and nursing time. Commercially, the device
addresses a $300 million initial market opportunity and has the potential to
save the U.S. healthcare system approximately $1.7 billion per year from costs
associated with preventable chest tube complications.

The proposed project aims to develop a novel chest tube device to solve the
clinical need of maintaining proper fluid drainage after cardiothoracic surgery
while enabling the use of small-bore chest tubes. Existing systems are prone to
clogging, which can lead to life-threatening conditions, longer hospital stays,
and increased costs. The objective of this research is to continue device
development and demonstrate statistically significant superiority in drainage
effectiveness over standard large-bore chest tubes in vivo. In this project, the
ability of the device to maintain continuous, clog-free fluid drainage in small-
bore chest tubes will be assessed in a benchtop simulation model, while certain
design characteristics are optimized. Subsequently, the effectiveness of the
device will be demonstrated under normal and challenged conditions in an animal
model and compared against the performance of standard large-bore chest tubes.
Successful conclusion of this effort will result in an optimized version of the
device that is suitable for use in clinical studies, in order to demonstrate the
effectiveness of the device in humans.