* 1548837
* SBIR Phase I:  Scientifically Supported and Technologically Enhanced Teacher Evaluation System
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2016,06/30/2016
* Marsha Mays-Smith, Amaysing Ideas LLC
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 06/30/2016
* USD 99,789.00

This SBIR Phase I project centers around using scientifically based educational
research and innovative data management and analysis techniques to support
improvements in Pre-K through 12th grade education through more efficient and
rigorous teacher evaluation processes. The American educational system needs
substantial improvement if it is to inspire both the innovation and creativity
needed now and in the future. The preparation of American students to meet the
challenges of the 21st century is of both national interest and concern. As
societal functioning becomes progressively more knowledge intensive, it
increasingly relies more upon human capacity to learn and innovate. Consistent
with the mission of the National Science Foundation to transform scientific
discovery into societal and economic benefit, this project can have untold
societal benefits as improved teaching practice leads to more learning. The
system has great potential for generation of taxable revenue through the sale of
the software and associated training services. The company will hire additional
researchers, experts in evaluation, professional developers, technical support
staff and clerical staff as it quickly grows at the conclusion of Phase I and
prepares for Phase II. Acknowledging that research suggests that the most
important factor effecting student learning is the classroom teacher, this
project leverages scientific research about classroom practice in the teacher
evaluation process to build teaching capacity. It recognizes a critical
disconnect between contemporary labor intensive and low yield bureaucratic
teacher evaluation processes and the efficient dissemination of actionable best
practice feedback. Theoretically, consistent with constructivism, you cannot
think, assess or make valid and reliable decisions without using a mental model
to simplify the process. Traditionally, each state education department, school
district, school and even classrooms have operated as their own informational
silos. The way that society organizes institutions, develops professional
networks that utilize common professional language, and classifies expectations
for professional conduct has critical impact on how society, business and the
economy function. Teacher evaluation needs a shared taxonomy to operate
optimally while still affording contextual sensitivity.

Using an innovative technological model built upon extensive qualitative and
quantitative research related to the language involved in evaluation, feedback
that includes targeted, substantiated evaluatory comments, strategies and
reflective questions that are already coded to evaluation rubrics, is made
readily accessible. This schema is articulated in software that affords the user
opportunities to quickly craft and revise evaluation documents. The software
works to develop the capacity of the evaluator to produce enriched,
comprehensive evaluations while removing archaic and time consuming steps that
can be accelerated with technology. The technology involved automates the
production of tailored, personalized and customized narratives in a fraction of
the time typically required by administrators to prepare them. Built upon a
bedrock of researched based feedback, this system is unlike any other. It
introduces processes that enhance interpreter reliability and that encourage co-
reflective dialog that will catalyze professional learning communities. The
existing prototype will be transferred into a multi-user web based version
through this project. The small business requesting this support has the
technological and learning science expertise to carry out this ambitious
endeavor. Stagnant evaluation processes will become vibrant, dynamic and
effective. It not only will improve the practice of STEM teachers but all
teachers for which it is utilized. The impact of this research will be both
broad and enduring.