* 1548903
* SBIR Phase I:  Imparting Soluble Polysaccharide Functionality to Insoluble Fiber Found in Food Processing Byproduct Streams
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2016,09/30/2016
* Brock Lundberg, Fiberstar Bio-Ingredient Technologies, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 09/30/2016
* USD 150,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research Phase I project is to create a new fiber based ingredient with
properties that: 1) makes foods and beverages that taste better and cost less,
2) has a clean label ingredient statement that is easily understood and not
artificial, and 3) is made utilizing a sustainable process consistent with good
manufacturing practices for food ingredients. The proposed new technology will
make functional food ingredients from natural raw materials and improve
sustainability compared to other thickening, suspending, or hydrocolloid
ingredients sold today, e.g. pectin, hydroxypropyl methylcellulose, and/or
carboxymethylcellulose. The production yields, as measured by the amount of
final product produced from a given amount of raw material, is two to three
times greater compared to common hydrocolloids while the raw materials are
fibrous byproduct streams made from juice and/or food production that would
otherwise be waste or used for other low value purposes. The raw materials are
also available globally in sufficient quantities at reasonable prices even
during periods of cultivated crop shortages. Despite the abundance of waste
plant materials from food processing, they have limited use in foods due to
economic, sensorial (taste, texture, smell) and technological constraints, e.g.
water holding capacity, suspending properties, mouthfeel, without intense
chemical modification, which the proposed technology will overcome. Of the $1.2
billion addressable market for hydrocolloid ingredients used for suspending and
thickening purposes, there is a $240-360 million market demand for competitively
priced ingredients with the properties outlined in this project and a successful
commercialization of this fiber based technology platform will meet this demand.

The technical objectives of this Phase I research project are to commercialize a
transformational, highly functional, low cost, and clean label new fiber
platform that remains stable without chemical, microbiological, or sensory
degradation over time in food and beverages such as juice, soup, mayonnaise, and
salad dressing. Typical usage rates of the proposed fibers are expected to be
less than 1% yet having a significant technical function, e.g. suspending,
thickening, emulsification, in the final food or beverage product. Rheological
and sensory comparisons to other hydrocolloids ingredients will demonstrate the
effectiveness in a range of applications. Due to its natural composition, the
fiber platform will withstand alkaline and acidic conditions ranging from pH
2-10, be thermally stable up to 100 oC, and withstand multiple freeze/thaw
cycles. Raw materials will contain native pectin levels from 15-45%,
galacturonic acid levels of 5-20%, and will be sourced from citrus, sugar beet,
and potato production processes. The proposed fiber platform will produce
suspending and thickening power three to four times greater than current
thickeners, which will result in a lower use rate, cleaner taste, and lower
cost.