* 1548167
* Advances in Quantum and Low-Dimensional Topology; March 2016; University of Iowa
* MPS,DMS
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2016
* Carmen Caprau, California State University-Fresno Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 12/31/2016
* USD 34,800.00

The conference "Advances in Quantum and Low-Dimensional Topology" will be held
at the University of Iowa in March 11-13, 2016. This award provides travel
support for conference participants with a focus on funding junior
investigators, students, mathematicians from underrepresented groups, and other
active researchers without their own sources of funding. The goals of the
conference are to (1) provide an environment fostering formation of new
collaborative communities between mathematicians at all levels and in varying
disciplines that touch on quantum and low-dimensional topology; (2) to energize
and advance transformative research in the areas of quantum and low-dimensional
topology; and (3) involve new Ph.D. recipients, graduate students, and
mathematicians from underrepresented groups in this active research area. It
will also allow leading researchers to disseminate their ideas to a larger
audience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This conference will focus on quantum invariants
for knots and three-manifolds and topics connected to these. These invariants
possess a rich structure and, in addition to quantum groups, relate to
statistical mechanics, quantum field theory, and affine Lie algebras. Presenters
have been working on the A-polynomial, skein module quantizations of character
varieties, skein algebras, categorified invariants, and other algebraic and
combinatorial themes motivated by knot theory. In recent years there has been an
explosion of interest in these topics as well as their applications and
potential impact on other areas of scientific investigations. There are many new
connections to explore in the future. The conference will attract many
researchers working in quantum and low-dimensional topology, and their
ramifications, and will be a venue for diversity and breadth of participation
not only by individuals but also by institutions. The program will provide ample
opportunity for graduate students, postdocs, and other young scientists to
present their work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The conference website will be located
at https://sites.google.com/site/advquantlowstop2016/.