* 1548571
* Science and Technology Center for Engineering Mechano-Biology
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2026
* Yale Goldman, University of Pennsylvania
* Cooperative Agreement
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 09/30/2026
* USD 33,976,341.00

The Science and Technology Center for Engineering Mechano-Biology (CEMB) brings
together leading researchers from a diverse group of disciplines and
institutions to investigate, understand, and innovate at the intersection of
biology, mechanics, and engineering. The mission of this Center is to discover
the governing principles of molecular and cellular communication, provide the
intellectual foundations and materials for engineering new and powerful cell-
based devices, and to train students in the multilingual foundations of
engineering mechano-biology preparing them to be innovative leaders able to
explore and exploit these interconnections to impact society. This award
supports an innovative network of researchers and educators to investigate the
fundamental relationships between cells, their environment, and the forces that
act upon them. The team will train a new generation of scientists and engineers
in the emerging discipline of Mechano-biology, and will partner with industry to
translate new scientific discoveries into products and solutions for the health
and prosperity of the nation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Engineering Mechano-biology,
with its focus on the interactions between structure, mechanics, and function,
will have a major impact on our ability to construct and repair tissues, organs,
and implants; to adapt plants to changing environments; to treat inflammation
and fibrosis; to understand the effects of exercise, activity, and trauma; and
to engineer optimized synthetic and biomimetic materials. This interdisciplinary
field will enable fundamental discoveries in biological function and spur the
development of cutting edge technologies for interrogation and guidance of plant
and animal structures on multiple scales. Projects will span the length and time
scales over which forces operate: from single molecules to supramolecular
complexes, cells, tissues and whole organisms, and from milliseconds to hours,
weeks or months. Major research efforts will focus on three Integrated Research
Thrusts (IRTs) requiring new interfaces across disciplines and organized
following a cell's hierarchical perspective from mechano-responsive molecules to
signaling pathways to the extracellular niche. Thrust 1: Mechano-biology of
Biomolecules and Nanostructures will characterize and engineer proteins and
molecules, enabling detection and manipulation of the pN and nm mechano-
responsiveness of proteins, scaffolds, and cells to probe or generate
increasingly complex engineered mechano-biological reagents, materials, and
systems. Thrust 2: Mechano-biology of Cells and Signaling will elucidate how
cells dynamically react to mechanical forces through feedback between the
cytoskeleton, the nucleus and the surrounding matrix, uncover the ways mechano-
signaling contributes to cell-cell communication, and discover how cells
distinguish and integrate mechano-signals across length and time scales. Thrust
3: Mechano-biology of Tissues, Materials and Microenvironments will identify
matrix-based mechanical cues in plants and animals and investigate the
fabrication of bulk gels, fibrous networks, and engineered micro-devices. This
will lead to the generation of materials with mechano-responsive properties as
well as novel means for studying the structural and biophysical cues in mechano-
transduction.