* 1548528
* SBIR Phase I:  Real-time Continuous Sensor-based Objective Scoring and Reporting of Acute Pain
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2016,06/30/2016
* Alireza Akhbardeh, ROPAmedics, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 06/30/2016
* USD 150,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is the development of a non-invasive device to
objectively measure acute pain. This pain measurement sensor will monitor
patients? pain continuously and in real-time thus replacing or complementing the
subjective pain measurement and scoring that is practiced today. When patients
are able to communicate, pain levels are subjectively reported by the patients.
When patients are unable to effectively communicate, pain levels are
subjectively measured by a clinician using proxies such as vital signs and
facial expressions. Such non-responsive patients include individuals in the
acute care units, pediatrics, or patients suffering from neurological disorders
such as stroke and dementia. Up to 10 million patients are admitted to acute
care every year with an average length of stay (LOS) over 10 days. Improved pain
monitoring could reduce LOS and decrease complications associated with over
medication. A decrease in LOS of just 0.25 days could save over $5 billion/year.
In addition, inefficient pain management is recognized as one of the major
reasons patients become addicted to opiates. Opioid abuse in the US costs over
$55.7 billion. An estimated market/revenue opportunity for this device is $450
million with limited adoption.

The proposed project entails the development of the real-time acute pain scoring
and reporting software platform. It will provide development of a platform to
enable real-time pain scoring and reporting, a major effort to prove that the
technology can be deployed in clinical settings where a physician can make good
use of pain level diagnosis and apply a therapy plan. Feasibility of the
platform has been indicated by studies aimed to prove the link between pain-
evoked cortical activity of the brain and corresponding hemodynamic responses.
In this project, the bio-signals extraction, signal conditioning, and real-time
pain scoring algorithms will be developed utilizing real-time objective pain
assessment in addition to developing a usability mobile app. In addition, we
will perform validation studies of the developed platform. Successful
development of the proposed platform will contribute to improving patient?s pain
management significantly by lowering costs related to pain management and length
of stay. The goal of phase II of the project is to miniaturize the system and
enhance the user interface, an essential step towards commercialization.