* 1548692
* SBIR Phase I:  Delivery of Hydrophobic Chemotherapeutics via Laser-Initiated Nanosyringes
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2016,10/31/2016
* Ryan Deschner, NanoHybrids Inc
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 10/31/2016
* USD 149,992.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to improve cancer patient outcomes by
providing a new method of chemotherapeutic drug delivery that expands the
arsenal of deliverable drugs and provides a highly potent dose, on demand,
directly at the tumor site. Millions of dollars are spent on cancer drug R&amp;D
each year, but the translation of promising pre-clinical drug candidates to
clinical trial success is marginal at best due to safety concerns, poor drug
solubility in aqueous media, and undesirable pharmacokinetic profiles. In fact,
40% of currently marketed drugs and 90% of drugs in development can be
characterized as poorly soluble. Targeted approaches that can package, protect,
and then deliver insoluble drugs directly into cancer cells on demand, will
accelerate the transition of cancer drugs from bench to bedside and help realize
the clinical potential of the estimated $8.2B spent on developing insoluble
drugs. Ultimately, this new nanocarrier solution will provide pharma companies
and physicians with an extraordinary tool for accelerating towards molecular and
personalized medicine with localized delivery of insoluble drugs, expanding the
arsenal of solutions for successfully combating cancer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed project will enable the clinical translation and targeted delivery of
chemotherapeutics with poor solubility. High-throughput drug screening has
enabled identification of new cancer therapeutics, many of which exhibit
excellent biological therapeutic action, but suffer from poor pharmacokinetics
and in vivo stability due to limited solubility in aqueous media. Proper
packaging for in vivo delivery of these hydrophobic drugs represents a large
unmet need for pharmaceutical companies targeting the $42B cancer
chemotherapeutics market. Furthermore, even once packaged, protected in vivo,
and accumulated in a tumor, many drugs require endosomal escape to the cytosol
to exact their therapeutic potential. Thus, delivery to the cytosol represents
another critical challenge. The proposed Laser Initiated Nanosyringe (LINs)
delivery platform addresses these two challenges. LINs is an optically-triggered
phase change nanocarrier platform designed to target and treat cancer by
delivering hydrophobic chemotherapeutics directly to the cytosol of molecularly
targeted cancer cells. The proposed research will lead to a functional prototype
of LINs capable of selectively delivering the hydrophobic model drug paclitaxel
directly to the cytosol of cancer cells in vitro. Ultimately, the goal is to
develop a platform technology that will significantly enhance the selectivity
and efficacy of many insoluble chemotherapeutic drugs under development.