* 1548538
* Dissecting how protein degradation couples the circadian clock to downstream processes
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2017
* Joshua Gendron, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Schoenknecht
* 07/31/2017
* USD 200,000.00

For most living organisms, specific biological processes must happen at specific
times of day. For example, in plants, photosynthesis, the process that converts
light energy and carbon dioxide into sugar, must be timed to daylight hours.
Many additional important processes are parsed out by a mechanism that controls
daily timing called the circadian clock. A lot is known about genes and proteins
that make up the circadian clock in plants; however how the circadian clock
actually controls particular biological processes such as photosynthesis is not
known. This proposal outlines experiments that will discover connections between
the circadian clock and some of these timed biological processes. Understanding
these connections will help us make crop plants that produce more energy and are
resistant to changes in the environment, such as those caused by global climate
change. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Much is known about the transcriptional
connections between the circadian clock and downstream biological processes, but
far fewer non-transcriptional connections have been made. One example is the
coincidence model for seasonal flowering which exemplifies a protein
degradation-based mechanism for coupling the clock to seasonal flowering. In
this system a circadian clock-controlled F-box protein times the degradation of
a key regulator of flowering. Beyond this example, there are 32 additional
circadian clock-controlled F-box proteins with little or no known biological
function. To fully understand the protein degradation-based couplings between
the circadian clock and downstream processes, the functions of these F-box
proteins must be understood. In this proposal a strategy is defined for
inverting the function of the 32 circadian clock-controlled F-box proteins to
study their functions. The completion of the experiments in this proposal will
provide a critical toolset and dataset to investigate protein degradation-based
coupling mechanisms between the circadian clock and downstream biological
processes. In addition, the proposed research will promote training and
scientific interaction at various levels of scientific discovery. 1)
Undergraduates, graduate students, post-doctoral researchers, and visiting
scholars will be trained in plant genetics, molecular biology, and biochemistry
in the laboratory; 2) A monthly plant ?showcase? will continue to bring together
the plant science faculty, students, and personnel at Yale with New Haven high
school and middle school students to foster interest in plant biology and STEM
education with young scientists; 3) The proposed work is intended for direct
application to crop species and will be a powerful tool to introduce
environmental plasticity in order to respond to global environment changes; and
4) Dissemination of the work to the general public will be achieved using social
media. The lab maintains a Twitter account (@GendronLab) and the presentations
of the plant showcase are published as podcasts that are freely downloadable
(http://greencafe.yale.edu). This is intended to increase advocacy for science
with a focus on plant science.