* 1548542
* "Strengthening the Collaboration and Partnership between US and African Engineering Programs by Working Closely with the African Engineering Deans Council (AEDC)
* ENG,EEC
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2017
* Craig Scott, Morgan State University
* Standard Grant
* Carmina Londono
* 08/31/2017
* USD 99,257.00

Countries around the globe, whether developed or developing, recognize that
having a well trained workforce in science and engineering is critical for
economic success. To successfully address global challenges there is a serious
need for engineering education and appropriate pedagogy that includes hands-on
experience and that is based on global perspectives, expertise and "success-
stories". One innovation in engineering education that has the potential to
completely transform the way hands-on engineering is taught in engineering
programs in the developing world and in areas that are economically
disadvantaged in the developed world is the "Mobile Studio Technology and
Pedagogy". The Mobile Studio Project (originally funded by NSF) has developed
pedagogy and supporting hardware and software that provides functionality
similar to that of standard laboratory equipment (oscilloscope, function
generator, power supplies, among others) typically associated with a highly
instrumented laboratory.

The PIs are convening a "Summit to Strengthen Collaboration and Partnership
between the US and African Engineering Programs" to be held in Addis Ababa in
Ethiopia on September 27-28, 2015. Applications that will employ the Mobile
Studio Project pedagogy in new curricula will be presented and discussed at the
Summit. The main objectives of the Summit are to: (a) ) establish collaborations
between universities with engineering programs in Sub-Saharan Africa; and (2)
lay the foundation for long term collaborations and partnerships with US
universities with engineering programs. The effectiveness of the Summit will be
evaluated by two teams. The internal (on-site) team will be responsible for
local, immediate data collection, on-site interviews and assessment of Summit
activities. The data will be forwarded to the external evaluation team for
review, verification and analysis. The external evaluation team will be
responsible for the design of the evaluation methodology, preparation of all
instruments, data analysis, and report preparation including recommendations for
change.