* 1548577
* SBIR Phase I:  Development of a Track-and-Trace Medication Barcoded Label
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2016,06/30/2016
* Michael Krenzke, ConsortiEX, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 06/30/2016
* USD 150,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project, if successful, will be improving healthcare
patient outcomes, potentially saving lives, and decreasing healthcare costs. The
Drug Quality and Security Act of 2013 set stricter manufacturing standards on
sterile injectable compounded medications that have closed the operations of
many third party suppliers, thus creating drug shortages and higher prices. In
response, the American Society of Hospital Pharmacists expects 40% of the US
market, 2000 hospitals, by 2018 to receive insourced compounds. Hospitals that
insource hope to decrease their costs and improve patient safety with higher
quality product. Today, insourcing hospitals often have multiple information
systems and use paper records cobbling together how a compound is made and to
whom it has been administered. When an ingredient recall occurs, hospitals spend
hundreds of man-hours identifying the problem source and affected patients. To
prevent further patient risks speed is demanded. This SBIR Phase I project will
provide hospitals the capability of an end-to-end quality management that will
track every production process step and tracing medications to patients.
Hospitals will be able to prevent patients from receiving recalled medications
and identify quality production compromises thus improving patient outcomes and
potentially saving lives.

The proposed project is a novel medication barcoded label encryption technology
compatible with existing hospital scanners. Key objectives include a new use of
barcode standards, a proprietary encryption algorithm, and a method to send and
extract secure serial code to and from Electronic Health Record (EHR) providers.
Today, healthcare providers utilize multiple barcoded label technologies with
minimal embedded medication data across disparate systems. Medication labels
could be the link across these systems for ingredient traceability. However,
existing solutions are inadequate to meet 2013 legislative traceability
mandates. The project invention will encrypt serialization fields within the
barcoded label connecting a specific medication to its production data, and
eventually to the patient. Compounding process data, such as ingredients,
environmental conditions, and production instructions, will be connected to
individual medication labels and stored in the patient?s electronic record. When
an ingredient is recalled or questionable process identified, an extraction
algorithm will pull the encrypted data from the EHR and will be connected to
production data. The encryption and extraction method must not require special
handling or software by the EHR. Success of this project will be label
readability by existing hospital scanners and retrieval of the serialized data
from the EHR.