* 1548734
* SBIR Phase I:  Development of a STEM Educational Platform Using Electronic Neuron Simulators
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2016,06/30/2016
* Joseph Burdo, NeuroTinker, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 06/30/2016
* USD 150,000.00

This SBIR Phase I project seeks to develop, manufacture, and evaluate a novel
nervous system simulation platform consisting of freely connectable electronic
neuron modules. These devices will be used in the post-secondary classroom to
further students conceptual grasp of neuroscience and physiology, and to
generate lasting enthusiasm for a career path centered on the science,
technology, engineering, and math (STEM) sector. Per a 2012 study by the
Department of Education, undergraduate STEM major retention rates are only 35%
from initial declaration through graduation. Studies have shown that unengaging
introductions to STEM are partially to blame. We believe that our product's
positive effect on new knowledge formation and student enthusiasm for STEM has
the ability to increase this low retention. We also believe that our company
will grow at a similar rate to our benchmark companies in STEM and neuroscience
education which, after approximately five years in business, each have several
dozen employees and aggregate sales greater than $1 million dollars. Our Phase I
proposal involves undergraduate student construction of neural networks,
including a patellar tendon (knee-jerk) reflex using our neuron simulators, and
evaluation of student learning and interest in STEM gains resulting from that
construction. At the heart of our neuron simulator is an Atmel 8-bit AVR RISC-
based microcontroller. LEDs integrated into the circuit board provide feedback
about the virtual "membrane voltage" level. Similar to real neurons, individual
simulators are connected together through axon outputs and excitatory or
inhibitory dendritic connectors integrated into each board. The flexibility of
the simulator connection pattern can lead to numerous nerve network
possibilities, supporting our belief that our neuron simulators are connector
toys for the nervous system.