* 1548147
* Collaborative Research:  Cross-Linguistic Investigations of the Acquisition of Subject-Verb Agreement
* SBE,BCS
* 06/15/2015,10/31/2018
* Isabelle Barriere, Long Island University
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 10/31/2018
* USD 73,770.00

Subject-verb agreement is pervasive in many languages and it is one of the
earliest syntactic relations that children must master. Prior research has
suggested that its course of acquisition is different in different languages:
early production but late comprehension have been observed in English, Spanish
and Xhosa (Bantu) while production and comprehension are both early in French
(by 30 months of age). The PIs in this collaborative project, Dr. Legendre and
Dr. Barriere, seek to reconcile these results by evaluating the hypothesis that
children can detect agreement markers better and earlier in languages in which
these markers are both perceptually salient and semantically
transparent.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The research project will target four
languages chosen because their relevant properties allow a number of factors to
be teased apart: English, Spanish, French, and Haitian Creole. This project is
innovative in seeking to investigate the role of perceptual factors, both at the
sentential level and cross-linguistically, and fosters interdisciplinary
approaches to the study of language acquisition by melding research in
theoretical syntax, psycholinguistics, corpus analysis, and speech perception,
and combining their respective research methods. The project will stimulate
international collaborations between the PIs in the US and research consultants
in France, and will provide valuable research experience for a post-doctoral
researcher, and for graduate and undergraduate students at the two US sites.