* 1548598
* RAPID: Investigating the Link between Fluvial Flood Events, Remobilization, and Preservation in the Stratigraphic Record along the Northwestern Gulf of Mexico Continental Shelf
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2016
* Timothy Dellapenna, CSU Fullerton Auxiliary Services Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Judith Skog
* 08/31/2016
* USD 24,968.00

This proposal was co-funded by the Sedimentary Geology and and Paleobiology
Program (EAR/GEO) and the Marine Geology and Geophysics Program
(OCE/GEO)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sediment dispersal
in the marine environment from small and moderately sized rivers can often be
significantly impacted by episodic events such as large floods. Unlike large
rivers with extensive sediment routing systems or large estuaries at their
mouths, these smaller rivers have a more direct sediment path to the ocean, thus
maintaining a better signal of the flood event. These episodic-event dominated
rivers typically reflect climate variability rather than seasonal cycles. This
results in the record of past flood events preserved in the marine sedimentary
deposit that can give insight into climatic variations over longer time scales.
Understanding these past climatic variations regionally will be critical for
anticipating future variations due to climate change. Unfortunately, developing
strong proxies for river floods using the marine sedimentary record is not a
straightforward application due to the complexities of sediment dispersal along
continental margins. This project aims to take advantage of recent, near
historic floods on the Brazos River, a moderately sized, episodic river draining
into the Gulf of Mexico (GOM), to investigate how a flood deposit is ultimately
preserved in the continental shelf sediment record. As large floods within this
river typically result from El Niño conditions, flood deposits preserved in the
sedimentary record will reflect past periods of intense flooding associated with
El Niño events in the northwestern GOM. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this
study is to develop a high-discharge/El Niño proxy for the northwestern GOM
based on this most recent flood event that may be useful for future paleo-
climate studies. To accomplish this, PIs plan to collect sediment cores during
two sampling cruises along the shelf between the river mouth and the distal
depocenter, a feature known as the Texas Mud Blanket (TMB). These cruises will
take place at approximately 3 and 6 months following peak discharge to
investigate: 1) how the flood deposit changes over this time period; 2) the
fraction that may be transported to the TMB during a single event; and 3) the
preservation potential of event layers in the TMB. To answer these questions
they will delineate the flood layer in the cores by analyzing a variety of
sedimentological properties including: physical characteristics, short-lived
radioisotopes (e.g. 7Be and 234Th), and elemental composition from XRF core
logging. Understanding these depositional characteristics will help to establish
an appropriate environmental proxy for such events. Some of the broader impacts
from this study include funding an early career scientist, and engaging and
training undergraduate and graduate students in geoscience research, many of
which will be from traditionally under represented groups.