* 1548533
* EAGER:  Cytokinesis mechanisms and cytoskeletal dynamics in Chlamydomonas
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2018
* John Pringle, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Charles Cunningham
* 06/30/2018
* USD 300,000.00

Cytokinesis is the final stage in cell division in which the single mother cell
is physically separated into two daughter cells, and is essential for the normal
proliferation and differentiation of cells of every form of life. Historically,
studies of cytokinesis have focused on just two groups of organisms: the
animals, fungi and their relatives, whose cells divide by forming an inward-
growing "cleavage furrow", and the land plants, whose cells divide by forming an
outward-growing "cell-plate". Thus, there is currently an unresolved paradox at
the heart of cell biology: by what mechanism did the common ancestor of modern
cells divide, and how did that mechanism evolve into the seemingly very
different mechanisms seen today? This project will exploit the experimental
advantages and favorable evolutionary position of the green alga Chlamydomonas
reinhardtii (which is closely related to land plants but divides by forming a
cleavage furrow like animals) to help elucidate the common core mechanisms that
underlay cytokinesis in ancestral cells and are still shared in modern organisms
despite their superficial differences. Understanding these core mechanism will
provide a better understanding not only of animal, fungal, and plant cells, but
also of a broad range of other cell types that have been largely ignored by cell
biologists but are of enormous ecological and economic importance. In addition
to basic knowledge, this project will provide new experimental tools that should
be valuable both in basic research and in applied studies (particularly in
biofuels development), and it will provide opportunities for postdoctoral,
graduate, undergraduate, and high-school students (including students from
underrepresented groups) to learn genetics, molecular biology, and cell biology
as a prelude to continuing in careers in science and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on elucidation of the
mechanisms by which Chlamydomonas cells form cleavage furrows for cell division
without a contractile actomyosin ring (CAR), a structure formed of filamentous
(F) actin, type II myosin, and other proteins, which has long been thought to be
necessary for furrow formation in animal and fungal cells. However,it is now
clear both that many cells that normally have a CAR can divide without it and
that most eukaryotic cells in other phylogenetic groups divide by forming
furrows but have no myosin-II, so there must another driver(s) of this process.
To elucidate the mechanisms of furrowing in Chlamydomonas and the associated
cytoskeletal functions, three interrelated aims will be pursued. (1) Improved
methods for expressing tagged proteins of interest and for microscopic
visualization of cytokinesis processes and cytoskeletal dynamics will be
developed and used to clarify the details of these processes and the questions
to be asked at the molecular level. (2) A combination of microscopy,
biochemistry, genetics, and transcriptome analyses will be used to investigate
the possible role of F-actin in the cleavage furrow and the mechanisms and roles
of the recently discovered dramatic transcriptional regulatory response to actin
depolymerization. Similar approaches will be used to investigate the function(s)
of the single Chlamydomonas septin protein, which is also expected (from
comparisons to other organisms) to be involved in cytokinesis. (3) Imaging-based
methods and high-throughput platforms will be used to identify mutants defective
in cytokinesis and/or cytoskeletal dynamics; characterization of these mutants
should help to reveal the underlying mechanisms of furrow formation and
cytoskeletal behavior through the cell cycle.