* 1548225
* SBIR Phase I:  Game-based learning for organic chemistry using mechanisms
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2016
* Julia Winter, Alchemie Solutions, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 12/31/2016
* USD 179,927.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project makes the theoretical
touchable for organic chemistry students by building a game for mobile devices
based on mechanisms. Mechanisms are maps of bond-breaking and bond-making events
illustrating how an organic reactant is transformed into a product. This
underpinning concept is a powerful tool used both in the teaching and the
practice of organic chemistry. Organic chemistry is traditionally the gateway
class for students progressing into STEM careers, such as medicine and
engineering. The course has earned its roadblock reputation with attrition rates
in the range of 30-50%. The fail-rate for under-represented minorities and first
generation students is even higher than that of the general student population.
Students' previous learning in chemistry or other sciences does not adequately
prepare them for the cognitive load of structure and pattern recognition
required to master organic chemistry. This project will produce the mechanism
game and bring a tactile interface to learning chemistry. The game is designed
to span the entire curriculum, into graduate levels. The accessibility and
relatively economical cost-structure of the mechanism game is particularly
attractive to the market of students needing to excel in organic chemistry to
achieve their career goals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical innovation of
this project is delivering the content of chemical mechanisms using a touch-
screen, game-based format. By layering audio, visual, and kinesthetic cues in
the user interface of the game, students will 'feel' bond-breaking and making,
acidity, and resonance. The mechanism game is an intrinsically motivating system
for students to know when they are moving through a reaction mechanism
correctly, helping students gain the intuition necessary for success in organic
chemistry. The important piece of this project is the development of this new
learning tool as a game, as opposed to an interactive tutorial. The research
will focus on the iterative process of creating engaging game-play by field-
testing with players as the game is developed. The technical challenge of the
project is devising a game that can tolerate the scientific scrutiny of academic
chemists while remaining appealing to even the casual game player. The key
metric for success will be testing the mechanism game with chemistry professors
and instructors to determine whether they would recommend the game to their
organic chemistry students.