* 1548490
* SBIR Phase I:  A Novel Platform to Enable Directed Delivery of Therapeutics into Brain Injuries
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2016,06/30/2016
* Sazid Hussain, AIVOCODE
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 06/30/2016
* USD 149,757.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to enable transformative advances into the
treatment of traumatic brain injury (TBI) and positively impact the lives of
injury victims, such as soldiers, their families and the society in general by
reducing the degree of disability and increasing independence. With over 10
million people worldwide sustaining TBI annually, it is the leading cause of
death and disability in the most active segment of the population. The enormous
financial and human suffering burden of TBI provides a compelling rationale for
the development of novel and innovative agents and approaches to TBI management.
Despite an obvious need, there are currently no clinically proven, effective
drugs to limit secondary injury or enhance repair in TBI. Precision-guided
delivery of drugs specifically to injured areas in the TBI brain may result in a
paradigm shift in the clinical management of TBI. The potential for clinical
application of such an approach is high, as the targeted delivery technology can
be used for delivering any therapeutic or diagnostic agent. Such a targeting
technology has not previously been available for treatment of brain injury and
therefore there exists a huge commercial opportunity.

The proposed project focuses on developing a targeting platform for site-
specific delivery of drugs to brain injury. One of the reasons for the failure
of many neuro-protective agents in clinical trials is due to the dose limiting
effects of these drugs. Incorporating a targeted delivery strategy can
circumvent this. We have identified a novel targeting peptide that specifically
recognizes TBI. Using animal models, we propose to demonstrate that combining
therapeutics with this peptide can improve delivery of drugs to brain injury. In
this proposal, we will test two different types of drugs (a protein therapeutic
and antisense nucleic acids) in conjunction with our targeting peptide to
demonstrate the validity of the principle of therapeutic targeting. We expect
that an intravenous administration of targeted drugs will lead to a higher
accumulation in brain injury than untargeted drug. This strategy can be expected
to improve therapy, and also diagnosis, of brain injuries. It may also advance
the understanding of the molecular changes associated with brain injuries and
may provide new therapeutic targets. With this platform technology,
transformative advances in brain injury treatment in the form of increased
efficacy, reduced side effects, and ease of administration are expected to ensue