* 1548941
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Settlement And Demographic Responses To Environmental Change
* SBE,BCS
* 11/15/2015,10/31/2016
* Arthur Joyce, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 10/31/2016
* USD 25,083.00

Under the direction of Dr. Arthur Joyce, Ms. Jessica Hedgepeth Balkin will
conduct dissertation research investigating the relationship between ecological
change, settlement patterns, and demography in prehispanic times. In
Mesoamerica, archaeologists have predominantly argued that populations during
the prehispanic urban period (400 BCE-CE 1521) were most often concentrated on
highly arable lands such as floodplains. Agricultural surpluses in these
settings could be produced based on corn, regarded as the most dependable staple
resource. Using archaeological data, Balkin's study explores how landscape
change may have led to a divergence from this pattern. On the coast of Oaxaca,
Mexico, the development of estuaries at the beginning of the urban period may
have allowed large settlements to rely on both agricultural and aquatic
resources. This study also investigates the notion that there are lag times in
demographic and settlement responses to environmental change. Social scientists
are increasingly recognizing that both modern and past human populations react
to ecological shifts in different ways. The choice to re-settle is complex, and
affected by a variety of sociocultural factors, such as labor investments in
urban infrastructure. This study is therefore directly relevant to modern
population dynamics. Due to its long-term perspective on the development of
human societies, archaeology is in a unique position to inform current policy on
the potential of populations to cope with major ecological events. Societies
have a significant capacity to thrive in challenging environments or climates if
they engage in sustainable land use practices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Balkin will
conduct an investigation of potential shifts in resource availability and
settlement after significant environmental changes. She will lead an
interdisciplinary team of geologists and archaeologists, including a soil
scientist and archaeology students from both Mexico and the United States.
Students will be trained in archaeological methods, giving them an opportunity
for professional development. The research will focus on the lower RÃ­o Verde
Valley on the Pacific coast of Oaxaca, a subtropical region with considerable
ecological diversity. Zones rich in arable lands and wild resources, including
the floodplain and estuaries, took their current shape as large-scale
agriculture and urbanism first began to develop in the region. Balkin will
address three research objectives related to these environmental and cultural
changes. First, the project will investigate whether the agricultural fertility
of the lower Verde floodplain was significantly higher than other environmental
zones after ecological changes resulted in its expansion (c.a. 400 BCE): was an
ecological incentive created for changes in settlement patterns? Methods include
soil fertility and geospatial (GIS) analyses. Using archaeological survey, other
objectives will focus on settlement pattern shifts in response to the
environmental changes. The second objective is to determine whether populations
followed the "safe" path by focusing only on the floodplain for agricultural
purposes, or if some groups settled near estuaries to exploit fish and
shellfish, important sources of protein. The third objective is to evaluate the
rate of human response to local environmental shifts: did a lag time in
demographic movement occur after the ecological changes, as observed elsewhere
in history and modern times?