* 1548381
* Group Travel Support for US Participants in the 31st International Congress of Psychology, July 22-27, 2016, Yokohama, Japan
* SBE,BCS
* 12/01/2015,11/30/2016
* Merry Bullock, American Psychological Assoc
* Standard Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 11/30/2016
* USD 45,000.00

This award allows the American Psychological Association, in collaboration with
the US National Committee for the International Union of Psychological Science,
to sponsor U.S. scientists to attend the International Congress of Psychology
(ICP) in Yokohama, Japan. The ICP is a premier international scientific congress
in psychology, held approximately every 4 years since 1889. The ICP attracts
6,000-10,000 psychologists, spanning a wide range of scientific psychology and
spanning the globe. It offers an excellent venue for showcasing the work of U.S.
psychological science, for exposing U.S. psychological scientists to cutting
edge ideas being discussed around the world, for fostering a broader
international perspective on research and theory across the discipline, and for
facilitating international collaboration and exchange.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Early career scientists and graduate students whose
research is within the purview of the Behavioral and Cognitive Sciences division
of NSF will be given priority for sponsorship. The program will include
mentoring and mentor-matching activities to strengthen the capacity building
aspects before and during the congress and in later follow-up activities. The
emphasis on young scientists strengthens the discipline and fosters the
development of U.S. science and scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
funded by the Behavioral and Cognitive Sciences division of the Social,
Behavioral, and Economic Sciences directorate at the National Science
Foundation.