* 1548091
* EAGER: Photo-Thermo-Chemical CO2 Reforming of CH4 by Concentrated Sunlight
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2017
* Ying Li, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 07/31/2017
* USD 107,003.00

1548091(Li)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study will explore the combined heat- and
light-driven reaction of two greenhouse gases - carbon dioxide and methane - to
produce carbon monoxide and hydrogen that can be used to generate fuels or
chemicals while decreasing levels of greenhouse gases. The unique aspect of the
work is that the heat and light will be used simultaneously via a solar
collector/heater to activate the carbon dioxide and methane reaction more
effectively than by either heat or light alone. The approach has potential to be
used in remote or small-scale applications such as biogas generators or
landfills where conventional fuel sources are not
available.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The reaction between methane and carbon dioxide
requires significant energy input to both activate the reactants and provide the
thermodynamic driving force required for the endothermic reaction. Sunlight
provides a means to a favorable energy balance. By use of a properly designed
solar collector, optimized in wavelength and intensity to provide both direct
photon activation and secondary thermal activation, the study will address the
combined effectiveness of thermal and photonic energy input to drive the carbon
dioxide - methane reaction. This will be one of the first studies of its kind,
and should provide important guidance into the relative effectiveness of the
combined approach versus either thermal or photocatalytic approaches alone. In
addition, the study will develop catalysts that are specifically designed to
utilize both thermal and photon energy sources, and it will also explore the
mechanism of the combined photo-thermo-catalyzed
reaction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If the approach is successful, it could open the
door to more catalytic reactions that could benefit from the combined thermo-
photo approach. These types of approaches rely on the sun for energy, and thus
present a path to a more sustainable energy future as well as a means of
mitigating greenhouse gas emissions or upgrading greenhouse gases to useful
products. The concept also fits well with treating gases in remote locations or
from small-scale gas sources, where solar collectors and reactors can be
utilized in modular form without the need for ancillary power sources.