* 1548256
* Environmental Assessment of the McMurdo Dry Valleys: Witness to the Past and Guide to the Future; Colorado State University, May 2016
* GEO,OPP
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2017
* John Priscu, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Burns
* 09/30/2017
* USD 92,935.00

Through the unique global partnership that is the Antarctic Treaty system, the
entire continent is formally designated as a natural reserve, devoted to peace
and science. To visit, and operate in, an environment like this comes with a
responsibility to do so carefully and with as minimal an impact as possible. It
is thus imperative that scientists, tour operators, contractors and managers
operating in Antarctica convene regularly to assess the state of the environment
and delineate requirements for the future that will maintain the pristine nature
of the continent. A region of Antarctica that is particularly vulnerable to
human impact is the McMurdo Dry Valleys (MDV). This area is the largest ice-free
expanse on the continent (ice free area = 4,500 km2) and encompasses a total
area of 22,700 km2. The landscape is a mosaic of glaciers, mountain ranges,
permanently ice covered lakes, ephemeral streams and novel soil ecosystems. The
global uniqueness of this environment has led to increased levels of scientific
research and tourism over the past decade. Given the increase in human presence,
it is important to assess routinely the impact of these activities for both
ethical and scientific reasons. It has been 17 years since environmental
stewardship of the McMurdo Dry Valleys (MDV) has been formally addressed. During
these 17 years, research activities in the valleys have increased exponentially
and major research campaigns have been established in the Taylor, Wright, Miers,
Garwood, Beacon and Victoria Valleys. This 17-year period has seen the
implementation of a Dry Valleys Specially Managed Area (ASMA) and several new
Specially Protected Areas (ASPAs) in the region. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Given the
relatively long hiatus since the last environmental assessment of the MDV, in
concert with exponential increases in research activity, this award will
partially fund a fourth workshop to assess the environmental integrity of the
region, discuss the success of present management strategies, and develop an
international plan with which to move forward. The workshop will include more
than 40 scientists, contractors and environmental mangers to discuss
environmental stewardship and scientific site integrity of the MDV. Workshop
participants have been carefully chosen to ensure gender balance and
representation from all career levels. The early career scientists will have a
chance to change the way they will work in Antarctica, allowing them to conduct
research in an environment that they have had a hand in shaping. Individuals
from five countries will participate, providing a global balance to the
workshop. A report will be produced by this workshop that will set the stage for
environmental stewardship in the MDV for the next decade.