* 1548677
* SBIR Phase I:  A Cognitive Assessment Engine for App Based Learning
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2016,06/30/2016
* Mita Mayoraz, Zapptitude, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 06/30/2016
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project aims to develop a new
technology solution to provide accessible, affordable and accurate assessment
system for app based learning. Advancement in the U.S. economy has been
consistently driven by technological progress and innovation. Yet, K-12
education sees little technological change, even as U.S. students increasingly
lag behind other nations. The advent of mobile devices and digital learning
tools/apps create promising opportunities for developing new learning
technologies to deliver academic content that is more engaging, adaptive,
relevant and rigorous. However, the effectiveness of digital learning
technologies such as game/app based learning is rarely known. Coupling real-time
evaluation and assessment systems with trusted reporting, the proposed
innovation will help schools make informed learning technology decisions,
provide actionable insight to help teachers monitor students' progress over
time, thereby improving teachers' instruction and student learning. This will
also drive the development of quality STEM apps that leverage the best of
today?s technology and reduce entry barriers for innovators. This project aims
to spearhead an innovation that can unleash the potential of game/app based
learning, creating a marketplace where the best learning apps/technologies are
recognized and continuously improved.

This project aims to provide new insights and contribute to scientific knowledge
about the developmental impact that the interaction with multiple educational
apps has on students? learning. The originality of the solution lies in cross-
app data mining and reporting. It provides (i) a one-stop dashboard to parents,
teachers and students with a unified assessment, (ii) the opportunity for timely
intervention and personalized recommendation to each student, and (iii) a cross-
examination of a child?s gameplay through multiple apps which has the potential
for more accurate assessment. The goals of the proposed R&D are: 1) to build an
assessment engine that any STEM based educational app developer can use to
provide game/app based assessment at the point of learning and 2) test this
assessment engine in a real life setting using 3rd party educational app(s). To
reach these goals - (i) a couple of 3rd party apps will be instrumented with our
SDK for data collection, (ii) a pilot study will be conducted with 3rd & 4th
Graders playing these educational apps on tablets in a classroom setting and
(iii) the data will be analyzed with our assessment engine to test the
feasibility of this new technology.