* 1548915
* SBIR Phase I:  Novel, point-of-service device for use in diagnosing the severity of anterior eye injures with an objective measure of the ocular tear film
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2016,06/30/2016
* David Kellner, InnSight Technology, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 06/30/2016
* USD 150,000.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project is a paradigm shift in the initial evaluation and triage of anterior
corneal injuries, through the development of a new medical device that can be
used to evaluate a patient with an eye trauma. There are 2.4 million eye
injuries per year in the United States. The most serious eye injury is called an
open globe injury. The incidence of open globes has been reported to be between
2-6 per 100,000 in adults and 15.2 per 100,000 in children. Accurate diagnosis
and timely management are critical for visual recovery. Making the correct
diagnosis on these patents is very challenging and first responders have very
little tools available to them. If suspicion for ruptured globe exists, the
patients are transferred to a tertiary care center in order to have access to an
on-call eye doctor. This inefficient, multi-referral approach is very costly to
our health care system and delays proper care. The United States spends $6.6
million dollars each year on open globes injuries. Access to a reliable,
accurate, hand-held, biosensor system can solve this problem by providing non-
ophthalmologists with a objective tool to improve diagnosis in order to initiate
the proper management for eye traumas which could save vision.

The proposed project will validate this biosensor in the evaluation of eye
injuries. 6.8-14.7% of ocular traumas that present to the emergency department
are from anterior injuries. This biosensor uses a sophisticated nanotechnology-
based approach through an enzyme-loaded gold plated electrode within sensing
paper that can be inserted in the ocular tear film of patients with eye trauma
to obtain immediate results on the degree of injury. The scope of this study is
to maximize the sensitivity of the biosensor test strips by optimizing the base
material of the sensor. The current configuration of the proposed system is
deposited on paper, and the team will move to glass or silica as a base layer to
improve the sensitivity of the device. Next, the team will study the variable
polymer coatings and their effect in robust detection of small fluid volumes to
optimize reproducibility. Testing will be on samples of collected ocular fluid.
From their preliminary work, the team anticipates achieving accurate results
with sensitivity of greater than 90%. The impact of this device is a paradigm
shift in the initial evaluation and triage of anterior corneal injuries. This
prevents unnecessary high-level specialty consultation and uses technology
advancements to provide better care with lower cost approaches.