* 1548203
* I-Corps: Thermopile-based Enzymatic Sugar Sensor Array (TESSA)
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2015,12/31/2015
* James Castracane, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* Rathindra DasGupta
* 12/31/2015
* USD 50,000.00

Sugar measurements in food and beverages represent very large national and
global markets in agriculture, food and health industry and science. Recent
developments of new industries such as precise agriculture, brewing of low carb
beers and the production of reduced calorie food /beverages bring the demand for
accurate, fast and low-cost measurements of total sugar content as well as sugar
species in liquid solutions, agricultural produce and plants. To date, all
available measurements of sugars in these industries are performed either by
expensive laboratory analytical techniques or by somewhat less precise manual
enzymatic kits and refractometry, which work only with liquid solutions. The
proposed new device, the Thermopile-based Enzymatic Sugar Sensor Array (TESSA),
will replace any of the above technologies. Furthermore, it can detect several
sugars simultaneously with a single measurement with high precision and accuracy
not only in liquids but in live plants and vegetables.

The goal of this project is the creation of a calibration-free, proof of
principle TESSA prototype to demonstrate to potential clients/investors the
significant advantages of the proposed approach. To achieve this goal, the team
will integrate the customer discovery process with engineering work on the
device itself. Prototype sensors will be fabricated through the application of
MicroElectroMechanical Systems (MEMS) technology. Supporting this will be the
development of several conceptual packaging designs reflecting the wide variety
of potential applications such as agriculture, fitness and health and others and
one or two of the designs will be fabricated with the use of the 3D printing.
The exact design of packaging will, of course, depend on the application. In all
cases, however, the team expects that its packaging will include remote access
(e.g. via WiFi) to sensors for continuous monitoring of sugars in products and
automatic logging of the information for possible sharing among other
producers/customers or for preparation of automatic reports for product
certification with relevant agencies.