* 1548996
* EAGER:  Proof-of-Concept of a New MIMO Transceiver for Addressing Beam Squint in Wideband High-Dimensional Arrays
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2015,02/28/2019
* Parameswaran Ramanathan, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 02/28/2019
* USD 199,991.00

Proposal no. 1546604: EAGER: A New System Architecture for Addressing the
Fundamental Beam-Squint Problem in Wireless Communication with Wideband High-
Dimensional Antenna Arrays &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Wireless technology is poised
for a radical transformation. New systems operating at centimeter-wave
(10-30GHz) and millimeter-wave (30-300GHz) frequencies are the focus of intense
current research to meet the exploding wireless data traffic demands. Two
factors make such high frequencies attractive: i) order-of-magnitude larger
chunks of available spectrum, and ii) high-dimensional antenna arrays enabled by
the small wavelengths. The resulting large number of degree of freedom can be
exploited for a number of critical capabilities, including highly directional
communication with narrow high-gain beams, and spatial reuse of the spectrum by
simultaneous wideband transmissions to multiple users through multiple beams.
However, the hardware complexity of the beamforming front-end and the
computational complexity of the back-end digital processing challenge the
current "digital" paradigm and require a fresh look at the design of the high-
dimensional analog-digital interface. One fundamental problem whose impact on
performance can no longer be ignored in emerging mmW and cmW systems is the
well-known ``beam-squint'' problem - the beam direction changes as a function of
frequency. Traditional solutions are far too complex to be realized in practice.
The objective of this two-year EAGER project is to provide proof-of-concept of a
new multi-beam system architecture that promises to deliver near-optimal
performance with dramatically reduced complexity compared to conventional
designs. The project will provide an invaluable research and training
opportunity for graduate and undergraduate students at the cutting edge of
wireless communications, including basic theory and prototype-based
experimentation. A patent has been filed on the new architecture and it is
expected to play an important role in the conception and development of emerging
wideband multi-antenna technology for cmW and mmW applications. The technology
could also impact radar applications.&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research draws on
tools from communication theory, signal processing, optimization, harmonic
analysis, antenna design, and physics of propagation. It is prompted by
promising initial results that revisit the beam-squint problem from a new
perspective, quantify its significant impact on performance, and suggest the new
multi-beam system architecture for effectively dealing with it. The new
perspective is offered by a beamspace theory, pioneered by the PI, for the
design and analysis of multiple input multiple output (MIMO) wireless systems
that employ multi-antenna arrays. An integrated theoretical-experimental
research plan is being pursued with two overall objectives: i) development of
basic theory for the new system architecture, and ii) proof-of-concept
validation using a prototype at 10GHz. The development of basic theory will
characterize the new multi-beam (MB) MIMO transceivers in all point-to-point
system configurations. It will enable a more complete quantification of the
performance gains of the proposed wideband MB-MIMO transceivers relative to
conventional phased array-based systems, as well as the performance-complexity
tradeoffs offered by them. The proof-of-concept demonstration will use a
prototype with a lens antenna for analog beamforming. The results of this
project will provide a definitive proof-of-concept of the new MB-MIMO
architecture for performance-complexity optimization in wideband high-
dimensional MIMO systems in which beam-squint is a significant problem. The
findings of this project are expected to lead to new research in the critical
emerging area of wireless communication and sensing with wideband high-
dimensional arrays.