* 1548324
* SBIR Phase I:  PAX Rotor Development for Flexible Power Take-Off
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2016,08/31/2016
* Jayden Harman, PAX Scientific, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 08/31/2016
* USD 150,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project lies in the development
of a flexible micro-hydro energy generation system that can provide clean,
reliable and affordable energy for individuals and small
communities/cooperatives in remote and developing regions. It promises to have
clear performance advantages over competing solutions at Watt and Kilowatt scale
while providing the lowest cost of total ownership. This is relevant to the
global marine hydrokinetic (MHK) market which applies to energy generation from
the world's rivers, tides, ocean currents and even manmade constructions such as
irrigation canals and effluent pipes. MHK energy is a socially and
environmentally friendly alternative to hydroelectric power as no dam is
required to extract energy. This market is potentially lucrative but is still
very nascent due to high technology costs, concerns over turbine survivability,
fish friendliness, and difficulty in permitting these deployments, especially in
the US and Western Europe.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business
Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will transform a biomimicry-based
design into a stable MHK rotor that can support flexible power take-off
configurations. The baseline design was created by reverse-engineering the
ultra-efficient, low-turbulence flow geometry of mammalian cardiovascular
systems. When applied to a MHK rotor, the resulting geometry allows for the
conversion of energy from a longer stretch of flowing water, which can lead to
similar power/energy generation to that of traditional MHK rotors but with half
the required depth. During the project, the shape will be varied to result in a
predictable, stable design with maximum efficiency of output under variable flow
conditions. The proposed R&amp;D plan is a primary research effort in
identifying the variables that lead to predictable, high performance, MHK rotor
design utilizing such methodologies as computational fluid dynamics (CFD),
prototyping and water tank testing. In addition, greater understanding of this
design will also expand the body of knowledge in the rapidly emerging field of
biomimicry.