* 1548367
* SBIR Phase I:  Analog Power Supply Integrated Circuit System for High Intensity Light Emitting Diode Lighting
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2016,01/31/2017
* Louis Scalzo, ACP Semiconductor Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Rick Schwerdtfeger
* 01/31/2017
* USD 150,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project will enable the development of a unique low cost
power analog Integrated circuit system ASSP (Application Specific Standard
Product) that will be mass deployed worldwide in the light emitting diode (LED)
lighting industry. Based on an innovative power supply design, significant cost
savings and reliability is achieved through integration. Furthermore LED
lighting companies can significantly reduce the cost of manufacturing of LED
Street lighting, enabling LED lighting to be sold to municipalities worldwide at
a far lower cost than exists today. Cities worldwide can save significant
amounts of energy and therefore costs by implementing LED lamps using this
unique power supply system.

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will enable for
the first time a highly integrated power supply chip set, designed for municipal
light emitting diode (LED) lighting, to significantly reduce energy consumption
by intelligently managing urban lighting, while achieving significantly longer
lifetime, higher efficiency and reliability. An analog power supply integrated
circuit system will be developed to allow a high degree of integration, and
incorporate interfaces for communication, remote sensing and monitoring. The
integrated circuits will be modeled, prototyped, and tested using simulators,
and hardware and software will be optimized to achieve the best results. This
analysis will enable manufacturing of prototype units in a very short interval,
and allow mass production and deployment of the integrated circuits worldwide.
Using the technology developed, energy savings of over 75% compared to
conventional lighting will be realized by intelligently configuring urban
lighting to optimum localized needs.