* 1548243
* EAGER: Interaction of Smart Materials for Transparent, Self-regulating Building Skins
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Tahir Cagin, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Yick Hsuan
* 08/31/2018
* USD 239,596.00

In the United States 50 percent of all energy produced is consumed by buildings
and 75 percent of all electrical power is used for the operations of buildings.
The functions of building skins are traditionally limited to be passive in
nature such as serving as thermal and moisture barriers and modulators of
sunlight. There is a need for innovative strategies to reduce energy consumption
in buildings. The objective of this EArly-concept Grant for Exploratory Research
(EAGER) project is to harness the inherent properties of smart materials to
explore the interaction of these materials and their potential to be used in
active and multifunctional building skins. Smart materials provide the
opportunity to imbue building skins with more dynamic capabilities namely, to
regulate functionalities such as gas exchange and purification (oxygen, carbon
dioxide, and common urban air pollutants), to modulate porosity, to reduce
thickness of thermal barriers, and to harvest energy and water from the air. If
successful, it will address the resource, energy, and labor intensive
infrastructure systems that currently serve a building's utility
functionalities. This exploratory project will engage interdisciplinary student
teams during design studios and workshops (a) to investigate the interaction of
smart materials within innovative building skins, and (b) to fabricate and test
these smart material interactions. A team of material scientists, engineers and
architects will pursue this endeavor.

This exploratory project fundamentally rethinks the way buildings are designed
and operated. It is envisioned that building systems that integrate their
functionalities through self-monitoring and adjusting their properties and
behaviors according to external environment to attain a desired outcome and
drawing inspiration from physiological systems in the natural world. Smart
materials, such as shape memory alloys, bi-metallic strips, stimuli-responsive
polymers, dendritic or star polymers, and piezoelectric materials, will be
explored for self-regulating behavior. The methodology will involve graduate and
undergraduate students from the disciplines of Architecture and Materials
Science and Engineering including students from underrepresented groups and
offering significant benefits to them. The project will pursue research and test
active, transparent and multifunctional building skin proto types using smart
materials that can interact with and react to their environment.