* 1548618
* SBIR Phase I:  Isothermal Gas Compression
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2016,08/31/2016
* Chris Finley, Carnot Compression LLC
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 08/31/2016
* USD 150,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is to reduce the carbon
footprint of industrial activity through more energy efficient air and gas
compression. The global market for air and gas compressors is estimated to
exceed $30 billion. It is estimated that approximately $50 billion in energy
costs is spent globally on air and gas compression each year. Isothermal
compression has been thought to be unachievable due to the requirement of
rapidly capturing the heat of compression. By creating a fundamentally new
method for compression, this technology has the potential to dramatically reduce
both operating costs for compression and greenhouse gas emissions associated
with energy usage for compression. The proposed technology also has the
potential to change the way thermodynamics and compression methods are taught in
mechanical engineering classes. Engineering students will now be taught that
rapid isothermal compression is possible, and will be challenged to find ways to
apply the concepts to a broad range of applications. Further study and
exploitation of isothermal compression may lead to an ever evolving field of
application, potentially creating additional areas of research and learning.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project will validate the energy efficiencies of a novel
method for compressing air and gas in an isothermal compression process. Heat
generated during air and gas compression leads to high energy consumption. The
technology proposed utilizes a liquid/gas emulsion to compress gas in a spinning
disc. The compression method has been proven with bench-top prototypes. This
Phase 1 project will validate total system efficiencies through the design,
manufacturing, and testing of a commercial scale system capable of generating
test data for comparison against current commercial air compressors. It is
anticipated that the first commercial test unit will generate energy
efficiencies on par or above current commercial products. The test unit will
provide comprehensive data on total system efficiencies and system component
efficiencies, which will provide a basis for addressing system design issues
necessary to enhance overall efficiencies for commercialization.