* 1548986
* Stimulating Research and Innovation in STEM Teacher Education
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2022
* Yolanda George, American Association for the Advancement of Science
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 09/30/2022
* USD 4,499,313.00

Several recent frameworks and standards groups, including the National Research
Council (NRC) and the Conference Board of the Mathematical Sciences (CBMS), have
called for a change in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM)
teacher education and professional development, as well as for changes in
teacher certification. As we seek to change teacher preparation, we will need to
build the research base. The 2010 NRC report Preparing Teachers: Building
Evidence for Sound Policy indicates that there is a consensus on the knowledge
and skills that STEM teachers need but more research is needed to reach a
consensus on what constitutes effective STEM teacher preparation. This project
will provide resources, tools, and a community for current and prospective
researchers who seek to expand the research base on STEM teacher preparation;
and the over 300 teacher education programs that are pursuing evidence-based
changes in STEM teacher education. This project will include grantees of the NSF
Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program and other STEM preservice education
research grantees funded by the NSF and U.S. Department of Education. Internal
and external evaluation of the project will examine changes in NSF Noyce teacher
education and other programs, including changes in (a) who is doing research
about teacher education and (b) innovations in STEM teacher education, including
changes in curriculum, courses, student assessment, teaching approaches, teacher
field experiences, teacher support and mentoring, teacher induction, teacher
leadership development, changes in degree requirements, faculty development,
licensure requirements, and changes in collaboration with local education
agencies and two-year colleges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will include
activities directed toward developing 1) a research agenda for best practices in
STEM teacher preservice education, and 2) a blueprint for innovation in STEM
teacher preservice education. Activities supporting the development of a
research agenda to help build effective STEM teacher preservice education and
leadership development programs will include identifying what we know from
current research and what we want to know. The community-driven process for
developing this research agenda will include: (a) assembling and convening a
working group of preservice educators, education researchers, staff in key
professional societies, and others; (b) commissioning papers; (c) conducting a
literature search and producing an annotated online bibliography; (d) surveying
teacher preservice programs; (e) producing a preliminary report; (f) hosting a
summit with the working group and teacher education program leaders and others;
and (g) producing a final report. Activities supporting the development of a
blueprint for innovation in STEM teacher preservice education and leadership
development programs will include: (a) assembling and convening a cross-
disciplinary working group of preservice educators, education researchers, staff
from key education and professional societies, and others; (b) collecting and
summarizing information on existing undergraduate education core concepts and
competencies related to STEM majors and non-majors, including teacher education
students; (c) co-hosting six regional meetings to get input from college and
university STEM faculty and students, local and state education agencies, and
others; (d) developing a preliminary report; (e) hosting two national summits
with the working group, teacher education programs, and all key stakeholders;
and (f) producing a final report and web-related tool(s).