* 1548791
* SBIR Phase I:  Neural Algorithms for Multimodal Sensory Analysis
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2016,06/30/2016
* Andrew Nere, Thalchemy Corp
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 06/30/2016
* USD 149,497.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is to enable continuous
sensing applications in a wide range of energy-constrained devices like
smartphones, smartwatches, and other wearables. Without dramatic innovations in
the development of ultralow power sensory processing, continuous sensing will
remain a niche application limited to environments with a stable and plentiful
power source. The technology described in this proposal will demonstrate the
viability and potential widespread deployment of continuous sensing devices in
mobile or remote environments with strict energy constraints. An important
immediate market for the proposed technology with significant customer base is
the smartphone and wearables market, where many new and emerging end user
applications could leverage environmental sensing to trigger context-based and
anticipatory actions. The proposed technology is broadly applicable to a number
of other markets and domains, including medical, health, and safety monitoring
of critical patient sensors, personal fitness devices, military applications,
and environmental monitors. The ability to flexibly deploy continuous sensing
for these and other applications has the potential to revolutionize these
markets and create entirely new and unforeseen application
domains.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project will develop a novel platform&lt;br/&gt;technology--inspired by
the mammalian neural pathways, which process sensory information--to
enable&lt;br/&gt;?always listening? audio processing capability within energy-
constrained devices such as smartphones, tablets, smart watches, and other
sensor-enabled wearable devices. The core technology, which provides the sensor
processing capability, will model many of the computational properties and
capabilities of the biological neurons that humans use to analyze information
from their various senses. This research will allow a broad range of devices to
continuously monitor their microphones, using streaming audio input to interpret
various user commands, infer the current context and needs of the user from
background noise, and even identify dangerous and harmful situations heard by
the device. The research will target deployment of these capabilities on low
power microprocessors and microcontrollers, often referred to as sensor hubs,
which are included in many modern smartphones, tablets, and wearables. Targeting
deployment on the sensor hubs will enable ?always listening? devices without
compromising the battery life of the device.