* 1548298
* SBIR Phase I:  A Novel Heat Dissipation Product for Chip Testing and Internet of Things
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2016
* Craig Green, CARBICE CORPORATION
* Standard Grant
* Rick Schwerdtfeger
* 12/31/2016
* USD 179,175.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is intimately tied to the significant increase
in transistor density that semiconductors have experienced over the past few
decades. This has enabled many technological advances ranging from high
performance servers to Internet of Things devices. Still with every advance in
chip technology the pain points related to chip cooling continue to increase.
Conventional thermal interface material (TIM) solutions, particularly in high
temperature applications, fall short. Three major TIM market segments exist:
polymer composites, metallic materials and phase-change materials. Commercial
carbon nanotubes (CNT) will create a fourth market segment that will supplant
existing TIMs, initially in the chip testing market and eventually extending
into servers, high performance computing and Internet of Things devices. CNT
researchers and small businesses have made little progress towards a commercial
TIM product. Among other factors, this failure is driven by poor positioning in
the crowded low-cost TIM space, which is currently dominated by thermal greases
and pads. Progress towards a viable solution lies in the strategic alignment of
product features with industry pain points. This Phase 1 SBIR aims to develop a
CNT based thermal interface material capable of capturing this chip testing
product opportunity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project aims to develop an innovative carbon nanotube (CNT) based
thermal interface material (TIM) that demonstrates chemical stability and low
thermal resistance in high temperature applications. The primary focus of this
Phase I SBIR is a durable, fungible, and low resistance thermal interface
material that will be transformative to the chip testing market. To this end, a
TIM will be developed for the chip testing market that can maintain its thermal
performance over 2,000 thermo-mechanical cycles - an extension of several
multiples of the expected service life of a burn in TIM. Furthermore the CNT-
polymer composite TIM will be capable of seamlessly accommodating changes in die
size during its expected lifetime. Finally, the technology will deliver industry
leading thermal resistances in preparation for an eventual transition to
competition in the server, high performance computing and Internet of Things
market.