* 1548021
* I-Corps Sites:  Jackson State University Center for Innovation and Entrepreneurship
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2016,01/31/2023
* Ramin Maysami, Jackson State University
* Continuing Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 01/31/2023
* USD 357,682.00

This project, from Jackson State University Center for Innovation and
Entrepreneurship, establishes an I-Corps Site. Innovation Corps (I-Corps) Sites
are NSF-funded entities established at universities whose purpose is to nurture
and support multiple, local teams to transition their technology concepts into
the marketplace. Sites provide infrastructure, advice, resources, networking
opportunities, training and modest funding to enable groups to transition their
work into the marketplace or into becoming I-Corps Team applicants. I-Corps
Sites also strengthen innovation locally and regionally and contribute to the
National Innovation Network of mentors, researchers, entrepreneurs and
investors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Jackson State University Center for
Innovation and Entrepreneurship (JSU Center) strengthens their culture of
entrepreneurship by supporting the translation of research from lab to market
through training for faculty, students, and staff in the areas of academic
entrepreneurship and innovation. The JSU Site:&lt;br/&gt;-Offers entrepreneurial
training and development opportunities for faculty and student teams in Science,
Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM) disciplines to prepare them for
participation in the NSF I-Corps Teams Program or for further commercialization;
&lt;br/&gt;-Broadens the participation of underrepresented, specifically African
American, faculty and students in STEM and entrepreneurial training and
development; and &lt;br/&gt;-Builds the capacity of faculty and students to
explore the translation of academic research into tools, products, services,
etc. that are favorable candidates for commercialization. &lt;br/&gt;These
objectives are carried out through three major activities: &lt;br/&gt;-Twelve
weeks of training for 30 STEM teams per year that emphasizes the role of
customer discovery and the business model canvas in the journey toward
commercialization.&lt;br/&gt;-A year-long series of academic entrepreneurship
workshops offered to the teams as well as to the campus community&lt;br/&gt;-An
end of the year Academic Entrepreneurship Networking and Engagement Session,
hosted annually in conjunction with Mississippi Innovation Month and Global
Entrepreneurship Week.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While progress has been made in
understanding how to support scholars in the transition of research and
innovations from lab to market, little attention has been directed to the ways
in which faculty and students at minority serving institutions may require
different levels of support or engagement to be successful in their
entrepreneurial efforts. Teaching-loads, service requirements, and limited
resources may hinder faculty of color at minority serving institutions from
venturing into entrepreneurship. Lack of exposure to STEM professionals and
limited access to information regarding entrepreneurship may limit African
American students? opportunities to participate in research based academic
entrepreneurship. Situating an I-Corps Site within the JSU institutional
contributes to greater understanding of the best practices for overcoming the
obstacles that hinder people of color and women in STEM from participating in
innovation and commercialization activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through
teaching and learning activities for faculty and students in STEM, and by
actively engaging faculty and students of color in academic entrepreneurship,
start-up, and commercialization training and customer discovery, the JSU
Entrepreneurship Center/I-Corps Site plays a major role in broadening the
participation of underrepresented populations in STEM related entrepreneurial
activities. The increased participation of faculty of color impacts society and
the community in particular by bringing to market the products, process,
services, and/or tools that are the result of research from a diverse pool of
scholars and thinkers. The pairing of underrepresented students with STEM
faculty and successful entrepreneurs also impacts the community by providing
important networking, mentorship, and research opportunities - all of which are
essential parts of recruiting and retaining students and promoting career
advancement for faculty.