* 1548031
* I-Corps Sites:  Arizona State University Startup Mill
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2021
* Ji Mi Choi, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Rebecca Shearman
* 04/30/2021
* USD 296,624.00

This project creates an I-Corps Site at the Arizona State
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NSF Innovation Corps (I-Corps) Sites are NSF-
funded entities established at universities whose purpose is to nurture and
support multiple, local teams to transition their technology concepts into the
marketplace. Sites provide infrastructure, advice, resources, networking
opportunities, training and modest funding to enable groups to transition their
work into the marketplace or into becoming I-Corps Team applicants. I-Corps
Sites also strengthen innovation locally and regionally and contribute to the
National Innovation Network of mentors, researchers, entrepreneurs and
investors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps Site at Arizona State University
(ASU) combines resources, infrastructure, and training to support multiple,
local teams across the four ASU campuses to advance technology concepts into the
marketplace. It supports ASU's Startup Mill project, focused on building the
innovation capacity of ASU, while contributing to the regional and national
economy through technology commercialization and the development of the next
generation of innovators. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ASU's I-Corps Site is a
university wide initiative - a collaborative partnership among the ASU colleges
and institutes, the technology transfer office and the external entrepreneurial
ecosystem - to provide training, coaching, and financial support necessary to
catalyze faculty and student efforts for transitioning university research into
the marketplace, and into becoming successful I-Corps
Teams.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Foci of this I-Corps Site is
on:&lt;br/&gt;Entrepreneurial training: ASU I-Corps Site synergizes existing
resources and services to deliver I-Corps training and support services that
embed the customer-development focused Lean LaunchPad (LLP)
curriculum.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Regional infrastructure: ASU I-Corps Site
leverages the regional network in the greater Phoenix metropolitan area to
support startups, including existing entrepreneurs and Executives-in-Residence,
a mentor network, regional and university angel groups, and relationships with
investors. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ASU I-Corps Site provides an opportunity to
advance the innovation capacity of university faculty, students, and researchers
through formal training, practice, and repeated exposure to an entrepreneurship
program. By disseminating, internalizing, and executing the NSF I-Corps Site
program over the course of the 3-year funding period, the ASU Startup Mill
contributes to the culture transformation of ASU to include an embedded
commercialization perspective. In addition, the implementation of the I-Corps
Site program includes systematic evaluation of opportunities to adapt and
augment the I-Corps model such that it promotes the inclusion and recruitment of
underrepresented populations. Specifically, ASU focuses on inclusion and
recruitment of veterans, Latino, and women participants in the program.