* 1548214
* Collaborative Research: ASSIST - Strengthening Engineering Faculty through Diversity Serving Professional Organization Engagement
* ENG,EEC
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2021
* Sarah Echohawk, American Indian Science and Engineering Society (AISES)
* Standard Grant
* Christine Grant
* 09/30/2021
* USD 745,764.00

This collaborative project has a goal of increasing the diversity of engineering
faculty at post-secondary institutions through engaging graduate students, post-
doctoral professionals and early career faculty in faculty oriented professional
development activities. The lack of diversity in the engineering ranks is well
documented. According to data collected by the American Society for Engineering
Education, the percentage of Hispanic tenure track faculty actually declined
from 2012 to 2013, from 3.9% to 3.6%. During that same period, the number of
African American faculty also declined from 2.7% to 2.6%. The numbers of
American Indian and Hawaiian/Pacific Islanders changed by single digit numbers,
their overall percentage being so small that it did not vary significantly. When
considering gender, the number of tenure track female faculty was 14.5% in 2012,
a number that has slowly increased from the 8.9% in 2001. It is a national
imperative to diversify the engineering profession, and the presence of role
models within the engineering faculty ranks is crucial to support the
encouragement of underrepresented students seeking and earning engineering
degrees. More specifically, 408 engineering doctoral degrees were awarded to
members of this target demographic in 2012, however the number of assistant
professors only increased by 28 (from 411 to 439). This is FTE for the given
year and does not account for faculty that may have been promoted from assistant
to associate or those who may have left the academy. If even Â¼ of those earning
doctorates had joined engineering faculties, this would result in an almost 25%
increase in the representation. Clearly greater effort is needed to increase the
number of those that earn doctoral degree who choose to enter academic
ranks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Seven engineering professional organizations that
target underrepresented populations in engineering and other STEM fields will
collaborate on this project: the American Indian Science and Engineering Society
(AISES), Great Minds in STEM (GMiS), Latinos in Science and Engineering (MAES),
the National Society of Black Engineers (NSBE), the Society for Advancement of
Hispanics/Chicanos and Native Americans in STEM (SACNAS), the Society of
Hispanic Professional Engineers (SHPE), and the Society of Women Engineers
(SWE). This project will facilitate travel for graduate students, postdoctoral
professionals and early career faculty to attend national engineering
conferences hosted by each organization. Utilizing content experts, these
organizations will provide professional development opportunities at these
conferences designed to prepare participants to become successful engineering
faculty. By creating a collaborative infrastructure between these organizations,
they will design, implement and evaluate the efficacy of increasing engineering
faculty diversity through these workshops and professional development
activities for the targeted participants. This activity will also create a self-
supporting community engaged in higher educational pursuits thus addressing the
isolation often perceived as contributing to the low numbers of faculty from
diverse groups. A secondary benefit is that the undergraduate and pre-college
students who attend these same conferences will have the opportunity to interact
with the graduate students, postdoctoral professionals and early career faculty
participants, thereby increasing their opportunity to learn about and
potentially seek graduate degrees, increasing the pool of those who seek tenure
track positions.