* 1548308
* SBIR Phase I:  Software application for conversion of text-heavy documents into interactive diagram-based documents
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2016
* Ray Emrani, VizCommunication
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 12/31/2016
* USD 150,000.00

This SBIR Phase I project addresses reading and learning difficulties faced by
many learners in school, college, and the workplace. The goal of the project is
to build a web application that helps individuals and organizations convert
text-heavy documents (such as online textbooks, manuals, and courses) into
interactive diagram-based documents. The greatest potential benefit will be for
students who have difficulty learning from long paragraphs of text ?including
visual learners, English Language Learners, and students with dyslexia or ADHD.
The users of the app will be consumers of educational content (students and
online learners) and content creators (authors, publishers, test prep companies,
and corporate training departments). The theoretical foundation of this proposed
research comes from studies that show the learning benefits of graphic
organizers in a wide range of disciplines, including science, engineering,
humanities, and social studies. This proposal will support the nation's need for
a skilled workforce by helping to increase the number of students who graduate
from high school, college, and post-secondary vocational programs and by
improving the learning outcomes for employer training and retraining programs to
meet changing business needs. The commercial impact is expected to be strong,
generating income for tax revenue and creating jobs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
technical innovation of the project is a methodology that provides a well-
defined sequence of steps for semi-automatic conversion of complex text-based
documents to interactive diagram-based documents. Fields of knowledge to be
drawn upon to build the web application include instructional design,
information visualization, text mining, and natural language processing. The
major technical hurdles to be addressed are accurate identification and
extraction of content from a source document, displaying the content using
interactive visualization techniques, and integration of the converter with the
Company's prototypes of a viewer and an authoring tool (built using HTML5, CSS3,
and JavaScript). One way that the methodology lowers the risks involved in the
conversion process is to separate the text-mining steps (relatively low risk)
from the natural language processing steps (relatively high risk). If
successful, the converter will dramatically reduce the time and cost for
individuals and organizations to convert existing educational content into
documents that are more accessible for diverse learners. The scope of this
proposal is limited to the conversion of digital textbooks that are available as
open educational resources. Future research will build on this methodology to
convert other types of documents (e.g. manuals and online courses) and file
formats.