* 1548305
* SBIR Phase I:  Developing a Novel In Vitro Assay Using Patient-derived Cardiomyocytes To Screen for Drugs To Treat Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2016
* Jason Lam, Stem Cell Theranostics, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2016
* USD 150,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project is to develop a stem cell-based platform to screen drugs
for treating hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM). The global economic burden of
heart failure is a staggering $110B per year, touching the lives of nearly
everyone. Stem cell-derived disease models enable us to innovate in the heart
failure space in a way that has not been possible before. The ability to
generate induced pluripotent stem cells from normal and diseased populations
will enable the development of authentic preclinical disease models. These cell
lines will contribute to a better understanding of cardiac disease, and will
expedite the development of new and better drugs to treat the disease. This
platform also will enable the understanding of cardio-toxic impact of any drug,
which is a major problem for drug attrition in clinical trials. The market
potential for novel drug discovery, which is enabled by this technology, allows
access to the multi-billion dollar drug discovery market.

This SBIR Phase I project proposes to establish the technical foundation for an
in-vitro platform to screen for drugs to treat HCM. The goal is to address how
select therapies with known results in animal models affect the morphology and
function of cardiomyocytes generated from a library of clinically defined HCM
genotypes. Preliminary results have demonstrated that the cardiomyocyte models
mimic disease phenotypes, and that these phenotypes can be partially rescued.
The work in this project will build on these preliminary findings and move the
platform from an academic interest into an industrial technology. As with any
new platform, developing standard processes can be a barrier for adoption,
especially when that technology involves the complexity inherent in biological
systems. The plan is to adapt high content imaging and multi-electrode array
technologies to assess structural characteristics, calcium cycling, and
electromechanical functions of the cardiomyocytes. Then, the platform will be
used to screen a set of 11 drugs for their ability to rescue disease phenotypes.
This work will demonstrate that the cardiac disease models are a valid
preclinical drug screening technology to evaluate genotype-specific therapy for
treatment of HCM.