* 1548016
* EAGER:  A Novel Self-Cleaning Microfiltration Membrane System for Water Purification
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2018
* Dong Chen, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 07/31/2018
* USD 39,999.00

1549736 Chen

Membrane filtration plays a critical role in advanced water and wastewater
treatment practices. However, membrane fouling increases the operation and
maintenance costs, and ultimately shortens membrane life. The main objective of
this project is to explore the fundamental mechanisms of self-cleaning
piezoelectric membrane systems and the application guidelines for fouling
control. This project may greatly advance membrane filtration technology for
water and wastewater treatment.

This study explores piezoelectric membranes to solve membrane fouling problems
in filtration processes. Utilizing multi-functional piezoelectric membrane
materials, the project will result in an innovative approach to control membrane
fouling. This project is the first to systematically investigate the cleaning
mechanisms of the piezoelectric membranes and the anti-fouling efficiency for
common types of membrane foulants. Upon completion of this study, the project
will reveal; 1) the fundamental cleaning mechanisms of the piezoelectric
membranes; 2) the cleaning efficiency with respect to typical membrane foulants
such as particles, organic matters and microorganism; 3) the cleaning effect
with respect to cake layer formation vs. membrane pore blocking; 4) the
technical guidelines of system optimization such as vibration frequency,
waveform and amplitude; 5) surface modification of the piezoelectric membrane to
be less prone to fouling and easier to clean; and, 6) potential side effects and
how to avoid them. The fundamental research includes mechanics of vibration,
sonochemistry, water chemistry, fluid mechanics, and disinfection. This research
is potentially transformative as it may bring a revolutionary solution to
membrane fouling and greatly advance the membrane filtration technology. The
proposed membrane system has the advantages of being chemical-free, with cost-
saving, a small footprint, productivity enhancement, extension of membrane life,
and easy push-button operation. The proposed study is of great significance for
both fundamental scientific research and industrial applications. In addition,
this project will support the educational missions of the university as well,
including courses development and support minority students in STEM education.