* 1548514
* EAGER/Collaborative Research: Challenging the Cognitive-Control Divide
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Dagmar Sternad, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Irina Dolinskaya
* 08/31/2018
* USD 171,060.00

This EArly-concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) collaborative research
project is between an expert in robotics and control theory and an expert in
experimental and computational motor neuroscience. It bridges cognitive science,
experimental psychology and control engineering. The intellectual premise of the
work is that a quantitative theory of human cognition may be built on top of
limiting cases of human motor function. This premise lays the foundation for the
development of a comprehensive quantitative theory of control-relevant
cognition. The result will be an invaluable tool for the human-friendly design
of complex motion control systems. Control strategies based on these fundamental
objects would be more intuitively understandable by human operators, including
prediction of impending failure. Extension of the results beyond motion control
provide a new class of knowledge-processing systems capable of more natural
interactions with humans. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is
to articulate and test a quantitative, control-relevant theory of human
cognition, to address a growing divide between cognitive science and control
theory. The core hypothesis is that cognitive functions emerged from and are
constrained by neural structures used for motor control. Complex motor actions
are composed from a limited "library" of dynamic primitives, defined as
attractors (e.g. fixed points, limit cycles, etc.). The project postulates that
a similar composition of dynamic primitives underlies cognitive processes and
that quantitative details may be obtained by re-purposing dynamic primitives
found in motor behavior, especially in the manipulation of complex objects such
as tools where the link between motor and cognitive function may be strongest.
The project is based on a novel series of experiments: A data series is
generated by various human participants physically manipulating a complex
dynamic object. Alternative data sets are generated by computer simulation of
movements to the same targets that minimize mean-squared applied force. Random
fluctuations generated by low-pass filtered zero-mean Gaussian white noise and
of magnitude comparable to the fluctuations in human performance are added to
the simulated force and motion time-series. Without being told the origin, a
second set of subjects are presented with the results as evolving abstract time-
series and asked to predict their outcome. Subsequently, they are asked to
generate a control input for the abstract system, based on their experience, to
accomplish a specified task. According to the hypothesis, the subjects will more
successfully predict the outcome of human-controlled systems than the synthetic
systems, and will generate control inputs that more closely match the human-
controlled system inputs.