* 1548957
* SBIR Phase I:  Spiral Countercurrent Chromatography for the Separation of Carbon Nanotubes
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2016,06/30/2016
* MARTHA KNIGHT, CC Biotech LLC
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 06/30/2016
* USD 150,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project lies in the availability
of single-wall carbon nanotubes in their most highly purified form in laboratory
scale quantities. This would be enabled by the use of a spiral countercurrent
chromatograph, invented and made in the USA. Single-wall carbon nanotube is one
of the most promising semi-conductor materials and is being actively considered
for making state-of-the-art high performance electronic circuits. The associated
know-how will be of great value to the high volume semi-conductor manufacturing
industry. The availability of discrete chiral types of the single-wall carbon
nanotubes separated by the proposed system will have additional impact on the
research market. Research labs in the semi-conductor industry and academic labs
may be able to develop the carbon nanotube based nanomaterials, components and
final products for point of care diagnostics, genomics devices and sensors for
environmental and security identification. The societal benefits of these
potential applications are significant. The benefits extend more broadly to the
life science research industry also where the technology works for protein and
particle separations in the development of novel vaccines and drug delivery.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; This Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project focuses on developing a novel laboratory scale
system for carbon nanotube purification. Carbon nanotubes are challenging to
manufacture and isolate in their pure form for use as robust logic and sensor
elements in advanced electronics. They are hard crystal carbon polymers that are
heterogeneous tubes of various lengths and diameters and occur as single-walled
or multi-walled with other structures. The existing processes to solubilize and
purify the various single-walled semi-conductor species are quite difficult and
have low mass yields. The methods mostly used to date are column chromatography
and density gradient ultracentrifugation. To meet the need of higher mass
loading and increased selectivity, this proposal focuses on developing spiral
countercurrent chromatography. A new spiral design rotor used with a polymer
solvent mix has shown improved nanotube fractionation over static extraction in
preliminary experiments. Recent innovative research on dextran polymer liquid
stationary phase makes it possible to improve the fractionation of carbon
nanotubes even further. It also opens up many exciting options for large
molecule separation. This development has a very significant intellectual merit
for both chromatography and semi-conductor research.