* 1548207
* Workshop: Improving Inference in Evolutionary Biology and Ecology-Charlottesville, Virginia; November 12-13, 2015
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2016
* Timothy Parker, Whitman College
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 06/30/2016
* USD 29,975.00

A hallmark of effective science is reproducible results. If a result cannot be
reproduced, it cannot be considered a robust scientific finding. Unfortunately,
obstacles often slow progress towards these robust, reproducible observations in
ecology and evolutionary biology as well as in many other disciplines.
Scientists are rewarded for publicizing exciting results, but scientists have
much less incentive to publish unexciting results or to test the reproducibility
of previously published findings. Scientists therefore often search their data
for the most exciting findings that will allow them to publish in the most
prestigious journals, and they often do not invest in seeking to publish their
full set of results. This and various related practices leads to an inflated
rate of published false positives - results that are the outcome of chance
rather than real biological phenomena. Because attempts to replicate prior
findings are often rare, the error of these false positives often goes
unrecognized for long periods. Even when replications exist, drawing conclusions
from them is hindered by a lack of standards to promote effective syntheses
across studies. Reducing bias and promoting replication and effective synthesis
will require changing the institutions that control the incentives currently
guiding scientists' decisions. One of the major classes of institutions shaping
incentives is scientific journals. Journals in some disciplines, such as
psychology and neuroscience, have begun introducing innovative editorial
policies to reduce bias and facilitate replication. Now ecologists and
evolutionary biologists are seeking to develop ideas appropriate for their own
disciplines. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is a workshop in which prominent
journal editors in ecology and evolutionary biology will join with researchers
interested in improving scientific inference to develop incentive structures in
these disciplines that will reduce false positive rates, promote replication,
and facilitate research synthesis. By the end of the workshop, the organizers
hope to have drafts of editorial policy templates and other ideas for shaping
incentive structures that make sense for these disciplines. The organizers also
hope that journal editors and others will then implement policies that are right
for their disciplines and journals, and that the discussions that follow in the
wake of these initial policy implementations will promote more widespread
adoptions of policies that improve empirical progress in their disciplines.