* 1548761
* SBIR Phase I:  Developing a Novel, Non-Hormonal Device for Vaginal Atrophy for Breast Cancer Survivors and Post-menopausal Women
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2016
* Holly Rockweiler, Madorra
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 12/31/2016
* USD 174,831.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to develop a hormone-free treatment
alternative for women suffering from vaginal atrophy. Vaginal atrophy is a
condition in which the vaginal tissue is thin, dry, and inelastic, and women
with vaginal atrophy experience day-to-day vaginal dryness and pain with
intercourse. This SBIR project catalyzes the early stage development of a
technology platform that will enable a novel home-use, hormone-free medical
device to treat vaginal atrophy. This project will represent the first medical
device treatment for vaginal atrophy developed specifically for women wishing to
avoid hormone-based therapies. Currently available treatment options fall in two
categories: over-the-counter products and hormone-replacement therapies. Over-
the-counter products, like lubricants and moisturizers, are available at
drugstores, but these products are often limited in their efficacy relative to
the severity of symptoms many women experience. Hormone-replacement therapies on
the other hand, such as estrogen creams, can be effective for women who choose
to use them; however they are contraindicated for large market segments of women
(e.g. breast cancer survivors and women with cardiovascular risk factors).
Therefore, this SBIR project is critical to the development of a safe treatment
alternative for women and represents a chance to significantly improve their
quality of life.

The proposed project supports the technical work required to develop this
medical device treatment for vaginal atrophy and addresses a major unmet need
for breast cancer survivors and post-menopausal women. The research and
development work supported by this SBIR grant will overcome the technical
hurdles crucial to successful commercialization of this innovative medical
device. The three main objectives of this project are to 1) design the ideal
device form factor and constituent materials to interface with the patient, 2)
determine the optimal therapy settings, and 3) solidify the optimal system
design required to generate the desired therapy profile. To achieve these
objectives, user interviews as well as computer and bench simulations in
surrogate tissues and representative vaginal anatomies (informed by
anthropometry) will be completed. Tissue samples will be instrumented with
sensors to monitor tissue parameters of interest and determine the ideal
treatment profile. In aggregate, the goals of this work will determine the
technical feasibility of the proposed medical device innovation. Completing
these three objectives will develop the therapy and generate the necessary
system requirements for the technology platform, ultimately equipping it for
commercialization.