* 1548616
* EAGER: A Mathematical Framework for Increasing Trust in Human-Machine Interactions
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Tahira Reid Smith, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 08/31/2018
* USD 306,000.00

1548616(Jain)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For decades automation has played a critical
role in air and space flight as well as in industrial settings such as
manufacturing and processing plants. Today, humans interact with automated
systems every day including in their home (e.g. robotic vacuums and home
monitoring systems) and in their vehicles (e.g. navigation systems). The role of
automation is meant to improve the human condition and improve our quality of
life. However the benefits of automation are sometimes lost when humans override
an automated decision due to a fundamental lack of trust in the machine.
Research has shown that close to 80% of the major accidents that have affected
lives and the environment are linked to errors, some of which may have
originated from trust issues in automation. Therefore, it is necessary for us to
study human-machine interactions so that the automated systems of tomorrow are
not only safer but more effective in promoting the health and prosperity of
humans. The goal of this research project is to enable emotional intelligence in
machines. That is to say, we believe that if a machine has the ability to sense
and process the feelings, particularly, trust, of the human interacting with it,
the human and machine can better cooperate to achieve a common goal or complete
a given task. In order to realize this vision, it is necessary for machines to
be able to 1) measure a human's emotional state and 2) respond accordingly to
the human through changes in its user interface (UI). We will study the use of
different psychophysiological tools to make these measurements as well as
utilize mathematical tools to develop models that capture how humans respond
emotionally to visual changes in machine UIs. The results of this study will
then enable us to redesign machine UIs that exhibit emotional intelligence. This
research project is a collaboration between two faculty, one with an expertise
in control and automation and another with an expertise in design and
psychology. By bridging the gap between these disciplines, the PIs will be able
to facilitate a dialogue and future research engagement between researchers in
the fields of dynamical systems and controls, design, and the social sciences.
This is critical because the study of human-machine interactions inherently
requires tools and methods from both traditional engineering disciplines as well
as the social sciences. It is also important for young engineers to understand
the value and benefits of interdisciplinary research and to understand their own
discipline in the context of other fields. To that end, the PIs will present the
results of this project to engineering undergraduates to expose them to cutting
edge research that is rooted in improving the human condition through
collaboration across seemingly disparate fields of study. This also aligns with
national goals of increasing participation in STEM fields by appealing to a
wider demographic of students, including women and minorities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With increasing automation in all aspects of society,
humans are increasingly being displaced as the primary decision-maker in various
roles (such as aircraft pilots and plant operators). However, humans still have
the ability to override automated decisions, and a significant problem arises
when the human overrides an automated decision due to a fundamental lack of
trust in the machine. In what are broadly being called Human-Agent Collectives,
we expect to see a growing need for cooperation and trust between humans and
machines to accomplish a large range of tasks. Therefore, the way in which the
machine senses and responds to the human is of particular importance. The
objective of the proposed research is to understand the dynamic relationship
between machine user interfaces (UIs) and human trust in automated systems. The
new knowledge gained through this research will enable us to improve human-
machine interactions by ultimately redesigning the user interface. This modified
user interface will include an emotional intelligence system for the machine to
respond to the human in real-time. Two specific aims guide this research. The
first aim is to conduct a dynamical characterization of real-time measurements
of trust. Such measurements do not currently exist and are necessary in order to
allow machines to sense the trust level of the humans that they are interacting
with. We propose to identify a dynamic model of trust that relies on real-time
psychophysiological measurements such as galvanic skin response (GSR) and
electroencephalography (EEG), as well as eye-tracking. The second aim is to
define a mathematical framework for modeling human emotional response to
machines. Machines communicate with humans through various design features in
their user interface (UI). We propose to conduct a human subjects study to
mathematically characterize how specific machine UI features can be used by a
machine to dynamically change human trust in the machine. Due to the use of
psychophysiological sensors, these models will be more widely applicable as
compared to previously developed trust models that were specific to the context
of the human subject studies from which the data was collected. This cross-
disciplinary project will advance knowledge and understanding within the
dynamics and control, design, and social science communities. Through the
proposed research, we will enable the design of a closed-loop emotional
intelligence system that achieves the overarching goal of improving the
relationship between human and machine, thereby leading to more reliable and
efficient operation of a range of automated systems. Additionally, the PIs will
co-organize events centered on human-machine interaction at both
dynamics/control and mechanical design conferences to encourage a dialogue and
research collaborations across these otherwise disparate fields. Finally, in
educational outreach, the PIs will disseminate this research to mechanical
engineering undergraduates to expose them to the excitement and benefits of
interdisciplinary research; this directly supports the ASME's vision for the
mechanical engineer of 2030 by broadening the brand of mechanical engineering to
appeal to a wider demographic of students, including women and minorities.