* 1548103
* The International Workshop on Biology and Biotechnology of Thermophilic Microorganisms; October, 2015-Georgia and Erevan, Armenia
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2015,02/28/2017
* Tatiana Vishnivetskaya, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Maija Kukla
* 02/28/2017
* USD 59,998.00

Part 1&lt;br/&gt;The proposed workshop in Tbilisi, Georgia and Erevan, Armenia
will catalyze collaborations and partnerships between US, Georgian, and Armenian
researchers in the field of the diversity and distribution of thermophilic
microorganisms. It will also stimulate and advance research into the biology and
ecology of thermophilic microorganisms with respect to fundamental science and
biotechnological applications. The project will support participation of
undergraduate/graduate students and early career scientists. The international
nature of this project will provide the platform for improving the network of
collaborative research and will be used for development of further exciting
research opportunities for undergraduate students, as well as enrichment in
students? educational and cultural experiences. The workshop webpage will be
created on the University of Tennessee Center for Environmental Biotechnology?s
website where the program, its mission, the list of participants, and a summary
of delivered metrics will be published for public
access.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part 2&lt;br/&gt;Thermophilic organisms were
discovered among bacteria, archaea, and mycelial fungi. Many (hyper)thermophiles
tolerate other environmental extremes such as high acidity, high pressure or
radiation levels, which makes them valuable subjects for applied microbiology
and biotechnology.&lt;br/&gt;The Caucasus Mountains located between the Black
and the Caspian seas are poised for major discoveries, since the thermal
features here have not undergone intensive study with advanced methods. The
proposed international workshop to take place in Tbilisi, Georgia, and Yerevan,
Armenia, will bring together scientists from U.S., Georgia and Armenia to
discuss what is known about the diversity and distribution of thermophilic
microorganisms in little-known thermal sites of the Caucasus. During the
workshop, the unique collection of microorganisms isolated from various thermal
sites including deep subsurface thermal aquifers will be discussed. The
microorganisms and sites they were isolated from will be documented and
systemized, so that follow-up studies and collaborations can be developed. The
round table sessions will discuss the application of next generation omics
techniques and bioinformatics for studying diversity and discovering novel
strains with valuable characteristics. This may lead to innovative strategies
and improvement of the current biotechnological processes. The uniqueness of
this environment, its lack of in-depth microbial analyses, and the near-absence
of previous international collaborations makes this workshop attractive in many
ways.