* 1548009
* I-Corps Sites:  Tennessee Technological University
* TIP,TI
* 01/15/2016,12/31/2020
* Stephen Canfield, Tennessee Technological University
* Continuing Grant
* Rebecca Shearman
* 12/31/2020
* USD 299,868.00

This project at Tennessee Tech University (TTU) creates an I-Corps
Site.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NSF Innovation Corps (I-Corps) Sites are NSF-funded
entities established at universities whose purpose is to nurture and support
multiple, local teams to transition their technology concepts into the
marketplace. Sites provide infrastructure, advice, resources, networking
opportunities, training and modest funding to enable groups to transition their
work into the marketplace or into becoming I-Corps Team applicants. I-Corps
Sites also strengthen innovation locally and regionally and contribute to the
National Innovation Network of mentors, researchers, entrepreneurs and
investors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of the TTU I-Corps Site is to
strengthen the innovation ecosystem and entrepreneurial community in the TN
region through the delivery of the I-Corps curriculum and support to 30+ teams
per year. This activity will leverage existing partnerships between Tennessee
Technological University (TTU), ORNL and the Biz Foundry to accelerate
commercialization through training, enhanced education, and support of
innovative research, while capitalizing on the existing university research
infrastructure and the Launch Tennessee (LaunchTN) accelerator network. The TTU
Site builds on the existing research experience at TTU by adding specific
commercialization training and experience for teams that are composed of various
combinations of students, faculty, members of industry and scientists. The TTU
I-Corps Site expands the innovation and technical commercialization
infrastructure at TTU by:&lt;br/&gt; 1) Building skill sets among students,
faculty, engineers and community startups, and&lt;br/&gt; 2) Moving technology
from academia, government, and industry toward commercialization.
&lt;br/&gt;This project achieves the goals of the Innovation Corps Sites Program
by facilitating the translation of research, encouraging collaboration between
academia and industry, and training students to understand innovation and
entrepreneurship (I&amp;E). This funding allows TTU to support teams whose
projects are likely candidates for commercialization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
innovation Site at TTU is built around the national I-Corps model, and its
focused training experience, and consists of three stages to recruit, immerse
and support technical entrepreneurs in the innovation and entrepreneurship
lifecycle. The stages are:&lt;br/&gt; 1) Team origination and recruitment
&lt;br/&gt; 2) Formal I-Corps training&lt;br/&gt; 3) Post-training
support&lt;br/&gt;These stages are designed to improve the pathway to successful
commercialization and develop the participants as better innovators and
contributors to the NSF I-Corps network. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Tennessee (TN)
state entrepreneurial startups, as exemplified by SBIR/STTR funding, fall in the
3rd quartile ranking with a 37% decrease in the past two decades. Until
recently, most TN entrepreneurs have had limited or no access to training or
opportunities to grow their startup. The TTU Site participates in and
contributes to the broader knowledge of entrepreneurship research and its impact
on engineering education and adds to the database of innovators in the NSF
I-Corps network. In particular, this Site aids in understanding the role of
entrepreneurship and innovation engineering education and its potential impact
on: critical thinking; the network of emerging entrepreneurs and mentors; and,
the addition of business students into the I-Corps model. The Site will
investigate the early implementation of a quantitative, nationalized assessment
model, based on the existing Critical Thinking Assessment (CAT) tool,
appropriate for the I-Corps model that could be extended to train the larger
innovation community.