* 1548867
* SBIR Phase I:  Providing Automatic Anomaly Prediction and Diagnosis Software as a Service for Cloud Infrastructures
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2016
* Xiaohui Gu, InsightFinder Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 12/31/2016
* USD 171,250.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project will be to greatly improve the robustness and
diagnosability of many real world cloud computing infrastructures. The proposed
technology will significantly reduce the downtime of production cloud systems,
which can attract more users to adopt cloud computing technology and thus
benefit the expanding segment of society and the economy that depends on cloud
technology. The project will also advance the state of the art of cloud system
reliability research by putting research results into real world
use.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project will transform system anomaly management for production cloud computing
infrastructures. The novelty of the company's solution lies in three unique
features: 1) it provides automatic multivariate anomaly detection that can
enable high-fidelity anomaly alerts without imposing any configuration burden on
the user; 2) it provides early anomaly alerts before big system problems occur;
and 3) it provides anomaly diagnosis that can generate hints on why an anomaly
occurs. The proposed research will produce novel and practical anomaly
prediction and diagnosis solutions that will be validated in real world cloud
infrastructures. Specifically, the project consists of two thrusts: 1) online
multivariate anomaly prediction that explores new light-weight unsupervised
learning algorithms for achieving high-fidelity anomaly alerts and providing
time-to-failure estimations; and 2) automatic anomaly diagnosis that can
identify possible causes of an anomaly to greatly expedite the anomaly
troubleshooting process in the cloud. The company will implement the software
products and carry out case studies with partners on real world cloud computing
infrastructures.