* 1548217
* RAPID:  Investigating the Efficacy of Coordination of Damage Assessment Initiatives following the April 2015 Nepal Earthquake
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2016
* Lucy Arendt, ImageCat, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* David Mendonca
* 07/31/2016
* USD 49,572.00

The April 2015 Nepal earthquake has resulted in a large number of local,
national and international damage data collection efforts. Many organizations
involved have a long history of responding to natural disasters and do so with a
mandate from the national government or other recognized organization. There are
other efforts that have emerged for the Nepal event that are not as coordinated,
resulting in confusion to a variety of end-users as to the veracity, technical
rigor, or openness of the data. This Rapid Response Research (RAPID) project
aims to take a view on the damage datasets generated since the earthquake and
assess the impact of each dataset in terms of the objectives and eventual end-
use. This information will feed the development of data quality benchmarking
criteria that can be used by any data collection effort following disaster
events. The eventual impact is to reduce the uncertainty in future datasets and
support the end-user to better understand the purpose, pedigree and
appropriateness of the data for their specific use case.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The project will collect data from a number of sources and bring
together a database of damage data for Nepal. In-country interviews with data
suppliers and end-users will help the understanding of the impact of each
dataset. Finally, criteria of best-practice will be generated to help inform
users understand and compare data in future events. With evermore increasing
technical capabilities for data collection, advancement of data processing,
storage and online sharing, it is clear that the demand for open standards and
interoperability is increasing. Therefore, it is crucial that data quality
measures are clear and accessible to help openly compare data and reduce
uncertainty to avoid unintended misuse of damage datasets.