* 1548766
* SBIR Phase I:  A Non-Invasive Elderly Sensor Platform
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2016
* Gerald Wilmink, WiseWear Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 12/31/2016
* USD 179,538.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project will be wearable
technology and mobile health. While the platform being designed within this
proposal is focused on the needs of the elderly, these algorithms developed by
integrated multi-sensor biometrics will be useful in developing a broad range of
wearables for mobile health, fitness, wellness, and military applications.
Additionally, the two sensors being developed in this effort will open up new
biometrics datasets that currently require blood collection or advanced imaging
(blood flow). By developing noncontact and very small sensors that replace
otherwise invasive technology, the door to including them in a variety of
applications opens. We believe that true change in how people live will be
achieved by combining multiple sensors and advanced predictive
algorithms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project aims to develop a sensing platform that measures of various
important predictors of elderly health to avoid the over 30 billion dollars in
health care costs and high mortality related to falls. The sensor platform will
use an array of sensors to measure various important predictors of elderly
health alerting, the wearer, clinician, or caretaker of changes in gait,
hydration, heart rate, respiration, location, and overall motion. The proposed
effort focuses on the development of two novel sensors. The first is a novel
application of MEMS microphone technology that will listen to the sound of blood
and air within the ear cavity enabling the tracking of respiration and blood
flow to the head. The second is a novel hydration sensor based on transmission
line theory. This sensor takes advantage of the inherent differences in water
absorption across the RF frequency band, specifically tuning into dermal layers
to obtain an accurate measure of body hydration. To use the data from these
sensors and other, we will implement an advanced algorithm system to tract
wearer health and their likelihood of fall. This novel combination of novel
sensors and intelligent algorithms will enable elderly wearers to lead happy,
healthy, and secure lives.