* 1548517
* EAGER: Developing a Mathematical Framework to Enable Bi-Directional Interactions of Humans with Smart Engineered Systems Using Relational Elements
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,12/31/2017
* Jonathan Gratch, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Alexandra Medina-Borja
* 12/31/2017
* USD 250,000.00

Buildings consume a staggering 38 percent of our nation's total energy use.
Existing automation approaches to address this problem focus either on
buildings, allowing them to better sense and respond to the behavior of their
occupants, or focus on occupants, seeking to educate them on making more
efficient energy choices. In contrast, this EArly-concept Grant for Exploratory
Research (EAGER) project considers ways to enhance the interaction between
buildings and occupants. The research team hypothesizes that user-building
interactions will be most effective when building users establish a relationship
of trust with building automation. By developing mathematical models and theory
that amplify user capabilities through relational features, users are empowered
to improve individual performance as well as building performance, while also
improving societal well-being. To do so, the work draws on theories from the
behavioral sciences to mathematically model when and how a building should
interact with a user and how these interactions should be framed. The results
will change the way we perceive and experience today's built environments,
leading what could become the creation of unprecedented built environments that
are attentive and have an identity. The project will enhance infrastructure for
research and education by making the models and data available via a free
research license, incorporating research findings into the engineering
curriculum, disseminating research findings via publications, and national and
international presentations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The modeling framework for
user-virtual human agent interactions is the key contribution to smart
engineered systems modeling and design and occurs at the intersection of
engineering, the behavioral sciences and computational modeling. If successful,
the mathematical framework will be used to design smart buildings that have two-
way interactions with people. The research objectives contribute to the ultimate
goal of enabling cyber-physical systems to interact and collaborate with humans.
This project integrates experimental data into the mathematical models, testing
the inclusion of relational elements embedded in the personification of a
building. The models will predict which response is the most suitable for a
building-user interaction. This model will also be informed and constrained by
existing theoretical work on persuasion. The model will account for various
contextual, temporal and personal factors as well as the changes in user
response due to continuous interactions with the building. The multiple-step
modeling methodology incorporates a combination of machine learning techniques,
mathematical projections for the classification problem, and statistical models
such as Markov model, and autoregressive moving average models. In particular,
the contributions are twofold: (1) modeling user-building interactions using
virtual human agents personifying buildings; and (2) performing fundamental
research on how theories of human interpersonal trust and influence can inform
the design of automation. The research will contribute to the fundamental
understanding of human-machine teamwork, including elucidating theories of why
and how people build connections with automated systems and advance our general
understanding of how automation exhibiting relational features can facilitate
behavior change in the population served by those systems.