* 1548861
* SBIR Phase I:  Polymer electrolyte membrane synthesis to enable low cost, durable fuel cells through novel material innovation
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2016,07/31/2016
* Gabriel Rodriguez-Calero, Ecolectro, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 07/31/2016
* USD 149,999.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research Phase I project is to develop alkaline anion exchange membranes (AAEM)
to enable lower cost and durable fuel cells. Widespread adoption of fuel cell
technologies has been difficult due to high costs, which are mostly due to use
of precious metal catalysts and the expensive polymer electrolyte components.
Using AAEM technology allows the use less expensive non-precious metal catalysts
(e.g. stainless steel, nickel, cobalt, and their alloys). Non-precious metals
have facile electrochemical reaction kinetics and are stable under alkaline
operating conditions making them prime candidates as catalysts. Moreover, the
polymer electrolyte, in this case the AAEM, when manufactured at scale should be
less expensive than the current technology. This technology has the potential to
enable the widespread deployment of fuel cell systems by reducing cost and
making fuel cells more economically competitive. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
technical objectives of this Phase I research project are to decrease the number
of steps in the synthesis pathway of AAEMs, while simultaneously reducing time
and increasing yields. These reductions in the number of steps will provide time
and raw materials savings in the overall synthesis of the polymer. The increased
yield of the reaction will ensure more efficient use of raw materials that in
the end will provide a more sustainable pathway to make the AAEMs, while
providing some added cost benefits. Increasing the reaction yields and
decreasing the number of steps will provide reductions in production time that
can be directly related to increasing manufacturing efficiency and lowering
labor costs. The technical objectives will provide necessary information to
scale-up production of AAEMs. Proving these technical development milestones is
of crucial importance for the further development, specifically scale-up, and
commercialization of our technology.