* 1548261
* EAGER: High-Throughput Bioprinting of Vascularized Living Tissue
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2018
* Jennifer Lewis, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Steve Schmid
* 09/30/2018
* USD 300,000.00

The ability to fabricate vascularized living tissues would enable critical
advances in drug screening, tissue repair and regeneration. Tissue engineering
has traditionally relied on the use of acellular scaffolds. However, this
approach vastly limits the size and complexity of the tissues that can be
created due to the lack of stable, perfusable vasculature and the inability to
replicate intricate multicellular configurations. Vasculature networks are
central to living tissues, since all cells must reside within several hundred
micrometers of a nutrient supply to survive. This award supports scientific
investigations on a new additive manufacturing process for fabricating three-
dimensional, vascularized living tissues composed of cells, extracellular
matrix, and embedded blood vessels. Results from this research will enable
broader use of 3D living tissues in the pharmaceutical industry for drug safety
and toxicity screening and, ultimately, in the medicine for tissue repair and
regeneration.

This research will establish the fundamental scientific understanding required
for bioprinting of vascularized living tissue at organ scale. The complex
interplay between cells, extracellular matrix, and vasculature in printed
tissues will be determined. These relationships will be established by
quantifying cell viability via live/dead staining as a function of varying cell
type, concentration, and extracellular matrix composition. The effects of
vascular network architecture, including blood vessel size, spacing, and degree
of branching, on cell viability and function will also be quantified by
live/dead and, concurrently, barrier function of the vascular channels will be
measured by a standard leak test as a function of different architectural
motifs. Finally, the relationship between nozzle size, design, and printing
speed will be determined for cell-laden inks of varying cell type,
concentration, and extracellular matrix composition to identify the requisite
conditions that promote maximum cell viability, as determined by live/dead
staining, during bioprinting and perfusion over long time periods.