* 1548550
* I Corps:  Advanced Non-Destructive Testing using Terahertz Technology
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2015,12/31/2016
* Magda El-Shenawee, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* lydia mcclure
* 12/31/2016
* USD 50,000.00

Terahertz (THz) technology has become an important tool that can benefit a wide
range of industries interested in quality control and inspection of their
products. Food processing, biomedical imaging, electronic device manufacturing
and many other industries all share a common need: the ability to "see inside"
products or samples without changing or damaging them. THz is a new technology
which could allow companies to inspect and evaluate their products in a
completely new, non-destructive way. The potential information customers could
gain would help them to better determine sources of failure of their products
throughout the manufacturing process. This would allow the customers to
establish better quality control and increase product output and development,
leading to reduced costs for the general public. Non-destructive testing was a
$3.77B market in 2013 and expected to grow to $6.8B by 2020. This illustrates
the importance companies place on implementing robust non-destructive testing in
their product manufacturing and development. THz technologies unique
characteristics could very well be developed into an industry standard to fill
in the gaps where conventional testing methods fail.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
goal of the proposed I-Corps project is to establish direct collaboration with
potential industrial customers to determine how THz inspection could fit their
needs. From the initial customer discovery interviews, a pool of companies
showing interest in THz inspection of their products will be established. The
team will then begin more in-depth communications with these companies, starting
with the most promising, to work out the exact details of the type of
information the company would be interested in and how THz could non-
destructively extract this information. With these details established
experiments and preliminary data analysis algorithms will be developed to
demonstrate the concept. This will be performed utilizing the THz Imaging and
Spectroscopy system available at the University of Arkansas. If applicable,
companies will ship samples of their products to the team to be imaged and
characterized. There are two ways to image a sample; THz reflection mode where
the signal is emitted and detected at the same side of the sample. The second
mode is THz transmission where the signal is transmitted through the sample and
the emitter and detector are located at opposite sides of the sample. Finally,
THz spectroscopy can also be used to characterize the materials of the samples
and evaluate their properties. Additionally, important parameters such as
repeatability and measurement sensitivity for each case will be quantified. The
value of the information gained through THz inspection will be estimated for
each potential customer. From this information it will be determined if the
primary potential outcome of establishing a small business in the future based
on "THz measurements-as-a-service" would be an economically feasible option to
pursue. Another potential outcome is to increase the knowledge of potential
research problems that THz technology can help solve through advancing the
detectors and the imaging algorithms.