* 1548823
* SBIR Phase I:  Collaborative game approach to support classroom instruction of difficult-to-teach science concepts
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2016,06/30/2016
* Adam Gordon, Andamio Games, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 06/30/2016
* USD 150,000.00

This SBIR Phase I project will enable teachers to present difficult, but
necessary to learn, science concepts using a collaborative game approach that
will significantly increase student engagement and understanding. The project
will focus on improving the instruction of photosynthesis and cell respiration,
processes which are multi-phasic, largely invisible, comprised of a complex and
interdependent set of interactions, and required by science standards. By giving
teachers and learners the confidence to undertake complicated science subjects,
the project aims to increase secondary student involvement and interest in STEM,
and help build the core scientific knowledge and higher order thinking skills
they will need to address the challenges of the 21st Century. The research is
based on well-documented pedagogical approaches to effective science
instruction, which include scaffolded curricula, formative assessments, hands-on
project-based challenges, and peer learning which arises from collaborative
problem solving. Developing a more immersive and practicable learning method
upholds the NSF's mission to promote exceptional science education and will help
attract and prepare more students for STEM-based careers. This work fills a
market need for educational technology tools that allow science teachers to
focus on their true area of expertise, teaching their students.

This SBIR Phase I project proposes to utilize the full range of sensors and
actuators of touch-screen devices in order to design a sequence of coordinated
physical interactions that model the chemical-based biological processes of
photosynthesis and cell respiration. The primary innovation is translating these
complicated biological processes - some sequential, others concurrent - into a
collaborative game that requires individuals and small groups to interact to
perform a series of intuitive, concrete, coordinated, and repeatable physical
actions to solve scientific challenges. Since concepts involving complex
chemically-oriented processes are more difficult to teach, often promulgate
common misconceptions, and typically dampen student interest, the key research
goal is to create a working prototype that supports teachers, accurately
transmits scientific knowledge, and actively engages students. The project will
determine the effectiveness of the collaborative game approach using feedback
from a cohort of high school biology teachers. Phase II will refine and expand
the approach and conduct classroom efficacy testing and validation. The result
will be an instructional tool that adapts to the educator's style and classroom
structure, provides content that meets relevant state and national standards,
and delivers the kind of engaging interaction that propels students to master
science-oriented content.