* 1548956
* SBIR Phase I:  Development of an Intelligent, Emotive, and Perceptive Socially Assistive Robot for Dementia Therapy
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2016,08/31/2016
* Mohammad Mahoor, Dream Face Technologies, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 08/31/2016
* USD 150,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is the development of a
social robot that will provide initial evidence for the feasibility and promise
of a new generation of life-like animation-based and emotionally intelligent
robots that provide companionship for individuals with cognitive disabilities
(e.g. Dementia and AD) and increase their happiness and independence. The
application and the potential societal and commercial impact of the project is
not limited to aging population and dementia therapy and can be used in a
variety of applications such as science, math &amp; reading tutoring in
classrooms or homes, language and speech therapy, autism therapy (e.g. special
Ed programs in school districts), and even as concierges and front desk
receptionists in hospitals, museums, hotels, and restaurants.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project will demonstrate the feasibility of developing and deploying of
emotionally intelligent light-projected life-like conversational robots for
improving the quality of life, self-efficacy and cognitive abilities of elderly
individuals with Alzheimer?s disease (AD) and dementia. Older people with AD and
other dementias have significantly more hospital stays, skilled nursing facility
stays and home health care visits than other older people. There is thus a
critical and growing demand in society and in our healthcare system to find
efficient, effective and affordable ways to provide care and improve the quality
of life of elderly individuals with dementia. This project will create an
innovative, empathic social robot which will engage elderly individuals in
assisted living facilities in a variety of activities, including exercises,
games, and especially natural spoken dialogs that relevant to their interests
and needs. The project extends the capabilities of current social robots through
research that integrates computer vision, spoken dialog, character animation and
robotic head movement technologies to develop an emotionally intelligent and
empathic robotic caregiver and companion. A pilot study will be conducted, in
collaboration with health care practitioners and residences of senior living
facilities, to study how naturally and effectively the social robot communicates
with elderly individuals and engages them in therapeutic activities (e.g.
Montessori-based activities and Spaced Retrieval memory care techniques), and
whether interacting with the robot over several weeks improves their self-
efficacy and sense of well-being.