* 1548409
* EAGER: Human centered robotic system design
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Camille Goudeseune, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 08/31/2018
* USD 300,000.00

1548409(Hovakimyan)

Technological advances today have the potential to transform the life of
everybody within the next 20-30 years in a dramatic way. The society of non-
distant future assumes co-existence of humans, pilotless planes, driverless
cars, and robots, in which machines and human beings share the airspace, the
roads, and populate indoor environments. This idea poses significant challenges,
falling within the scope of engineering, psychology, social science, politics,
ethics, and economics. Inspired by this vision, the project proposes to lay down
the foundations for the world of the future, in which cars, drones, and robotic
machines autonomously co-habit and work with humans. Hence, it is important to
build a scientific community, where psychologists and engineers work together in
order to develop socially trustable autonomous mobile robots. More specifically,
we propose to formulate rigorously relevant scientific and human centered
psychological concerns (namely, actual safety, humans' perceived safety, and
humans' comfort) that arise in such systems, where humans and robots are
required to safely interact in a shared space. The overarching objective is to
provide a general design framework and control architecture for human
interaction with autonomous robots that is flexible and capable of safe
operations.

This proposal focuses on the problem of human centered robotic design and
control. The goal of this project is to provide the foundations to address human
related concerns that arise in multiple human-robot systems, where robots have
to perform tasks in the presence of (and in cooperation with) humans. In
particular, this proposal targets the fundamental understanding of two issues
that are crucial in the integration of robotic systems into real-life human
populated environments: first, how humans perceive autonomous mobile robots as a
function of robots' appearance and behavior; second, how to design and control
mobile robots so that to improve the level of comfort and perceived safety of
the people present in the environment. The research here assumes a collaborative
study, involving Mechanical Engineering, Psychology and Computer Science
Departments at University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, in which human
perception of robotic appearance and behavior is the main subject that has to
define what it means for a robot to be socially accepted and to generate empathy
between humans and robotic machines. Social etiquette in human-robot systems
will be sought through the study of human behavior. At the initial stage of this
ambitious research project, the virtual reality cave at Beckman Institute and
the motion capture suite at CSL Intelligent Robotic Lab will serve as testing
and validation environment to derive robots' design features and behavioral
protocols toward the development of these robots. The outcome of this first step
will provide the basis for further research in the field and will contribute to
the sociotechnical society of the future.