* 1548288
* EAGER:  Factors Affecting the Emerging Development of Science and Engineering Scholars
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2016
* Alexandra Graddy-Reed, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 08/31/2016
* USD 54,017.00

This Early-Concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) will support a project
that will examine a series of educational determinants that impact early
demonstrated success for emerging science and engineering (S&E) scholars and
assess the impacts of early research funding and training on longer-term
outcomes that include employment and research productivity. The project will
extend theoretical discussions focused on science and innovation policy by
directing attention to an integral yet overlooked population of the S&E
workforce, emerging graduate student scholars. It will trace these individuals
over time to examine the factors that lead to early-demonstrated success and
longer-term outcomes of both research and development (R&D) funding and
prestige. The project will provide evidence to assess relationships among R&D
funding, innovation, and employment, and the databases brought together will
enable future research regarding the value of external funding and prestige
across S&E-related career trajectories.

The investigators will bring together data about individuals who have been
awarded Graduate Research Fellowships and those given honorable mention for
those fellowships by the National Science Foundation, data about graduate school
departments from the National Research Council's Data-Based Assessment of
Research-Doctorate Programs in the United States, and individual-level data
drawn from publicly available curriculum vitae and resumes to examines a series
of antecedents and outcomes that help define success among emerging S&E
scholars. The investigators will draw upon data collected by the NSF National
Center for Science and Engineering Statistics (NCSES) in order to identify a
crosswalk of a unique university-department identifier to facilitate the
construction and analysis of two new datasets based on academic institutional
research activity. This EAGER-supported project responded to a Dear College
Letter issued by the NSF Science of Science and Innovation Policy (SciSIP)
Program designed to facilitate the use of STAR METRICS, NCSES, and other
databases in order to evaluate relationships among science funding, employment,
and outcome metrics.