* 1548121
* INSPIRE_Deciphering the Genealogy of Neurons via Planetary Biodiversity Capture
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Leonid Moroz, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Evan Balaban
* 08/31/2020
* USD 1,000,000.00

This INSPIRE project is jointly funded by the Organization Program in the Neural
Systems Cluster in the Division of Integrative Organismal Systems, the
Systematics and Biodiversity Science Cluster in the Division of Environmental
Biology, both in the Biological Sciences Directorate, and by the Biologial
Oceanography Program in the Division of Ocean Sciences in the Geosciences
Directorate, the Office of International Science and Engineering, and the Office
of Integrative Activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Why there is such an enormous
diversity of neurons in our brains is the least understood and one of the most
challenging problems in modern biology. Two factors contribute to this
diversity. One is that different neurons have different functions, and the
other, is that different neurons have different evolutionary histories. However,
neither evolutionary history nor classification of neuronal types is
established. The goal of this project is to reconstruct the genealogy of neurons
and develop an unbiased classification of neurons in the majority of animal
groups. This will provide a way to predict the properties of neurons and their
connections. A novel approach to determine the kinds of molecules that are
expressed in different neurons will be developed. To gain access to critically
important organisms, the Principal Investigator will organize worldwide voyages
on research vessels to collect marine animals that represent all major types of
neuronal organization. Thousands of distinct neuronal populations across species
will be collected and analyzed with novel computational and mathematical tools.
The work will create a new field of NeuroSystematics. The team will develop and
test a novel approach for distant training of undergraduate and graduate
students to perform real-time analyses at any world location. The project will
involve research collaborations with over 150 investigators from universities
from many countries and will provide opportunities for international and
underrepresented minority students to be involved in biodiversity research in
remote oceanic laboratories. The project will also provide priceless resources
and reference databases for several disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research strategy is based upon the development of a mobile version of a nano-
volume capture technology designed for massive transcriptome analysis of entire
nervous systems at single-cell resolution. The focus will be on animal lineages
never investigated before, including phoronids, brachiopods, xenoturbellids, and
rare and fragile larvae. The team will integrate phylogenomic tools and
statistical geometry to characterize transcriptional divergence in cell type
evolution and reconstruct neurogenic gene regulatory circuits. To incorporate
the inherent statistical uncertainty in the genome, as well as natural selection
within complex systems, stochastic approaches from information theory will be
used to evaluate molecular diversities across dozens of classes of neuronal
architectures. The genomic nature of species boundaries will be studied to
reveal environmental and neurosensory limitations to the rates of speciation.
Thus, deciphering the genealogy of neurons will be integrated with the
functional and ecological constraints that underlie the formation of new
behaviors.