* 1548480
* Workshop: Investigation of the Theoretical Foundations in Systems Engineering; Frost, West Virginia; October 2015
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2018
* Konstantinos Triantis, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Rich Malak
* 07/31/2018
* USD 49,531.00

Systems engineering has evolved over the last forty years as a systematic
approach towards the engineering of complex systems. While the practice of
systems engineering has resulted in many successful systems, the theory
underlying this practice has not yet been fully developed. This workshop aims to
provide an investigation of the theoretical foundations of systems engineering.
Over the long-term this will have implications for the practice, education, and
outreach of systems engineering. In the current practice there is a wide spread
need to have well educated systems engineers that exhibit flexibility and
capability when addressing the design and production issues associated with
complex engineered systems. The discovery of the theoretical foundations of the
field will be a step forward in addressing societal needs related to better
designed engineered systems and improved systems engineering and educational and
outreach programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this workshop is to
investigate and define theoretical foundations for systems engineering with
respect to one among many fundamental thrust areas such as risk management or
trade-space exploration. To achieve this objective, the workshop participants
will follow an approach that will address theoretical gaps in the literature,
define an axiomatic framework, suggest what can be borrowed from other
disciplines, investigate synergies among thrust areas and link the theoretical
foundations to societal needs. If successful, the approach followed in this
workshop can be used and augmented to address additional thrust areas in the
future. This will allow for the creation of rigorous theoretical frameworks that
can subsequently be tested with solid empirical fieldwork.