* 1549663
* STTR Phase I:  Joint Wireless Communication and Vehicular RADAR through Successive Structured Target Estimation
* TIP,TI
* 01/15/2016,12/31/2016
* Robert Heath, Kuma Signals, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 12/31/2016
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is the production of
high-fidelity intelligent transportation systems at lower costs to increase
automotive safety globally without wasting wireless spectrum to be used for
other humanity improvement technologies. Successful completion of the work plan
in this project enables opportunity for wireless communication device vendors
and automotive original equipment manufacturers (OEMs) in the vehicular RADAR
sensor market through structured target estimation (SSTE). Preliminary studies
have suggested that SSTE may reduce the device cost requirements for vehicular
RADAR to automotive OEMs by one order of magnitude. The availability of RADAR
processing on standard wireless communication devices also enables dual-purpose
wireless devices, leading to further reduced costs as well as increased
security. Reduced costs and increased security in vehicular RADAR not only
presents an attractive business opportunity, but also leads to safer
transportation globally. Preliminary studies have also shown that SSTE requires
87% fewer spectrum resources. More efficient spectrum usage yields more spectrum
availability for other applications like cellular communications and
simultaneously increases the opportunity for license-free public
spectrum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Technology Transfer Research
(STTR) Phase I project will validate a new framework for RADAR through a suite
of signal processing functions known as successive structured target estimation
(SSTE). In contrast to standard RADAR waveform processing, SSTE uses channel
impulse response estimates available on wireless communication devices. SSTE
exploits newly-discovered target structure to substantially improve performance
in terms of ranging accuracy and spectrum consumption. The work plan will
evaluate ranging accuracy and spectrum consumption through over-the-air radio
frequency (RF) testing with moving vehicles. These tests must show that: (1)
SSTE enables RADAR applications that use much less spectrum than required by
current RADAR devices (2) SSTE functions adequately in all relevant vehicular
environments (3) SSTE is able to track a sufficient number of targets for
vehicular applications (4) wireless communication devices may service RADAR
applications through SSTE without sacrificing performance in relevant vehicular
environments.