* 1549167
* SBIR Phase I: Bio-Inspired Encapsulation Approaches for Improving Stability and Delivery of Food Compounds
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2016,06/30/2016
* Anupama Ranganathan, InnovaNutra
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2016
* USD 149,991.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project is the development of an array of natural and low cost
food-derived encapsulation products with improved overall physicochemical
stability of the bioactives during processing and storage. There is a great
consumer demand for food-derived phytochemicals and nutrient bioactives that are
known to exhibit excellent health and nutritional benefits. But, an imposing
challenge to the food industry is the inherent oxidative and thermal instability
of these bioactives during processing and storage that eventually results in
their degradation. The current solutions are sub-optimal, add substantial cost,
and often require the use of synthetic chemicals. All of these only provide a
limited improvement in the food product's shelf life. Success in improving
chemical and thermal stability of susceptible food ingredients and bioactives
utilizing an encapsulation process that will provide an all-natural solution
without additives and sacrificial antioxidants will transform the food
encapsulation industry (current market size over $22 billion dollars,) and
improve the sustainability of food products by extending their shelf life.

This SBIR Phase I project proposes to develop a novel encapsulation approach
that will significantly improve oxidative, pH and thermal stability of the
encapsulated bioactive compounds, and thereby extend their shelf-lives.
Challenges during food processing and storage arise due to inherent oxidative
and chemical instability of bioactives and natural colorants and their
accelerated degradation during processing. The key objectives of this project
are to develop encapsulation systems using cells to encapsulate bioactives by a
pressure-assisted encapsulation method, evaluate the influence of pH, heat and
oxidation on stability of encapsulated bioactives, and determine their shelf
life in a model beverage system. The encapsulated model compounds include:
natural color extracts, antioxidants and anti-inflammatory products, and
vitamins. Compared to the current state-of-art, the application of a rapid and
scalable pressure-assisted encapsulation technology enables quick and efficient
partitioning of fat-soluble and water-soluble compounds in intracellular
structures of cells. It also provides multifold improvement in the kinetics and
efficiency of encapsulation process compared to conventional diffusion
processes.