* 1549166
* Collaborative Research: Impact of Metals on Photochemical Aging of Water Soluble Organic Carbon in Atmospheric Particulate Matter: A Combined Lab and Field Study
* GEO,AGS
* 04/15/2016,10/31/2019
* Brian Majestic, University of Denver
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 10/31/2019
* USD 191,269.00

This study is focused on improving the understanding of the interactions between
soluble iron (Fe) and organic material in fine particles in the atmosphere. This
research is relevant to the larger question of how atmospheric iron affects the
processing and aging of the organics in atmospheric particulate matter. The
results will provide information useful to atmospheric chemists and to
environmental health professionals.

The project will examine the importance of the Fe-assisted oxidation route of
water-soluble organic carbon. It consists of three tasks: (1) field sampling,
(2) characterization of the particulate matter, and (3) photochemical laboratory
experiments. The field samples will be analyzed to assess the sources of the
atmospheric Fe, since the source of the Fe may determine its chemical speciation
and, thus, its solubility and availability to chemical reactions. Aqueous
extracts of the field samples will be subjected to an artificial aging process
and undergo analysis for oxidation state and the chemical speciation of total
iron, and the production of reactive oxygen species will be quantified. By
investigating the role of transition metals and taking into account aqueous
chemistry, this project will offer a more complete picture of how organic
compounds are "aged" in the atmosphere. The results will provide useful
information on the role iron plays in the processing of organic compounds in
atmospheric particulate matter and the potential impacts of these mixed
particles on human health.