* 1549688
* STTR Phase I:  Additive manufacturing of ceramic composites for next generation gas turbines
* TIP,TI
* 01/15/2016,07/31/2017
* Rishi Raj, AMERICAN MANUFACTURING, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 07/31/2017
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project lies in next generation
gas turbines where the heart of the engine, the combustor and the blade, are
constructed from ceramic matrix composites (CMCs). These developments will spell
a new phase of air transportation beyond the current engines that rely upon
nickel-base superalloys, which have reached their maximum capability. The
ceramic engines are eventually expected to be 25% more efficient. The CMCs are
constructed from fibers of silicon-carbide that are spun into net shape and then
infiltrated with an equally robust high temperature matrix, also made from
silicon carbide-based ceramics. The fiber composites overcome the inherent
brittleness of monolithic ceramics while retaining their mechanical and
corrosion resistance in aggressive environments. These composites will have
applications beyond gas turbines. They can become the critical breakthrough for
the solar collector on Concentrated Solar Power systems, and have the potential
to be used as cladding for nuclear fuels for greater safety and accident
tolerance. The key innovation in this Phase I project is the development of an
additive manufacturing process for creating a dense and defect free matrix from
polymer precursors that convert into silicon carbide-based
ceramics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Technology
Transfer Research (STTR) Phase I project employs additive manufacturing to
fabricate dense and defect free matrices for ceramic matrix composites (CMCs).
These composites are constructed from fibers of silicon carbide (SiC). The
innovation in this project lies in constructing the matrix from polymer
precursors where nanoscale layers are deposited in quick succession to create
the matrix. These silicon-based polymer precursors convert into ceramics when
heated to ~800 oC. Nominal processing, also known as polymer-infiltration-and-
pyrolysis, produces cracks in the matrix despite 24 hour curing cycles. These
cracks degrade the strength of the composite. In this project nanoscale coatings
are deposited in the form of thin layers of liquid and then pyrolyzed into the
ceramic in just one or two seconds. The coatings are defect free and dense. The
short curing time allows rapid deposition of layers. The CMC can be prepared
from SiC fiber preforms in about four hours. The feasibility of the process has
been demonstrated with carbon fibers under a grant from Ceramics Program at NSF.
In this SBIR project, American Manufacturing LLC seeks to demonstrate the
fabrication of CMCs made from silicon-carbide fibers, and demonstrate their
viability for high temperature applications.