* 1549003
* SBIR Phase I:  A Handheld, One Step Paper-Based Device for Rapid Self-Testing of Sexually Transmitted Infections
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2016,06/30/2016
* Ricky Yin To Chiu, Phase Diagnostics, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 06/30/2016
* USD 150,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to create a new gold standard diagnostic for
the detection of sexually transmitted infections (STIs). The project proposes to
replace slow and expensive lab-based assays and expand regular testing to
previously unreachable settings. The proposed technology combines the ease-of-
use and very low cost of rapid point-of-care diagnostics with the very high
accuracy of lab-based tests, enabling unprecedented reliability at the clinics
and at home. Chlamydia is the leading sexually transmitted infection in the
United States. An estimated 4 million new cases occur each year with direct
annual medical costs of greater than $3.5 billion. Due to the asymptomatic
nature of the infections, along with the social stigma and embarrassment for
testing, sexually active individuals undergo limited screening. This inadequate
screening and the inability to provide same visit testing and treatment results
in continued transmission to and from partners. If successful, the proposed
technology will enable same visit testing and treatment in clinics, overcoming a
major hurdle towards controlling treatable STIs. Furthermore, the ability to
provide at home self screening will eliminate the embarrassment of testing,
thereby increasing the current inadequate rate of screening in the United
States.

The proposed project is to develop a novel diagnostic that can achieve lab-
based sensitivity at the point-of-care. Existing rapid point-of-care
technologies, such as the lateral-flow immunoassay utilized by consumer
pregnancy tests, are simple, fast, and inexpensive, however are severely limited
when the concentrations of the target biomarkers in the sample are low. To
overcome this problem, we integrated proprietary paper-based sample
concentration components prior to the conventional lateral-flow immunoassay to
significantly enhance its performance without additional equipment, training, or
increased time-to-result. The proposed device is aimed at simultaneously and
seamlessly concentrate and detect target pathogens within a single device that
is made entirely with paper materials. This paper-based platform technology is
expected to create countless new applications for clinical, safety, and
resource-poor needs. This project will investigate the feasibility of the
technology for the detection of chlamydia. The proposed technology will be
compared with lab assays and existing rapid tests in the market.