* 1549234
* SBIR Phase I:  Taurine- and Methionine-Rich Soybean for Aquafeed
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2016
* Frank Turano, Plant Sensory Systems, LLC.
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2016
* USD 164,999.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project will be the production of enhanced-nutrition (EN)
soybeans that contain taurine and increased methionine. As the world population
increases and becomes more affluent, meat and fish consumption is rapidly
growing. The fastest growing food sector is aquaculture. Small wild-caught fish
are used to make feed for aquaculture, but wild-caught fish harvests have not
changed in 25 years. This practice is not sustainable. Overfishing the small
fish population jeopardizes the marine ecosystem. Aquafeed producers are turning
to soy-based protein to replace fishmeal but plant proteins lack taurine and are
deficient in methionine, two important amino acids for fish. To meet fish
nutritional requirements, producers supplement soy-based aquafeed with synthetic
taurine and methionine. In addition to added costs, synthetic taurine and
methionine are produced from hazardous substances, and synthetic taurine has
been shown to contain arsenic. EN soybeans would reduce the amount of
supplemental amino acids required in aquafeed, a $2.2B global annual cost
predicted for 2020, and could save aquafeed producers 20% of additive feed
costs. The EN soybean would be an economical, healthy, sustainable,
environmentally friendly and secure source of taurine and methionine for the
rapidly growing aquaculture industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I
project proposes to demonstrate that the enhanced-nutrition (EN) technology can
produce commercially viable levels of taurine and methionine in soybean seeds
without adversely affecting seed quality. Soy-based protein is replacing meat
and fish-based protein. However, plants lack some amino acids required in
aquafeed and must be supplemented, which increases feed-production costs.
Taurine and methionine, two amino acids either lacking or limited in soybean,
are added to soy-based aquafeed. The goal of this SBIR project is to produce
soybeans that contain taurine and increased methionine that can be used in
aquafeed with reduced supplemental amino acids. Molecular, biochemical, and
physiological methods will be used to meet the following objectives in this
Phase I research. The goals are to determine whether EN soybean seeds contain
taurine and have higher methionine levels compared with seeds of control lines;
determine whether the EN technology affects the other amino acid levels, seed
quality (total protein, oil, moisture content, and seed viability), or seed-
storage protein levels; and identify five lines with high levels of taurine and
methionine. Anticipated technical results are EN soybean seeds with taurine
levels at least 0.2% dry seed weight and total methionine levels at least twice
that of seeds in control lines.