* 1549223
* SBIR Phase I:  AERODYNAMIC FLOW DEFLECTOR FOR CURRENT AND FUTURE WIND TURBINES TO INCREASE THE ANNUAL ENERGY PRODUCTION BY 10% AND REDUCE THE LEVELIZED COST OF ENERGY BY 8%
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2016,08/31/2016
* Arturo Villegas Vaquero, XPEED Turbine Technology LLC
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 08/31/2016
* USD 145,381.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is in the development of
a more efficient wind energy production technology. This technology will make
wind energy more economically attractive, improve the energy security of the
U.S., create hundreds of jobs and help to reduce coal and natural gas emissions
by providing an alternative renewable energy source. An expected reduction in
the levelized cost of energy (LCOE) by 8% would help reducing the price of this
energy and signing of more wind power purchase agreements. Therefore US citizens
would be paying less money out of their pockets on their electric bills.
Additionally, big reduction of the cost of wind energy has attracted over $100
billion in private investment since 2008. An expected 10% increase in Annual
Energy Production (AEP) would power an extra 1.8 million homes, reduce carbon
pollution by 12.5 million metric tons and generate $180 million a year in tax
payments to communities. Finally, the innovation proposed in this application
has the potential to address both the efficiency demands of wind farm owners
(reducing the break-even times) and providing a disruptive design innovation to
turbine manufacturers for them to have a sustainable competitive
edge.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research
(SBIR) Phase I project will address challenges related to aerodynamic efficiency
of wind turbines. It focuses on developing aerodynamic flow deflectors to be
mounted on the wind turbine blades. These can be incorporated into new wind
turbine designs or retrofitted onto the thousands of currently operating
turbines to increase their efficiency. By introducing the proposed flow
deflector, the radial component of velocity of the incoming flow is redirected
to produce an additional amount of torque and generate the extra power. From
discussions with leading wind energy companies, there is a general agreement
that this could be a game changer and one of the biggest improvements in wind
turbines to date, but large scale field test validation is needed. Therefore,
the key technical challenge to bring the technology to market that would be
addressed in Phase I is to perform a field test of the flow deflectors in a
large scale turbine (1-20 meter diameter) under realistic environmental
conditions. The main goal for Phase I is to demonstrate the substantial power
increase (AEP &gt;2-3%) while reducing the cost of energy (LCOE &gt;2%) when
retrofitting a large scale commercial turbine with the proposed technology.