* 1549937
* EAGER: Renewables: Market Mechanism for Managing Uncertainties Caused by High Levels of Renewable Generation
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2018
* Mohammad Shahidehpour, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Anil Pahwa
* 08/31/2018
* USD 299,952.00

Renewable energy resources in electric power grids are inherently variable, and
the ability to predict the variation in generated power is quite limited. This
variability raises issues regarding proper pricing mechanisms for electric power
in systems with high levels of renewable generation. The research objective of
this project is to explore a new fundamental market-based mechanism for managing
the uncertainty caused by high levels of renewable generation or renewable
energy sources (RES). The key concept of the proposed mechanism is to charge
uncertain sources and credit flexible sources based on Uncertainty Marginal
Price (UMP), which represents the marginal cost of immunizing the next increment
of uncertainty at a specific location. Management of uncertainty is one of the
key issues that must be dealt with to have seamless high-level penetration of
RES. The clear price signals and incentives developed in this project have the
potential to remove a critical barrier to distributed RES, which in turn will
promote energy independence and reduce environmental impact, contributing to the
goal of a low-carbon economy. The proposed UMP concept enriches the fundamentals
of electricity market theory and opens a new door for future
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project will, for the first time,
provide explicit price signals and utilize a market mechanism to manage any
level of uncertainty using a robust optimization framework. In comparison, the
traditional reserve approach is based on experience and heuristics that cannot
work under the high renewables scenario. The research project aims to manage
uncertainty both at the source side (uncertainty reduction) and the resource
side (uncertainty accommodation). UMP provides important price signals for both
the&lt;br/&gt;market operation and investment related to uncertainty and
flexibility. In the short term, the proposed market-based mechanism provides
incentives for RES operators to improve forecasting accuracy (i.e., to reduce
uncertainties). It also provides incentives for existing flexible resources
(e.g., gas-fired generating units) to contribute reserves for uncertainty
accommodation. In the long term, the proposed mechanism provides price signals
for siting new flexible resources (e.g., energy storage) to accommodate
uncertainties from increasing RES penetration.