* 1549673
* STTR Phase I:  Ultra-large and low-cost electrodynamic modeling in commercial clouds
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2016,06/30/2017
* John Booske, FlexCompute Inc
* Standard Grant
* Rick Schwerdtfeger
* 06/30/2017
* USD 267,100.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research Phase I project is to enable anyone with internet to access extremely
powerful computing facilities to perform scientific computing. High performance
computing is essential for computational prototyping in many areas of modern
engineering, such as solar cells, automobiles, aerospace, and communication
devices. However, significant barriers make it difficult for ordinary engineers
to easily access powerful computing facilities. By leveraging the low-cost
commercial cloud, the project will develop key technology that allow commercial
clouds to perform extremely high performance scientific computing, thereby
significantly reducing the cost and increasing the accessibility of high
performance computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project will develop technologies that overcome key
challenges in using commercial clouds for high performance computing. Unlike
high performance computers, commercial clouds are not designed for scientific
computing. They have high latency, intermitted availability, and heterogeneously
distributed resources. These features make it difficult to conduct scientific
computing. This project will develop new computing methods that fully take into
account the heterogeneous nature of the commercial cloud. It enables anyone to
access high performance scientific computing anywhere with an easy-to-use
interface. Computing is provided as on-demand service. Engineers would not need
to own any high performance computers and the computing resources are virtually
unlimited.