* 1549092
* SBIR Phase I:  Chemically Bonded Ceramic Exhaust Coating
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2016
* Reed Shick, Covaron Inc
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 12/31/2016
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will center on
the development of a new chemically-bonded amorphous ceramic network (CBACN) for
use as a thermal coating in next-generation engine exhaust thermal management
systems. The coating will permit a combination of performance, price and
processing parameters superior to currently available technologies. The
potential outcome of the proposed work will be a low-cost, easy to apply,
thermal barrier coating that bonds to exhaust components, reducing the net heat
loss from the exhaust to the surrounding components. Thermal exhaust coatings
offer improved engine and catalytic efficiency, lower under-hood temperature,
and reduce vehicle weight. The net effect for the consumer is improved
efficiency, reduced greenhouse gas emissions, reduced pollution, improved
safety, and lower cost. The net outcome for automobile manufacturers will be
higher corporate average fuel economy (CAFE) scores, a simplified manufacturing
process, and an estimated cost savings of $20 per vehicle. Current ceramic
exhaust coatings are too costly for use by original equipment manufacturers
(OEMs). The potential outcome of the proposed research is a ceramic exhaust
coating for use in a thermal management system appropriate for OEM use.

The intellectual merit of this project derives from the advancement of low-cost,
easy to apply, chemically-bonded ceramics into a market currently occupied by
difficult-to-apply plasma sprayed ceramic coatings. Target features for these
coatings include thermal conductivity less than 5 W/m-K, emissivity below 0.3,
adhesion to exhaust-grade stainless steel, thermal stability, wear resistance,
chemical resistance, and ease of coating and integration into the vehicle
manufacture supply chain. CBACNs may be formulated with a wide range of physical
properties not obtainable in a sintered ceramic system. Related CBACN coatings
have been developed with enough adhesion and flexibility on 400 series exhaust
stainless steel to survive a 35 degree bend around a 10 mm mandrel.
Independently, CBACN coatings have been developed with emissivity below 0.2 and
with thermal conductivity below 1 W/m-K, although no single coating has been
developed with all the desired properties simultaneously. This project will
focus on the material synthesis and evaluation tasks needed to realize such a
material system.