* 1549136
* SBIR Phase I:  Inorganic Phase Change Materials Embedded in Closed-Cell Foams
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2016
* Lealia Xiong, CoolComposites
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 12/31/2016
* USD 179,979.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will result in the
development of an additive for spray polyurethane foam (SPF) insulation that
absorbs heat on warm days, reducing cooling needs and lowering construction and
operational energy costs. The additive consists of cheap raw materials, and the
company is designing a synthesis process that will minimize production
complexity and costs. The resulting insulation additive composite will perform
up to 40% more effectively than existing SPF. Thus, in hot climates, the amount
of insulation needed can be reduced, resulting in zero-day payback for
customers. This upends the current economics of PCM products, which ordinarily
require a substantial upfront investment and a long payback period. Furthermore,
the adoption of these additives will lower the electricity needed to cool the
building, shrinking its environmental footprint. In addition, the composite will
be applied during construction in the same way as SPF, reducing barriers to
adoption. The total North American market for insulation is $11 billion per
year. SPF makes up 9%, or $990 million, of this market, and is growing by 5% per
year.

The intellectual merit of this project lies in the use of inexpensive inorganic
phase-change materials (PCMs) in the insulation additive, and the drop-in nature
of the additive. Most PCM-enhanced building materials on the market use organic
PCMs, which although easy to process, are expensive and flammable. In addition,
the application of these materials is incompatible with existing construction
processes. In contrast, the product to be developed in this effort uses cheaper
inorganic PCMs that are flame retardant, and the additive will be easily applied
during construction as a composite with SPF insulation. Inorganic PCMs usually
suffer from a lack of thermal reversibility, meaning that they cannot cycle
daily and would not be useful as a building material. However, we have developed
an innovative processing method that creates small particles that are thermally
reversible. The company's current research focuses on mixing the additive into
polyurethane foam in a drop-in process, using the hydrophobic foam as protection
for the additive from leakage and atmospheric water vapor that may degrade the
additive. By working with spray foam manufacturers, the team will adjust
properties of the additive to ensure compatibility with SPF and its precursors,
and a long lifespan for the resulting composite.