* 1549836
* STTR Phase I:  Nanophotonic magnetic-resonance spectrometer for chemical trace analysis
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2016
* Andrejs Jarmola, ODMR Technologies, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 12/31/2016
* USD 225,000.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I project will result in
the fabrication and validation of an optically-detected magnetic resonance
sensor for determining the chemical composition of trace quantities of liquid
and powder samples. This is critical in numerous industries ranging from defense
forensics and environmental safety, to materials synthesis and petroleum
exploration. The desire for chemically-specific detection of trace analytes has
spurred the growth of a large and diverse market, served by techniques such as
Raman spectroscopy and high-field benchtop nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR).
These are already sizeable markets (on the order of $1 billion) with annual
growth rates of 5-10%, depending on product type and geography. This new sensor
will have a direct and broad impact on public security and defense, for example
in airport and border security checks. The reliable detection and analysis of
small quantities of potentially-threatening chemicals and materials are
essential for simultaneously meeting the increased demands for security and
eliminating the need to test large quantities of analyte. An impact on science
education is also anticipated, based on the anticipated development of an
affordable turnkey system, which can be used in instructional and research
settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this project lies in
the application of the basic physics of solid-state defects in diamond to create
a device with unique properties desirable for chemical trace analysis. Unlike
many NMR systems, this spectrometer operates at ambient temperature, in a range
of magnetic fields easily generated by small permanent magnets, and with sub-
microliter sample volumes. The analyte is delivered via a microfluidic chip to a
sensor region consisting of a nanostructured diamond doped with nitrogen-vacancy
(NV) color centers. By applying pulses of laser light and microwaves, the
magnetic field from the analyte's precessing nuclear magnetization becomes
encoded in the NV fluorescence signal. Analysis of the fluorescence signal
reveals the NMR spectrum of the analyte, from which the chemical composition can
be extracted based on established libraries. This platform bypasses two common
problems that hinder NMR sensitivity using traditional coil-based approaches.
First, it does not rely on thermal polarization and thus allows operation at
ambient temperature and low magnetic field without affecting the signal
strength. Second, it uses a magnetometer to directly measure the nuclear
magnetization and thus avoids the poor sensitivity that is fundamental to
frequency-dependent flux detection.