* 1549875
* DCL:HSI Course Based Research Experiences in STEM Education at a two-year HSI College
* EHR,DUE
* 08/01/2016,05/31/2019
* Catherine Prince, Santa Rosa Junior College
* Standard Grant
* Tom Higgins
* 05/31/2019
* USD 300,000.00

This project will support changes in science teaching for all students at Santa
Rosa Junior College. The investigators will incorporate student-centered
teaching practices that increase student motivation and interest in learning and
improve laboratory instruction in biology, chemistry, environmental science,
geology, math, and physics. These improvements will leverage the CUREnet
project, which was previously funded by the NSF, therefore increasing the impact
of that investment. The project will improve instruction for non-science majors,
increasing the scientific literacy of the general population. Because the
college is a Hispanic-Serving institution, the project will also promote the
broader participation of Hispanic students majoring in the sciences.

The goals of this project are to shift from traditional, faculty-centered
instruction to evidence-based, student-centered practices. The focus on courses
that serve both STEM majors and non-STEM majors will broaden the STEM workforce
and improve STEM literacy for all students. Project evaluation will examine the
development of students' scientific self-identity and impacts on students'
academic performance. This project will generate evidence regarding the impacts
on student learning due to a research-rich, student-centered, problem-based
learning STEM curriculum; how students develop scientific self-identity; the
factors that convince non-STEM students to switch to STEM majors; and how
faculty members from multiple disciplines form a cohesive professional learning
community that collaborates productively at a Hispanic-serving community
college.