* 1549934
* KUMU Conference on PDE, Dynamical Systems, and Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 03/01/2016,08/31/2017
* Samuel Walsh, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 08/31/2017
* USD 16,000.00

This award will provide support for participants, especially graduate students,
junior researchers, women and mathematicians from under-represented groups in
the sciences, to attend the second regional conference "KUMU Conference in PDE,
Dynamical Systems and Applications" to be held in Columbia, Missouri on of April
23-24, 2016. The meeting is organized jointly by the Departments of Mathematics
at the University of Missouri-Columbia and the University of Kansas in Lawrence.
The conference will showcase recent advances and facilitate exchange of ideas in
partial differential equations (PDEs) and dynamics of complex systems. Many
basic first principles in nature take the form of conservation (or balance) laws
for quantities that vary in space and time, and these laws lead naturally to
partial differential equations. PDEs are therefore encountered in nearly all
areas of science; they describe wave motion, diffusion, deformation, mixing,
pattern formation, and many other phenomena. Specific application of current
interest include climate modeling, water waves, electrodynamics phenomena in
complex media, and neuroscience. While participants are clustered in the
Midwestern and Southern states near Missouri and Kansas, many researchers
working at institutions elsewhere in the US will be included. Early career
mathematicians will be given an opportunity to present their work to gain
recognition and invaluable feedback. The conference website is
http://faculty.missouri.edu/~walshsa/kumu2016/&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many of the
complex nonlinear problems governed by PDEs can be reframed as dynamical systems
posed on infinite-dimensional spaces. This strategy has proved to be effective,
and it certainly shows tremendous promise as a means to attack a host of open
problems in nonlinear science. To realize this promise, a strong and continuing
collaboration between the PDE and dynamics communities is essential. The goals
of the KUMU Conference are to support and facilitate this collaboration. The
major themes of this year's meeting are as follows: applications of dynamical
system techniques to fluid mechanics and water waves; dynamics of dispersive
PDEs; and index formulas in the study of stability of nonlinear waves. Each of
these topics has generated a great deal of recent activity. The KUMU Conference
will help to advance this research.