* 1549911
* EAGER: Ultra-High Frequency Phononic Devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2018
* Agisilaos Iliadis, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 07/31/2018
* USD 149,999.00

Surface acoustic wave propagation through engineered "phononic" crystal lattices
was shown by theoretical and experimental evaluations to result in exciting new
properties with "pass" and "stop" frequency bands, fractional wavelength
propagation, mode hopping and high frequency resonances. The theoretical and
experimental research on the propagation of surface acoustic waves through these
lattices can be controlled by the size and geometry of the unit cell of these
engineered structures. Yet, most of the work has been limited to moderate
frequencies at megahertz ranges. Fundamentally, these structures can reach
ultra-high frequency ranges through scaling down and design. This EAGER project
proposes to study the problem of increasing the frequency of operation to ultra-
high frequencies of such surface acoustic wave structures by developing a novel
nanostructured phononic lattice device and exploring its properties.
Furthermore, a novel fully integrated surface acoustic wave-phononic lattice
device is proposed that has the potential to provide unique acoustic wave logic
functions. The potential benefits of this research can be transformational in
the electronics industry as a new family of acoustic wave devices can be
developed with unique properties in the ultra-high frequency, and digital
switching domain, with a host of key applications, such as superlensing imaging
at fractional wavelengths, ultra-high frequency acoustic resonance filters for
secure communications, switching phononic logic elements, ultra-sensitive
sensing and others. The fundamental understanding of these structures will
advance substantially the field of acoustic wave propagation and generation and
will allow incorporation of such research in most electronics text books that
will benefit student development. In societal needs it is anticipated to have a
tremendous impact through applications in ultra-high frequency secure
communications, acoustic logic elements, superlensing acoustic imaging for
airport security, ultra-high sensitivity sensors, that are critical to societal
needs for home, hospitals, institutions, airports, schools and vehicle safety.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the project is to explore and develop a novel
family of ultra-high frequency acoustic nanodevices based on phononic lattices
of self-assembeled nanostructured thin films with different unit cell size and
geometry. Three key innovative approaches will be introduced and employed for
this project (a) the development of the self-assembly of piezoelectric
nanostructures for the phononic lattice with the study of its fundamental
acoustic wave properties, (b) the development and study of the surface acoustic
wave inputs and outputs for the nanostructured phononic lattice, and (c) the
integration of the nano-phononic lattice with inputs and outputs for an active
acoustic wave logic element. The project will design for fundamental frequencies
f0 in the gigahertz range and and study upconversion through fractional
wavelength and scaling-down to sub-terahertz ranges. The proposed novel approach
to developing a new family of acoustic nanodevices will explore the properties
of the nano-phononic lattices theoretically and experimentally, explore
frequency upconversion, mode hopping to higher frequency optical branches, and
higher order resonances through the phononic lattice for ultra-high frequency
applications.The proposed research focuses on introducing and exploring new
concepts in phononic device development for ultra high frequency performance and
unique capabilities for active switching that has a potentially transformative
impact on integrated acoustic devices and circuits.