* 1549112
* CAP: Data Consortium Fellows: A Mentorship Program to Expand the Cyberlearning Data Analytics Community
* CSE,IIS
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2018
* Matthew Berland, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 12/31/2018
* USD 99,385.00

The Cyberlearning and Future Learning Technologies Program funds efforts that
will help envision the next generation of learning technologies and advance what
we know about how people learn in technology-rich environments. Capacity-
building (CAP) projects increase the ability of researchers to understand how
such technology should be designed and used in the future and supports new
capacity in allowing researchers to answer questions about how people learn, how
to foster or assess learning, and/or how to design for learning. The proposed
work is a series of summits designed to increase the capacity of researchers in
the learning sciences community through exposure and instruction in advanced
data analytic techniques. It addresses a critical need at the intersection of
two burgeoning fields of study and advances the larger goal of CAP projects.

This project is a series of summits that builds on previously funded NSF work to
advance learning sciences. Members of the learning science community are often
unaware of the complementary developments in the data analytics community that
could enhance the depth and impact of their work. The participants in these
summits are current NSF awardees, from various programs, whose work focuses on
learning sciences. Building through exposure and instruction in data analytics
not only expands the body of knowledge at the interface of these two fields, it
smartly leverages current NSF funded projects.