* 1549386
* SBIR Phase I:  Transforming Incident Response: A Platform for High-Fidelity Network Forensics at Scale
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2016,06/30/2016
* Matthias Vallentin, Broala, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 06/30/2016
* USD 0.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project concerns improving the security of the Internet,
at a time when virtually all sectors of the U.S. economy depend on the safety
and stability of that critical infrastructure. The commercialization of this
innovation will benefit multiple sectors of the US economy, including
government, defense, critical infrastructure, utilities, financial services,
manufacturing, education, and research. By transforming the workflow of computer
professionals who analyze and respond to cyber security incidents, this
innovation will enable the nation's private and public organizations to respond
to the rapidly-increasing levels of external threats much more quickly and
effectively. The project will release the underlying core technology as open-
source software to the public, making its capabilities freely available to the
broader network security community, while exploiting the added value of tightly
integrating the system into its existing product line to drive revenue.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project will develop an early prototype of a novel network forensics platform
that provides highly interactive access to a long-term forensic archive of a
customer's network activity. The platform will support real-time analysis of
cyber events at a variety of scales and contexts by employing an efficient,
compact representation of network events that enables a unified view of network
activity at much finer granularity than with traditional products. The primary
technical challenges for bringing the product to market include scaling current
prototype technology into high-performance production-grade software,
integrating it into an existing commercial appliance platform without impairing
the performance of either, and designing an interactive user interface that
supports forensic investigations effectively.