* 1549578
* EAGER: Curriculum Development for I-Corps PNP Pilot Program
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2015,11/30/2016
* Angela Evans, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* chu-hsiang chang
* 11/30/2016
* USD 299,717.00

Non-Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The purpose of this proposed project
is to explore how the existing I-Corps curriculum (i.e., the I-Corps canonical
program and I-Corps-L program) can be adapted to train social and behavioral
scientists to establish sustained working relationships with policy conduits in
the public and nonprofit sectors. The ultimate aim of the work is to enhance the
exchange of expertise, ideas, and discoveries between the academic research
communities and the nonprofit and public sectors. A team of 5 national experts,
including an expert in the I-Corps training protocol, will participate in the
existing I-Corps programs and observe the delivery of each I-Corps training
module. They will use the information and knowledge obtained during each module
session to determine how best to adapt the existing I-Corps training programs
for use in policy and nonprofit settings. The team will then further refine and
adapt the existing I-Corps training programs into a special I-Corps Policy and
Nonprofit (I-Corps-PNP) training curriculum that can be tested in a formal pilot
with social and behavioral scientists in the
future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposed project will determine whether, and
how, the I-Corps training paradigm can be used to train social and behavioral
scientists to develop the appropriate skills to successfully translate knowledge
and expertise to contribute to the practices in policy and nonprofit arenas. In
addition, it will explore how the training program may sustain and espouse
fruitful collaborations between social and behavior scientists and their policy
and nonprofit counterparts. The adoption of such a curriculum by a variety of
funding sources (e.g. nonprofit, governmental entities, and private foundations)
could result in a new orientation for social science researchers - one that is
sensitive to the practical challenges faced by policymakers and community
stakeholders. In the long term, the created training curriculum will (1) help
social and behavioral scientists to engage successfully with leaders in the
policy and nonprofit communities, (2) promote growth in partnerships between
academia, public policymakers, scientists and innovators that can lead to more
holistic reflection on, and assessment of, more dimensions of social policy
challenges and how best to address them, (3) cultivate nonprofit entrepreneurial
capacities that reflect the knowledge and expertise resident in social and
behavioral scientists, (4) increase knowledge sharing about potential
innovations and policy options available to policymakers, (5) improve
accessibility to the products of innovation generated by social scientists, and
(6) facilitate more timely delivery of research and expertise to social policy
considerations.