* 1549041
* SBIR Phase I:  Thin Film Solar Cells
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2016
* Robert Kokenyesi, Beet Inc
* Standard Grant
* Rick Schwerdtfeger
* 12/31/2016
* USD 150,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to create a transformative, sustainable
photovoltaic solution that will accelerate cost declines of renewable
photovoltaic energy technologies. Today's commercial solar cell technologies
have limited opportunity for significant efficiency improvements. The product of
this research project integrated with commercial solar cells will enable
breakthrough improvement in conversion efficiency and power output. Solar cells
and modules incorporating this technology will provide high power density and
long term performance stability to drive cost-reduction of renewable solar
energy and accelerated growth of solar installation projects.

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will expand the
knowledge base on a new class of solar absorbers materials for solar cell device
integration. From a basic-science perspective, the proposed research enables new
opportunities in science and engineering to investigate performance of
superabsorbing chalcogenide materials integrated into solar cells. The new class
of proposed absorber materials eliminates the need for the traditional n-type
sulfide materials to create the p-n junction, enabling the development of unique
solar cell configurations. This research project will focus on establishing
absorber deposition processes to control the composition and morphology of the
absorber layer and relate it to device performance characteristics of resulting
solar cells. The proposed research objectives are to reproducibly demonstrate
high device performance and establish a pathway to achieve continued
improvement.