* 1549222
* SBIR Phase I:  A Revolutionary Design for a Continuous Adiabatic Demagnetization Refrigerator
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2016,06/30/2016
* Joshua West, High Precision Devices, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 06/30/2016
* USD 149,999.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will demonstrate
the feasibility of a novel Continuous Adiabatic Demagnetization Refrigerator
(CADR) design by building and testing a prototype. This new technology has the
potential to greatly reduce the cost of ultra-low temperature research.
Currently, if a researcher needs to keep an experiment below 0.1K for more than
a few days, there is only one viable technology: Dilution Refrigerators. These
refrigerators rely on the very rare isotope He-3 (largely sourced from Tritium
decay within the nuclear stockpile) and are quite expensive ($350,000 or more).
The technology to be developed in Phase I promises to reduce this cost
significantly by avoiding the complexity, size, infrastructure requirements, and
He-3 reliance of Dilution Refrigerators. The envisioned CADR has the potential
to help enable cost-effective quantum computing, the wide deployment of hyper-
sensitive detectors for tracking nuclear material, the creation of quantum-
information sensors critical to certain cryptographic schemes, in addition to
other outcomes heretofore unknown.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit
of this project is the creation of a revolutionary ultra-low temperature
refrigerator. During this Phase I effort, a prototype refrigerator will be
created which demonstrates the basic working principles of this new design. This
prototype refrigerator will operate using a single stage of Gadolinium Gallium
Garnet (GGG) as a refrigerant for continuously lifting heat from sub-Kelvin
temperatures to a 3K pulse tube. This refrigerator will serve as a proof-of-
concept for a two-stage refrigerator to be designed and tested in Phase II. The
future two-stage refrigerator will use GGG to precool ferric ammonium alum (FAA)
in order to reach 0.1 Kelvin and below. The research in this Phase I effort will
feature an iterative process of subsystem characterization (heat switches,
magnetic shielding, etc.), design, build and test. The Phase I effort is focused
on answering the feasibility questions surrounding the engineering of this CADR
while leaving 100 mK temperatures, multi-stage cooling, and deep analysis to
Phase II. A successful proof of concept refrigerator to be demonstrated and
characterized at the end of Phase I will move useful heat (goal of 0.5
milliwatts) from sub-Kelvin temperatures to a 3K pulse tube.