* 1549703
* STTR Phase I:  Lightweight Self-Lubricating Cylinder Liners for IC Engines to Conserve Energy and Reduce Emissions
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2016,07/31/2017
* Christopher Jordan, Intelligent Composites, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 07/31/2017
* USD 260,149.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer Phase I project will investigate a
hybrid, lightweight aluminum self-lubricating composite system which has promise
to reduce friction and improve performance of cylinder liners in internal
combustion engines. Friction between moving parts in an internal combustion
engine, especially between the piston rings and cylinder liner, accounts for a
large percentage of the parasitic losses that harm fuel economy. The high-
performance materials to be studied and optimized in this work can lead to
reduced oil and fuel consumption and greenhouse gas emissions in a range of
internal combustion (IC) engines. The Total Available Market (TAM) for cylinder
liners in all internal combustion engines worldwide is estimated to be in excess
of several billion dollars per year. Every internal combustion engine has one or
more cylinders. The served available market (SAM) for powersports engines alone
is estimated to be greater than $35 million. The initial target market for these
materials will be cylinder liners for small displacement powersports engines,
with the potential for follow-on markets in a wide array of personal and
commercial vehicle engines.

The intellectual merit of this project derives in part from the development of a
database of structure-processing-property relationships in hybrid aluminum-
silicon carbide-graphite metal matrix composites for internal combustion engine
cylinder applications. This will include development of processing methods to
manufacture cylinder liners with uniform dispersions of SiC and graphite, and
will involve both lab and field testing of cylinder liner materials. The project
work will help quantify and analyze the changes in friction coefficient, wear
rate, fuel consumption, and oil by-pass for different hybrid composite liners in
personal watercraft engines, and thereby help quantify the benefits to the end
user in terms of energy savings, reduced emissions and improved performance.
This project is designed to understand the best formulation of composite
constituents to optimize performance while minimizing cost. There has not been a
fundamental study to optimize compositions based on balancing costs, performance
and emission characteristics. This work will help to develop a set of design
principles for optimized liner chemistries depending on desired performance.