* 1549748
* STTR Phase I:  Development of New Technology that addresses Membrane Fouling Challenges in Membrane Based Water Treatment Systems
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2016,06/30/2017
* Mark Benjamin, MicroHAOPs, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 06/30/2017
* USD 260,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer Research Phase I project is the potential to dramatically increase the
efficiency and lower the cost of treating impaired water to meet drinking water
quality criteria. Membrane-based water treatment systems are at the forefront of
the effort to address the current and future water crisis facing both developed
and developing societies the world over. Modern membrane systems take advantage
of tremendous advances in materials science and water treatment technology over
the past two decades, and yet they still function very inefficiently with
respect to their productivity and energy usage. The innovation that the proposed
research will advance addresses this challenge by dramatically reducing membrane
fouling, which lies at the root of these inefficiencies. The primary application
of the innovation that will be the focus of this research is desalination of
brines and seawater. Although the innovation does not remove salt from water
directly, it will greatly enhance the performance of desalination by reverse
osmosis processes. Given the enormous anticipated growth in the seawater
desalination market in coming decades, the commercial potential for the new
process is outstanding.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical objectives in this
Phase I project are to demonstrate and optimize the performance of an innovative
pre-treatment process that removes from natural waters the contaminants that
cause membrane fouling during desalination operations. The new process combines
the deposition of a thin layer of heated aluminum oxide particles on a porous
support surface and the passage of the raw water through those particles and the
support. The particles remove a very large portion of the membrane foulants from
the water, so that when it is subsequently desalinated by reverse osmosis, the
reverse osmosis system can be operated at higher fluxes for longer times and at
lower pressures than is currently possible. Eventually, the pre-deposited
particles become saturated and must be replaced with fresh ones. The efficient
removal of the particles from the support surface and the uniform and reliable
application of a new layer of particles represent major challenges that will be
addressed in the research.