* 1549667
* EAGER: Computational Kinematic Synthesis for Designing Millirobotic Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2017
* Ronald Fearing, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Rich Malak
* 08/31/2017
* USD 144,788.00

Kinematic synthesis is the technique for creating mechanisms which follow a
desired path through space. An example of kinematic synthesis is designing a
mechanism to drive a robot leg. Although kinematics as a field is two centuries
old, there is not yet a general method to go from a path specification to a set
of links and joints. This EArly-concept Grants for Exploratory Research (EAGER)
project aims to develop a new solution method for computational kinematic
design, which will allow for the computation of complete solution sets to large
synthesis problems previously regarded as intractable. The new solution method
is named the Finite Root Generation method and has direct applications to
current needs in the field of biomimetic robotics. Specifically, legged
millirobots are in need of switchable kinematics for low to high speed running
gaits that will enable a greater range of mobility without the cost of adding
actuators. As a broader impact, this research will enable more effective search
and rescue robots at lower cost, through the use of inexpensive mechanisms
rather than expensive motors.

The class of problems considered in this award are complete solution sets to
general formulations of kinematic synthesis equations, which result in high
degree synthesis equations. The current state-of-the-art root finding method is
the homotopy continuation method, which seems limited to systems of degree less
than 1 billion. The Finite Root Generation method aims to solve synthesis
equations of many orders of magnitude greater than this. This is possible
because the Finite Root Generation method avoids computing roots at infinity,
where homotopy algorithms spend the majority of their time computing infinite
roots only to then filter these solutions out. The Finite Root Generation method
intends to provide a complete picture of the design space, offering the designer
unintuitive solutions that cannot be found any other way. The intellectual merit
of this project centers around the introduction of a new and potentially
transformative solution method to the field of computational kinematic design,
and the application of this method to biomimetic millirobot design to create
drastic improvements in running efficiency and performance.