* 1549082
* SBIR Phase I:  Site Toolkit for Augmented Reality Exhibits: Bringing Easy-To-Use Augmented Reality to Open Air Museum Sites
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2016,06/30/2016
* Wayne Zachary, CHI Systems, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 06/30/2016
* USD 149,974.00

This SBIR Phase I project provides tools and methods for open air cultural
heritage and environmental education sites to deploy augmented reality (AR)
based exhibits. AR is an established technology that can bring educational
material to life. However, the museum industry has been unable to tap into its
full potential because AR installations are technically challenging to
implement, requiring the purchase of expensive hardware and use of highly
skilled technical staff to create and deploy the content. This project provides
a software tool suite designed to enable cultural heritage and environmental
education sites to more quickly, easily, and cost-effectively create and deploy
AR exhibits than is currently possible. AR exhibits developed using these tools
will enable institutions to deploy engaging virtual exhibits with dynamic
geospatially-based content at locations in which deploying traditional
interpretive content is extremely difficult. This in turn will provide NSF
funded research projects with the ability to disseminate their latest research
results to the public in a timely and easily deployable fashion. Making AR use
practical will lead to more engaging exhibits, generating greater visitor
enthusiasm and learning which will, in turn, produce more visitors, larger
donations, and create jobs within the Museum industry focused on developing AR
exhibits.

This project will produce content creation and viewing software and a business
model designed to provide cost effective creation, deployment, and maintenance
of Augmented Reality (AR) exhibits. The toolkit will be comprised of four
technological components: a mobile viewer application running on iOS and
Android, a content delivery server, a web based exhibit intelligence tool
designed to monitor the use of the exhibit, and a web based content creation
system with automated functions for authoring and checking material. The
business model is designed to make AR exhibits revenue neutral or profit
generating by sharing the income generated from the viewer application sales.
Together these elements create a new approach to implementing augmented reality
in open air museums that is designed to overcome the major issues limiting the
practical use of AR by these institutions. Phase I of this project will
concentrate on the development of the mobile viewer application and the exhibit
intelligence tool. A prototype exhibit will also be developed for testing in
Phase II. The experience gained from creating the content for this exhibit will
guide the requirements and interface of the content creation software to be
developed in Phase II.