* 1549085
* SBIR Phase I: Next generation online learning platform with novel pedagogy and a comprehensive universe of content
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2016,06/30/2016
* Priscila Bala, Free Boundaries, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 06/30/2016
* USD 0.00

This SBIR Phase I project will address the acute need for novel pedagogy and a
scalable learning system for subjects in science, technology, engineering and
mathematics (STEM) at the high school and college levels. The new system will
serve as a platform for the creation of next generation textbooks and other
educational content. It will empower teachers to provide more individualized
education to their students, allowing them to transition from lecturers to
mentors. It will enable students to follow an individualized path to learning
STEM subjects at a self-determined pace. The new platform will serve as a
crucial tool in our nation's efforts to reform education, particularly in the
STEM subjects, as it helps the country maintain its edge in technology and all
other fields where technical knowledge plays a key role. The high quality
platform services will be low cost, and widely available. The development of the
proposed system will provide substantial cost savings for students, families and
educational institutions across the country, as well as generate numerous jobs
in technology and education. The platform is projected to generate significant
income and commensurate tax revenue.

The proposed platform will deliver a comprehensive and coherent universe of
cross-linked and cross-referenced educational content delivered through a cloud-
based software system. The system will ultimately include content for all
science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) subjects, as well as all
prerequisite subjects, making it a complete and self-contained educational tool.
All content will be developed either in-house or by carefully selected outside
authors. One of the distinguishing characteristics of this project is that the
same team is developing both the content and the platform. A meticulous curation
process will ensure high quality pedagogy. Content authors will have access to
well designed, intuitive authoring tools. The system will include innovative
features for feedback and dialogue among students and educators, as well as
novel tools for student engagement. The platform will be implemented with the
help of scalable cloud-based technologies, through a seamless user interface. By
the end of Phase I, the platform will be sufficiently mature to be used by the
general public. Content will be developed for Calculus, Linear Algebra and
Differential Geometry. Further advances will include sophisticated analytical
reporting tools, incorporation of adaptive learning engines, and content
development for all STEM subjects.