* 1549274
* SBIR Phase I:  Mobile Hands-On Empirical Solution in Science Education for Secondary School
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2016,06/30/2016
* Ahmad Zaatari, Ideation Systems, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 06/30/2016
* USD 149,997.00

This SBIR Phase I project is developing a new technology-based learning
ecosystem to engage secondary students in STEM learning through in-class
participatory and self-paced experiments that facilitate discovery and bridge
abstract concepts to concrete real world learning experiences. More graduates
are urgently needed in the STEM fields; this shift will begin with nurturing an
interest in the sciences in the minds of youth at the pre-collegial level. This
project is designed to strengthen students' confidence in undertaking the
difficult challenges inherent in the STEM fields and to enhance their ability to
imagine solutions beyond the classroom. The integrated classroom hardware
solution being devised will have plug-and-play simplicity with modular data
collection sensors and integrated lesson plans that work together to make
learning more tangible. Compatibility with students? smartphones and tablets
will make adoption easier and further reduce cost. The project is readily
commercializable and expandable with a subscription-based business model. The
NSF mission of supporting STEM progress for the broadest educational and social
benefits guides this project. It addresses the imperative social need to prepare
the next generation to effectively solve STEM problems that have global
implications, such as climate change and formulating renewable energy sources.

STEM teachers have expressed the need for hands-on learning tools that do not
tax their fleeting time by requiring extensive system-level know-how, that fit
their shrinking budgets, that avoid build on top of legacy hardware platforms,
and that are wireless and portable. This project will yield a new and affordable
technology to bring the Internet of Things and cloud-based research and learning
into the science classroom. Innovative and flexible sensor hardware will provide
reliability in measurement, true portability, tailored functionality, ease of
use and reuse, and expandability. The hardware will have a lean modular design
(to avoid equipment redundancies) and will be interoperable across multiple
scientific disciplines and across topics within the same discipline.
Importantly, it will fulfill the market need for hands-on STEM classroom
learning experiences at an affordable price point. Integrated with focused lab
problems for targeted STEM instruction, these sensors will optimize size,
functionality, usability, reliability, and power consumption to achieve required
needs. As the hardware/lesson plan ecosystem gets further refined over the
course of this project, the project team will engage ongoing teacher feedback to
most effectively guide development through initial design, prototype production,
class implementation and feedback, technical and pedagogical review, and future
recommendations.