* 1549613
* STTR Phase I:  Optical Sensor for Guiding Medical Needles
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2016,06/30/2017
* Jeon Woong Kang, Biosight, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 06/30/2017
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer Research (STTR) Phase I project will be, if successful, enabling the
development of the smallest Raman spectroscopy-capable fiber probe ever
developed. The optimization of a smaller Raman-capable probe will improve a
broad range of clinical applications such as coronary artery plaque diagnosis
during cardiac angiography procedures. In addition, the proposed technology
represents a new class of 'intelligent' surgical tools based on non-invasive
photonics sensing technology. By integrating intelligent algorithms into a
variety of surgical tools, the team expects to improve patient safety, while
reducing medical costs resulting from procedure complications. Finally,
biophotonics technologies exist which could improve patient care and clinical
outcomes. However, many of them are expensive and do not reduce overall medical
costs. As medical costs are currently a national budget priority, the
development of biophotonics technologies, that can provide improvements on both
fronts, is a priority. It is expected that a low cost, easy to use, optical
spectroscopy-based needle placement technology will not only improve the safety
of a variety of surgical procedures but also reduce overall medical costs by
decreasing the probability of expensive medical complications due to needle and
instrument misplacement.

The proposed project will develop a miniature Raman spectroscopy (RS) probe
which can be incorporated into epidural needles. This will be the smallest RS
probe ever developed. Forty-five million medical procedures take place in the
U.S. each year which rely on the blind or semi-blind insertion of needles into
tissue. Complications include debilitating headaches, spinal cord injury,
infection, bleeding, damage to organs, and ineffective procedures. The cost to
the U.S. healthcare system from these complications exceeds $20 billion
annually. Each year, 13 million epidural needles are placed and $1.2-$2.7
billion in immediate healthcare costs plus additional ongoing healthcare costs
are spent for needle misplacement. From ex-vivo tissue study, we showed that RS
can differentiate every tissue layers from skin to spinal cord. During the STTR
phase I period, the team will develop a miniature Raman probe which can be
incorporated into epidural needles (17-gauge Tuohy needle). A portable clinical
prototype device will also be developed. The device will be validated by a live
animal study in the MGH animal facility. The performance of the system will be
compared to the currently used loss-of-resistance (LOR) epidural insertion
method.