* 1549614
* Support for US Participation in ICMMES-2015 (Beijing, China, July 20-24, 2015)
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2016
* Li-Shi Luo, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 08/31/2016
* USD 16,000.00

1549614(Luo)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal seeks funds to partially cover
travel expenses of graduate students, post-doctoral researchers, and junior
faculty members from institutions in the United States to participate in the
International Conference for Mesoscopic Methods in Engineering and Science
(ICMMES) that will be held July 20-24, 2015 at the Beijing Computational Science
Research Center, Beijing, China. An objective of this proposal is to increase US
participation in ICMMES and to strengthen the leadership position of US in this
fast-growing and promising research field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main
intellectual merit of this conference lies in the exchange of scientific ideas,
presentations of cutting edge research, and exposure to a richly diverse array
of topics in the area of mesoscopic fluid dynamics. The conference organization
is in direct response to the growing interest in multi-scale and multi-physics
phenomena observed in nano- or micro-systems and biological systems, and the
increasing importance of computational science to research in these disciplines.
The conference will be attended by both prominent and young scientists in fluid
dynamics, applied and computational mathematics, physics, and computer science,
from around the world, who will be discussing research challenges in mesoscopic
methods, the theory and modeling of bringing the scales from the molecular to
the macroscopic. These methods are promising candidates to effectively connect
microscopic and macroscopic physics and thereby substantially extend our
analytical and computational capabilities. The focus of ICMMES is
mesoscopic/kinetic methods (e.g., lattice Boltzmann equation, lattice gas
cellular automata, discrete velocity models, gas-kinetic schemes, dissipative
particle dynamics, smoothed particle hydrodynamics, and various novel methods)
for computational mechanics in its broadest sense.The broader impact will be to
increase participation of students and young scientists who would not otherwise
be able to afford to travel to the meeting and pay associated costs. Special
consideration will be given to under-represented minorities, women, persons with
disabilities, and those in Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCU)
and Hispanic Serving Institutions (HSI).