* 1549609
* Workshop: Research Challenges in Modeling & Simulation for Engineering Complex Systems; Arlington, Virginia; December 2015
* ENG,CMMI
* 12/01/2015,11/30/2016
* Richard Fujimoto, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Rich Malak
* 11/30/2016
* USD 46,000.00

Computer-based models and simulations are vital technologies needed in advanced
economies to guide the design of complex systems. For example, increased
urbanization will necessitate investments of trillions of dollars globally in
the next two decades toward the development of urban infrastructures such as
transportation, water, and energy. A significant portion of this investment is
needed to address concerns regarding the aging infrastructure in the United
States. Computer models and simulation are essential to guide this re-design of
major cities in order to realize increased sustainability and resilience to
natural and human-caused disasters. Similarly, modeling and simulation are
essential technologies to design complex systems in industries such as
aerospace, manufacturing, logistics and supply chains, telecommunications,
computer and information systems, health care, defense, and homeland security,
among others. However, the development and use of reliable computer models and
simulations is today time consuming and expensive. Engineered systems are
continually increasing in complexity and scale. Advances in modeling and
simulation technologies are essential to maximize the effectiveness of computer-
based tools to engineer the increasingly complex systems needed in the future.
Further, recent technological advances such as cloud computing, novel computer
architectures, big data, and the Internet of Things necessitate new developments
in modeling and simulation to fully exploit these capabilities. This project
will convene a workshop that brings together leading researchers from disparate
disciplines to identify and articulate the most important, impactful modeling
and simulation research problems and questions that must be addressed to
maximize the impact of new modeling and simulation technologies. The results of
this workshop will inform future research investments in modeling and
simulation, and ultimately, enable the creation of more effective and less
costly engineered, complex systems.

The workshop will address key topical areas in modeling and simulation.
Conceptual modeling will be examined to determine how teams of individuals from
different disciplines can best create sophisticated, reliable models of complex
systems. Advanced computational methods will examine topics such as exploitation
of new computing capabilities and technologies. Techniques and methodologies to
manage uncertainty in the design of complex systems will be addressed.
Approaches to enable and facilitate model reuse will be explored to accelerate
and reduce of cost of creating effective computational models.