* 1549887
* EAGER:   A New Precursor for Carbon Fiber Manufacturing
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2017
* Carl Lawton, University of Massachusetts Lowell
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 08/31/2017
* USD 105,824.00

This EArly-concept Grant for Exporatory Research (EAGER) project will evaluate
the processing of carbon fiber using a new precursor that will result in a
simpler, less energy intensive and more cost-effective manufacturing process as
compared to the most common process based on polyacrylonitrile (PAN). Carbon
fibers are the strongest and stiffest materials per unit weight, thus carbon
fiber-reinforced polymer composites see a variety of low-weight high performance
uses such as in automotive, aerospace or civil infrastructure applications.
Carbon fiber is a key ingredient for our nation's defense and energy future but
domestic supply is limited because of cheaper overseas supplies. Low-cost
domestic supply of carbon fiber of comparable or superior quality to that
currently available overseas will enable the manufacture of carbon fiber-
reinforced composites and give US manufacturers a competitive advantage in the
global economy. This award supports a feasibility study for the development of a
new precursor that is expected to simplify the manufacture of carbon fiber. The
multi-disciplinary approach will help broaden the participation of
underrepresented groups in research and positively impact engineering
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the present research, a rigid-rod, linear
polyaromatic polymer of known chemistry will be evaluated as an alternate
precursor. The precursor contains only carbon and hydrogen atoms and has very
high thermal stability. It is therefore anticipated that an additional
stabilization step will not be necessary and that the conversion to carbon fiber
will be simpler and less energy intensive compared to the current manufacturing
process. The precursor will be synthesized starting with an enzymatic route.
Precursor fibers will be spun and the structure and orientation of the fibers
will be controlled by simultaneous heating and stretching. The fibers will then
be pyrolyzed under tension at high temperatures and inert atmosphere.
Preliminary data will be obtained to support a hypothesis-driven research plan
for a follow-on fundamental research project where the effect of process
parameters on the micro-structure and ultimately the mechanical, electrical and
thermal properties of the resulting carbon fibers will be studied. If
successful, this study can transform the way carbon fiber is manufactured.