* 1549541
* EAGER: Enhanced Optical Pressure from Nanostructured Metal Films
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2016
* Kevin Webb, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 07/31/2016
* USD 116,799.00

Enhanced Optical Pressure from Nanostructured Metal Films&lt;br/&gt;Kevin Webb
and Xianfan Xu, Purdue University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A combined theoretical
and experimental study of optical forces in nanostructured material is proposed
to establish a method to control the nanometer-scale force on a small particle
and to provide enhancement in the total pressure on a structured surface.
Consequently, large forces on small particles and an increase in the total force
on a membrane are expected. While optical tweezers are now commercially
available, they are effective for moving large beads to which, for example,
biological molecules are attached. Positioning nanoparticles like quantum dots
requires large and local forces that can be achieved with control over the
geometry of a metal surface. This would circumvent the need for the large beads
in optical tweezers and provide an approach for synthesizing new materials by
nano-scale optical assembly. Furthermore, the substantial increase in the
relatively weak pressure provided by light will allow weaker optical signals to
be used in mechanical control. The resulting optomechanical system can be
simpler and more versatile than optoelectronic systems, opening communication
and sensing opportunities. Specifically, while it has been recognized that all-
optical networks can increase both speed and efficiency, there remain challenges
as to how to provide network reconfiguration that this approach could address.
At the fundamental level, this work will provide experimental force data on the
nanometer scale that will be used in establishing a model that can be used for
device design. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to design and
fabricate gold films with resonant nanometer-scale slots that are expected to
produce a dramatic enhancement in the overall pressure. &lt;br/&gt;The
verification of this method for increasing the force will allow the approach to
be used to mechanically control a surface using laser light in various free
space and waveguide arrangements. The project will lay the design foundations
for nanophotonic structures that impart substantial and controllable optical
forces to actuate tuning elements in photonic networks. This will simplify
switching technology and the approach has the potential to reduce energy
consumption and cost. This project will facilitate sensing, allowing a molecule
to be moved to a region with large field and hence large Raman dipole moment for
identification. Such nanoscale traps could be used in material synthesis,
allowing trapping of quantum dots in nanocavities for achieving optical sources
and detectors, for instance. While optical tweezers are becoming more common,
determination of the absolute force relies on macroscopic calibration procedures
that do not provide access to the force on the nanometer scale. By evaluating
the relationship between materials and geometry and the force, it should be
possible to design tweezers with larger forces to move smaller objects or larger
objects locally. There should also be new opportunities through control of the
optical material properties, both electric and magnetic. At the fundamental
level, the proposed work may provide an answer to a century-long debate about
the description of the optical force.