* 1549054
* SBIR Phase I:  Screencast Integration with Scientific Probeware Systems
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2016,06/30/2016
* Scott Stuckey, Inquiry Technologies, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 06/30/2016
* USD 150,000.00

This SBIR Phase I project is focused on helping students demonstrate critical
thinking and reasoning skills for hands-on activities involving scientific
probeware systems without requiring writing proficiency. A challenge facing
educators is to ensure that instruction covers important content in a way that
can reach all students. When teaching STEM concepts (Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Math), it is essential to provide opportunities to investigate
questions about the world that students encounter in daily life in much the same
way that scientists and mathematicians do; however, many students do not have
the writing proficiency to express the complexity of their observations, become
frustrated and lose interest in STEM subjects. This project is intended to
increase the success rate at which students demonstrate, explain, and document
their knowledge when working with probeware experiments. This project has the
potential to help students to enjoy scientific experimentation and develop an
interest in science strong motivators for pursuing opportunities in STEM
careers. The success of this project will support the significant improvement of
science and engineering education, and help the United States to increase the
number of students who enter STEM fields to meet the rapidly expanding demand
for scientists and engineers in the future. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
technology, when commercialized, will provide school districts a student-
centered, curriculum-agnostic learning and assessment tool that incorporates an
innovative screencasting tool. Its use will support students? analysis and
mastery of complex STEM concepts and practices when participating in experiments
using scientific probeware, without requiring writing proficiency. The goal of
the research is to develop a portable software tool that enables real time
student documentation and effective teacher assessment of students? probeware
STEM activities. The resulting learning tool will function as a portable
application housed on a flash drive, capture student explanations and
demonstrations in real time, and allow playback operation on electronic devices
with a display screen without the need for an Internet connection. This
portability will provide support for students during probeware experiments, then
allow them to revisit an entire lab experience in real or accelerated time
within or away from school. The innovation will enable tangible documentation
for the types of science skills and practices that embody the Next Generation
Science Standards (NGSS). Phase I research will focus on demonstrating the
feasibility and functionality for a portable application that builds upon prior
NSF-funded core technology, measure the impact of the innovation on elementary,
middle, and high school students? knowledge integration, explanatory behaviors,
and science practices, and demonstrate its feasibility for using the device in
student assessment.