* 1549853
* STTR Phase I:  Optical Modeling and Materials Performance in Laser-Stimulated Phosphors for Next-Generation Solid-State Lighting
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2017
* Ram Seshadri, Fluency Lighting Technologies, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Rick Schwerdtfeger
* 12/31/2017
* USD 255,313.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to deliver energy and electricity savings in
the high-power lighting market, by creating an energy-efficient, high color-
quality, and cost effective alternative to conventional light sources using
laser technology and materials design. Commercialization of this innovation
could lead to the next generation of energy-efficient light sources, surpassing
the limitations of current lighting technologies and drastically increasing the
availability and uptake of energy-efficient light sources in the high-power
market. As lighting is a major source of electricity use in the commercial and
industrial markets, this would in turn aid in reducing global energy consumption
and help to preserve our environment. The intellectual knowledge gained from
these studies will inform future materials research in developing robust
materials with optimal properties to advance solid-state lighting, as well as
other energy related technologies including solar energy technologies.

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project aims to advance
research in the field of solid-state lighting towards the goal of ultra-
efficient and smart lighting by exploring laser-stimulated phosphor emission. In
particular, the proposed innovation focuses on energy savings in the high-power
lighting market, where high-power light emitting diode (LED) technology does not
attain the energy efficiency seen in low-power LED technology, due to LED droop.
The use of laser technology can simultaneously overcome the negative effects of
droop while also leveraging the directional nature of a laser to create a
focused light source that can be better controlled and delivered to the
illumination area with less losses and higher overall efficiency. This project
will address device designs using optical modeling to maximize lighting
performance metrics and will develop materials systems to mitigate the thermal
effects introduced when using an intense light source such as a laser or high-
power LED, which can damage and degrade materials within the device.