* 1549949
* Support for the Doctoral Consortium Program at IEEE International Conference on Health Informatics (ICHI) 2015
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2016
* Ming Li, California State University-Fresno Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 09/30/2016
* USD 14,000.00

This award supports twelve US matriculated students to participate in IEEE
International Conference on Healthcare Informatics (ICHI) Doctoral Consortium
Program. Students who are selected will receive funding to cover their
expenditures on registration, travel, and lodging. Students will be scheduled
for a rapid-fire talk, with auto-advancing slides, to present a synopsis of
their work. These rapid overviews will be followed by a poster session where
participants and mentors can discuss research in greater detail. Selected
participants may also be invited to give a longer oral presentation. The
consortium will close with a panel discussion discussing topics relevant to
doctoral students (e.g., dissertation proposal, dissertation execution, job
search, and grant seeking). Awardee students will also benefit from vis-a-vis
meeting with leading researchers and receive valuable guidance on direction of
their dissertation, specific issues in health informatics, as well as career
development. This award promotes the training and development of the future
generation of leaders and workforce, as well as enhances the participation of
women and minority students in in this critical field. The student award
application procedure and results will be announced at the ICHI 2015 conference
website (http://cs.utdallas.edu/ichi2015/).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;IEEE
International Conference on Healthcare Informatics (ICHI) is the premier
community forum concerned with the application of computer science principles,
information science principles, information technology, and communication
technology to address problems in healthcare, public health, and everyday
wellness. The conference highlights the most novel technical contributions in
computing-oriented health informatics and the related social and ethical
implications. The conference aims to (i) fertilize interdisciplinary education
among healthcare informatics students, researchers, and practitioners; (ii)
promote research design and methodology development in the emerging fields; and
(iii) coalesce knowledge translation between academia and industry/government.
Issues addressed by ICHI become increasingly important in the marketplace with
availability of numerous consumer and clinician systems and services. The
conference has been held four times: 2010 (IHI 2010, Washington DC, USA), 2012
(IHI 2012, Miami, Florida, USA), 2013 (ICHI 2013, Philadelphia, PA, USA), and
2014 (ICHI 2014, Verona, Italy). ICHI 2015 will be held in Dallas, Texas USA on
October 21-23, 2015. The IEEE ICHI 2015 proceedings are published by IEEE.