* 1549572
* EAGER: Renewables: Collaborative Proposal on Stochastic Unit Commitment with Topology Control Recourse for Networks with High Penetration of Distributed Renewable Resources
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Shmuel Oren, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Anil Pahwa
* 08/31/2018
* USD 149,999.00

The massive integration of wind resources into the generation mix of the
electric power infrastructure poses new challenges to system operators due to
the uncertainty and variability of these resources. The intermittent nature of
wind and other renewable energy resources, together with limitations of storage
in current power systems, poses serious challenges for integrating renewable
resources into the power grid, while maintaining acceptable service reliability.
Efficient deployment of conventional and flexible resources requires new methods
that explicitly account for uncertainty in day-ahead unit commitment. This
project proposes to use topology control as a recourse mechanism which mobilizes
flexibility of the grid through transmission line switching to redirect power
flow in response to prevailing renewable generation conditions, thus overcoming
loss of reliability due to intermittency. However, such topology control will
require new algorithmic innovations which will allow system operators to plan
their day-ahead unit-commitment by incorporating topology control as a recourse
action. The project pursues a novel problem formulation for transmission line
switching in response to variable generation that holds promise for being
computationally feasible. It is hoped that the outcomes of the project will help
to facilitate growth of renewable generation while maintaining grid efficiency
and reliability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Because the topology of the grid consists
of a discrete set of transmission links, the choice of which links to use
becomes a combinatorial optimization problem. Moreover, the presence of
intermittency in renewable generation requires the transmission network to adapt
to the specific generation scenario being observed. This leads to a two-stage
stochastic optimization model in which the first stage choices are associated
with slow-ramping generators, while the second stage model includes the fast-
ramping as well as intermittent generators. The recourse action in this setup
leads to a mixed-integer program (MIP) in the second stage, which violates the
convexity requirements of common decomposition algorithms which have been highly
successful in power system operations. This proposal shows that a new model,
which is a two stage stochastic MIP (SMIP), possesses a very special structure
which can be exploited so that realistic stochastic unit commitment problems can
be solved, even though the general class of two-stage SMIP models are known to
be extremely difficult. The proposal outlines a combined parallel-serial
approximation strategy which appears promising, and could transform the
commonly-held notion that high penetration of renewable energy will have an
adverse effect on reliability. The project is a high-risk, high return
undertaking on two levels: a) it could lead to a truly sustainable approach to
reliable renewable integration, and b) the algorithmic advance of solving very
large scale SMIP by decomposing into smaller pieces, without sacrificing
optimality would provide a major step in the solution of these very challenging
optimization problems.