* 1549580
* EAGER: Uncovering Mechanistic Link Between Autophagy and Circadian Clock in Arabidopsis
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/2015,12/31/2017
* Stacey Harmer, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Steve Clouse
* 12/31/2017
* USD 300,000.00

During the daytime plants use carbohydrate generated through photosynthesis to
support their growth and development. To avoid starving in the night when
photosynthesis is not possible, plants store some of the carbohydrate produced
in the day as starch reserve for nighttime use. In Arabidopsis plants, 95% of
the stored starch is consumed by dawn. Interestingly, the 24-hour circadian
clock controls the rate of starch degradation so that the appropriate amount of
starch is used by dawn irrespective of the length of the night. The precise
molecular processes involved in clock-controlled nighttime starch usage are not
understood. Recently, the autophagy (self-eating) process has been implicated in
nighttime starch degradation. This project will investigate the inter-
relationship between the clock and autophagy using the Arabidopsis plant as the
model system. Results from these studies should provide strategies to improve
plant productivity by maintaining the appropriate day-night energy balance
especially during changes in environmental conditions. Through its broader
impacts, project will train a research scientist, a post-doctoral fellow, and an
undergraduate student from Biology Undergraduate Scholars Program (BUSP).

Autophagy is a dynamic process during which double membrane-bound vesicles
called autophagosomes enclose cytoplasmic materials and target them to the
vacuole/lysosome for degradation or recycling. Autophagy (Atg) core proteins are
conserved among eukaryotes including Arabidopsis model plant. The ubiquitin-like
modifier Atg8 plays a key role in autophagosome biogenesis, cargo recruitment,
and autophagosme delivery to the vacuole/lysosome. Arabidopsis Atg8 interaction
studies uncovered an intriguing module consisting of Arabidopsis circadian clock
components. This project will investigate the possible molecular link between
Arabidopsis autophagy and the circadian clock. The project will specifically
investigate whether circadian clock regulates autophagy and whether autophagy in
turn regulates clock function in Arabidopsis. Understanding the mechanistic link
between autophagy and circadian system should provide insights on carbon
assimilation and energy homeostasis in plants.