* 1549942
* Collaborative Research: EAGER: Enhancing Pyroelectric Effects in Nanostructured Materials for High-Efficiency Energy Conversion
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2017
* Alexander Balandin, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Eyad Abed
* 08/31/2017
* USD 75,000.00

A large amount of energy is lost as waste heat in many engineering systems such
as automobiles and turbomachinery. Significant energy gains may be obtained by
efficiently scavenging such waste heat through appropriate energy conversion
mechanisms. One particularly promising opportunity lies in the conversion of
temperature gradients in time into electricity, referred to as the pyroelectric
effect. This project will utilize experiments and theoretical modeling to
explore the pyroelectric effect in nanowires, and will build prototype
pyroelectric-based energy harvesting microdevices. Research will help understand
the nature of pyroelectric effect in nanowires, including the amount of energy
that may be realistically harvested from nanowire based devices, performance
limits, etc. which will help guide further development of potential energy
conversion devices. All three institutions involved in this collaborative
research are minority serving institutions located in highly populated Hispanic
areas. PIs will leverage this opportunity to excite and recruit minority and
women students to the emerging nano/microscale energy harvesting area. The PIs
will carry out outreach to local high schools to excite K-12 students about
energy harvesting, and encourage them to consider further STEM education and
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical goal of this combined experimental
and theoretical-simulation research is to measure and characterize the
pyroelectric effect in nanowires (GaN, ZnO, etc.) for developing micro- and
nano-scale devices for thermal energy harvesting and sensors applications.
Despite its potential to convert waste heat into usable electricity, the
pyroelectric effect has been largely unexplored, in particular at the
micro/nanoscale. This is partially due to lack of methodologies for
characterization of this effect at small scales. Recent theoretical findings
suggest a dramatically higher pyroelectric coefficient in nanowires, similar to
enhancements observed in thermoelectric and piezoelectric performance of
nanowires, albeit this prediction has not been confirmed experimentally. In this
effort, a methodology based on microfabricated devices will be developed to
quantitatively measure and characterize the pyroelectric properties of
individual suspended nanowires. In addition, theoretical models and
computational tools will be developed for (i) interpretation and analysis of the
experimental pyroelectric data; (ii) prediction of the pyroelectric response of
various nanostructured materials (individual nanowires; nanowires arrays); and
(iii) optimization of the nanostructure parameters (material composition, size,
shape, interface) for enhancing the pyroelectric voltage. The proposed models
will include strong non-uniformity of the polarization distribution in
nanostructures and possible phonon and electron confinement effects. Based on
the learning from experiment and theory, prototype pyroelectric-based energy
harvesting microdevices will be built using a single and an array of nanowires.
Experimental data on pyroelectric coefficient of nanowires and dependence on
nanowire size, temperature, etc. will contribute to the fundamental
understanding of this effect. A fundamental understanding of pyroelectric
transport in single nanowires may lead to a new paradigm of high efficiency
energy conversion devices that take advantage of nanoscale engineering of
materials to optimize pyroelectric performance.