* 1549018
* STTR Phase I:  Low-Cost Biosynthesis of Sugar Phosphates via ATP-Free Enzyme Cocktails
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2016
* Daniel Wichelecki, Cell-Free Bioinnovations Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 12/31/2016
* USD 0.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research Phase I project could be a significant decrease of sugar phosphate
manufacturing costs, thereby creating opportunities for the low-cost production
of numerous drugs and their derivatives used to treat cardiac diseases, cancers,
and degenerative diseases. For example, fructose 1,6-bisphosphate (FBP) is a
very important drug for treating cardiac diseases. Furthermore, less costly FBP,
along with two thermostable enzymes (i.e., aldolase and triosephosphate
isomerase), will provide affordable glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate (G3P) and
dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) to both the pharmaceutical industry and
academia. Both G3P and DHAP are important precursors for the synthesis of
numerous carbon-carbon chiral compounds used for pharmaceutical production. The
in-vitro synthetic biosystems platform to be developed in this project could be
instrumental in unlocking the full potential of modified sugar phosphates in
drug discovery and drug synthesis. Furthermore, this platform is much more
environmentally friendly than typical chemical synthesis: modest reaction
conditions and significant decreases in environmental footprint. This platform
also has the potential to lead the next paradigm shift in biomanufacturing, by
establishing a viable, environmentally friendly alternative for pharmaceutical
manufacturing plants currently using chemical synthesis.

The technical objectives in this Phase I research project are to validate the
technological feasibility of the biosynthesis of fructose 1,6-bisphosphate,
glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate and dihydroxyacetone phosphate via a non-natural ATP-
free enzymatic pathway. In contrast to glycolysis, this novel pathway involves
neither costly coenzymes (e.g., NAD+, ATP) nor requires ATP regeneration. Also,
thermostable enzymes from hyperthermophilic microorganisms will be used to carry
out reactions at 50-60 deg C in aqueous solution. Thermophilic enzymes have a
longer lifetime than mesophilic enzymes, and the relatively high reaction
temperature eliminates possible microbial contamination. The goal of this
project is to demonstrate the biosynthesis of fructose 1,6-bisphosphate,
glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate and dihydroxyacetone phosphate from low-cost
substrates, that is, starch and pyrophosphate, via a novel ATP-free enzymatic
pathway. The technical tasks are to (1) clone and express several recombinant
pyrophosphate phosphofructokinases from various thermophilic microorganisms; (2)
validate the feasibility of the synthetic pathway for biomanufacturing sugar
phosphates; (3) optimize the synthetic pathway for cost-effective production;
and (4) obtain grams of high-purity fructose 1,6-bisphosphate crystals via a
series of purification steps. The most essential task is the efficient
expression of a recombinant, high-activity pyrophosphate phosphofructokinase,
which enables the omission of glycolysis? ATP-dependent phosphofructokinase from
our pathway