* 1549058
* SBIR Phase I: Debugging Smart Cyberphysical Systems
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2016
* Chuchu Fan, Rational CyPhy Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 12/31/2016
* USD 150,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is based on two trends: (a) software is quickly
becoming the most complex and expensive part of engineering products like cars,
medical devices, and drones and (b) existing testing and simulation techniques
are inadequate for finding software bugs in early design. This leads to
expensive recalls and sometimes fatal failures, and increasingly, certification
bodies are incorporating stringent testing and verification standards.
Successful completion of this project will result in a scalable prototype tool
that will help demonstrate to our potential customers, namely the engineering
system designer, that it is possible to radically cut down software development
cost without compromising on quality. This will be possible using our algorithms
and tools that enable effective early discovery of bugs as well as coverage
guarantees that give certificates for meeting design requirements.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project aims to develop commercial technology that can scalably analyze the
correctness of designs. The software tool built in this project will
automatically check the safety of system designs by combining fast numerical
simulations, with automatic analysis of design models to cover a large set of
possible behaviors from a few traces. Our techniques have had demonstrable
success on several industry-scale challenge problems in the automotive,
avionics, and medical devices industries. In this project, we will develop a
polished prototype of our software tool with features that will enhance the
designer's experience. It will provide automated support for debugging complex
system designs. These features will flatten the learning curve for the tool and
make the approach applicable to existing industry standard design environments
like Simulink/Stateflow. We will develop use-cases for the tool that will
demonstrate the entire design workflow on challenging problems. The prototype
and the use cases will become the basis for the creation of a minimum viable
product and for beta testing.