* 1549888
* EAGER:  Development of Intrinsically Stretchable, Active-Matrix OLED Displays
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2015,12/31/2016
* Chuan Wang, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Nadia El-Masry
* 12/31/2016
* USD 100,000.00

Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Nontechnical:&lt;br/&gt;The proposed EAGER combines recent
advances in several scientific disciplines, including organic and polymer
semiconductors, key materials behind highly flexible and intrinsically
stretchable organic light emitting diodes (OLEDs), single walled carbon
nanotubes and silver nanowires spun out of efforts in nanomaterials development,
and the demonstration of intrinsically stretchable polymer OLEDs and highly
flexible CNT backplanes. &lt;br/&gt;This work will represent a major step
forward in promoting practical application of wearable electronics, with the
functional devices taking an innovative form factor, fabricated with non-toxic
materials and by a low-cost process. Such displays will be light weight and
stretchable.&lt;br/&gt;They can be folded like handkerchiefs into small sizes
for easy portability and unfolded into large screens to plug in a number of
small size portable electronics for use as large size, external screens. The
displays can also conformally cover uneven surfaces and cope with body movement,
thus making them wearable like human
clothing.&lt;br/&gt;Technical:&lt;br/&gt;This EAGER will investigate the
essential materials and scalable process for the demonstration of active-matrix
organic light-emitting diode (OLED) displays that can be repeatedly stretched by
50%. All the components in such display including the OLEDs, thin-film
transistors and interconnect are intrinsically stretchable. The simplicity and
stretch ability of such new displays could offer important benefits such as
deployment into large size displays from a small stowed volume onto uneven
surfaces, compatibility with wearable electronic devices, and light
weight.&lt;br/&gt;To achieve the above mentioned goals, the EAGER project will
focus on the following research objectives: (1) Study of fundamental structure-
property relationship essential for stretchable thin-film transistors. The
research involves extensive exploration on materials design for the channel, the
source/drain and the dielectric layers with superior stretch ability and inter-
layer adhesion for ideal device performance ; (2) Integration of stretchable
OLEDs and stretchable thin-film transistors. A set of RGB lighting pixels will
be printed and connected to their neighboring transistors by ink-jet printing.
The work involves the selection of light emitting materials for red, green and
blue color emission and the optimization of printing process for uniform light
emission.&lt;br/&gt;For broader dissemination of the research results and to
improve awareness to the importance of advanced manufacturing for next
generation flexible and stretchable electronics, the proposed research includes
plans for educational outreach components, including research/teaching lab
development and community college and local high school outreach programs. FSU
College of Engineering is a joint venture between FAMU (an HBCU) and FSU.