* 1549289
* SBIR Phase I:  Democratizing Computer Science Education through a Sustainable Peer Tutoring Community
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2016,06/30/2016
* Navid Ahmadi, Actimator LLC
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 06/30/2016
* USD 150,000.00

This SBIR Phase I project seeks to create an effective peer-tutoring platform
for Computer Science (CS) education. Currently, the software industry in the
United States is suffering from a shortage of 100,000 CS professionals per year.
The root can be traced to the lack of CS preparation in K-12 education, where
the majority of students do not receive proper CS education at school. While
there is an ongoing effort to establish CS education in K-12, the teacher
training and certification process is slow and expensive. Receiving mentorship
is crucial to learning Computer Science. Online solutions that offer one-on-one
tutoring are expensive and therefore not affordable by the majority of students.
This project offers an affordable solution: a sustainable, global, online peer
tutoring community in which every student can learn CS, programming, and STEM
(Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics)-related content from their
peers. By lowering the tutoring costs to a fraction of the price of other
existing solutions, majority of students, in particular in underserved
communities, will have access to affordable quality CS education. Additionally,
with its collaborative nature and social engagement elements, it can prepare
students with 21st century skills and broaden participation of women and
underrepresented populations in Computer Science.

The goal of this Phase I project is to design, develop, and evaluate distributed
communication and coordination software and educational content that are
required for effective remote peer tutoring. Using a real-time collaborative
game design software, peer tutors work virtually yet closely with students to
guide them through the creation of a video game, solve computational problems,
write programs together, and answer their questions just-in-time. This project
features a distributed, shared development environment that allows multiple
users to edit the same project at the same time. This real-time collaboration
system employs a fast and scalable technology that manages multi-user concurrent
editing of a shared project. The theoretical framework for this project is built
based on 1) peer tutoring techniques such as Peer-Led Team Learning, which have
been used successfully to teach CS, and to increase the participation of
underrepresented groups; 2) decades of research and development in collaborative
and social software engineering. In this project, an engaging peer tutoring unit
for teaching computer science and STEM concepts in the context of collaborative
game design will be produced and implemented in after-school settings in a
number of schools to evaluate and establish the educational feasibility of the
project.