* 1549650
* STTR Phase I:  Odorant receptor identification transforms odor design
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2016,06/30/2017
* Gregory Frolenkov, Odorcept, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2017
* USD 241,164.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) Phase I project will be to develop odorant receptor function
bioassays to provide services for companies that develop and formulate odors
used in many kinds of commercial products. These services identify the
biological sensors responsible for specific odor sensations and determine how
these sensors are involved in interaction effects between odors. Armed with this
knowledge, several things become possible. The sensors associated with desirable
smell sensations can be directly targeted, facilitating the formulation of odors
designed to please, sooth, or stimulate. The sensors that respond to repulsive
odors can also be identified, opening the way to develop specific blockers of
these offensive stimuli. Furthermore, the highly unpredictable interactions that
happen between odors can be characterized, and the sensors affected by these
interactions can be identified. This makes it possible to predict the outcome of
mixing odors, facilitating the development of new odors designed for specific
purposes. In the same way that understanding the actions of signaling molecules
in the body led to the development of better pharmaceutical drugs, these
services will allow better manipulation of odor environments and experiences.

This STTR Phase I project proposes to complete the development of two biological
assays capable of identifying and characterizing the sensors that respond to any
odor. Humans and animals employ hundreds of odor sensor proteins, but which
respond to any given odor is unknown. One major objective is to improve an in
vivo assay that identifies which sensors respond to an odor, increasing its
sensitivity and capacity for screening odors rapidly. This objective tests new
assay conditions designed to reduce variability and new ways to quantify the
responses of the sensors. Also important is a proof-of-concept experiment
designed to demonstrate that interactions between odors at specific sensor
proteins can be measured in vivo. Preliminary results support the expectation
that achieving these results will be possible. Another objective is to convert a
cell culture assay for drugs into an assay capable of measuring the sensitivity
of individual sensor proteins to odors. This objective tests new ways to
facilitate the function of these sensors in the cell culture environment.
Successful conversion of the cell culture assay depends on finding the right
combination of accessory factors from among a few dozen candidates.