* 1549508
* EAGER: Understanding Cybersecurity Needs and Gaps at the Local Level
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2015,02/28/2018
* Mario Caire, University of Texas at El Paso
* Standard Grant
* Nina Amla
* 02/28/2018
* USD 150,000.00

This project investigates the degree to which businesses at a local level are
dependent on computers and the Internet for daily operations. Of those that are,
the project investigates the degree to which they implement good or bad
cybersecurity practices with an particular emphasis on very small businesses.
Understanding their needs helps fill a knowledge gap within the cybersecurity
industry and has local as well as national security and economic implications.
In particular, knowledge gained will help identify cybersecurity gaps and needs,
raise awareness of these gaps and needs, and make progress toward solving
problems faced by existing and emerging threats. This in turn will help improve
the national situation "from the ground up" by helping to make such
establishments more secure in an era where they are increasingly being targeted
by malicious actors who see this business demographic as a prime target for
exploitation.

The project conducts interviews with key stakeholders and implements a survey of
local businesses in El Paso County (Texas) to collect a mix of quantitative and
qualitative data on relevant cybersecurity issues. Both technical and human
factors related to cybersecurity are be addressed. The methodology for this
project is designed to be applicable in other geographical areas (i.e. cities
and counties) within the U.S. which allows for a comparison of results providing
a perspective on the state of cybersecurity at different levels. Because the
small business community is particularly difficult to contact, best practices
are also identified for eliciting participation of business owners. To ensure
adequate representation of this demographic, the survey is implemented using a
mixed mode data collection methodology utilizing paper, telephone, web, and
tablet computer based surveys (tablets are utilized for on-site contact of
business owners). While cybersecurity is typically regarded as a national or
state level issue, this project seeks to demonstrate that this is not
necessarily the case. Establishing a secure and trustworthy cyberspace
nationally will benefit by focusing on issues faced by local businesses and
finding ways to address their needs.