* 1549095
* SBIR Phase I:  Dual-Capsule Epoxy Self-Healing Additives for Corrosion Protection
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2016
* Gerald Wilson, Autonomic Materials, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 12/31/2016
* USD 149,252.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is significant due to
the number of critical challenges in the design of protective materials the
proposed technology could address. The proposed R&amp;D activity will facilitate
the development of a dual-capsule epoxy self-healing system for epoxy protective
coatings. The incorporation of such a system into the design of protective and
marine epoxy coatings will improve the corrosion resistance of these coatings
leading to longer maintenance cycles for these assets along with a decrease in
the loss of productivity, energy consumed and volatile organic compounds
associated with maintenance, repair and overhaul activities. The product
developed will also find utility as a specialty additive for adhesives and
sealants spanning multiple consumer and industrial applications. Finally,
successful development of this technology will enable the development of novel
one-pack epoxy coating and adhesives curable at ambient conditions, curing
agents for powder coatings and novel corrosion inhibiting
formulations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business
Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will result in the development of an
approach for the microencapsulation of amine curing agents for epoxy resins en
route to the development of a dual capsule epoxy-based self-healing system. Due
to their amphiphilic properties, curing agents for epoxies, (typically amines
and amides) are difficult to encapsulate since they tend to reside at the
interface between the oil and the water phases in oil-in-water emulsions that
are a prerequisite for most encapsulation procedures. As such, self-healing
systems demonstrated even at an academic level have been based other chemistries
even in cases in which the matrix is an epoxy. We will approach this problem on
two fronts. The first will be the systematic evaluation and selection of an
amine curing agent with a degree of hydrophobicity that will permit its
encapsulation. Upon successful encapsulation of the amine, the second front will
identify an appropriate process for reinforcing the properties of the shell wall
to improve its robustness. Following the achievement of adequately stable amine
microcapsules, the efficacy of the dual capsule self-healing system combining
these capsules with complementary microcapsules containing an epoxy resin, will
be assessed in prototype coating and adhesive formulations.