* 1549579
* Mechanisms of Climate Variability and Change
* GEO,AGS
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2022
* Dennis Hartmann, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 06/30/2022
* USD 1,095,460.00

This work addresses basic physical mechanisms that determine mean climate,
climate variability and the atmospheric circulation response to greenhouse gas-
induced global warming. Much of the research focuses on the interaction of cloud
radiative effects and atmospheric circulation. One issue to be addressed is the
close association over the western equatorial Pacific between atmospheric
heating due to the radiative effects of clouds and associated water vapor and
energy export from the region. The PI hypothesizes that the radiative heating of
the atmosphere by clouds and vapor anomalies plays a deciding role in horizontal
energy export, in part because cloud radiative heating in the upper troposphere
increases the requirement for export. The research further considers the
possible effect of upper-tropospheric cloud radiative heating in confining the
intertropical convergence zone (ITCZ) to a narrow strip near the equator. A role
for cloud radiative effects in confining the ITCZ would be of interest given the
persistent double-ITCZ bias in climate models, in which models incorrectly
produce an ITCZ on either side of the equator. Further research considers the
role of cloud radiative effects in determining key features of the atmospheric
circulation response to global warming, including the expansion of the Hadley
cell (accompanied by an expansion of the dry regions in the subtropics) and the
poleward shift of the midlatitude jet streams commonly found in model
simulations. A related issue to be addressed is the dipole in shortwave cloud
radiative feedback over the Southern Ocean, where the feedback is negative in
lower latitudes (where it thus serves to counteract greenhouse warming) but
positive in higher latitudes. Previous work by the PI and his collaborators
suggests that the positive feedback at higher latitudes is due to cloud
brightening as warmer temperatures favor liquid droplets over ice particles in
clouds. Two other topics to be addressed are the mechanisms which produce El
Nino-like conditions in the equatorial Pacific sector, and the contribution of
natural variability to the increasing sea ice cover trend around Antarctica and
the decline of sea ice in the Arctic. The work is conducted through analysis of
observations and a variety of numerical model simulations, for example the
experiments conducted in the Clouds On Off Climate Intercomparison Experiment
are examined to understand the role of cloud radiative effects in energy export
and ITCZ confinement. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has societal broader
impacts due to the value of improved understanding of the climate system for
anticipating and responding to the likely consequences of climate variability
and change. In addition, the project supports three graduate students, thus
promoting the development of the next generation of climate science researchers.
The PI also engages in outreach to the public and stakeholders through a variety
of venues.