* 1549035
* SBIR Phase I:  Advanced bioeconomic forecasting enabled by next-generation crop monitoring
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2016
* Adam Wolf, Arable Labs, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Rick Schwerdtfeger
* 12/31/2016
* USD 170,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project will be to empower farmers to capture a greater
share of revenue from the marketing of their crops. Agriculture is a significant
engine to the U.S. economy, and farming itself is vital to creating economically
vibrant rural areas. Farmers are often at a disadvantage when it comes to
capturing good prices from their crops because there are significant information
asymmetries in the marketing supply chain. This project develops a combination
of hardware and analytics that greatly improves crop forecasts at dramatically
more accessible prices, which allows farmers and their trusted buyers to make
more informed marketing decisions. An addition to the narrow application of
sensing hardware and analytics for forecasting, the data collected by the
platform can also be used by growers to make decisions that improve operational
performance of complex agribusinesses and improve the agronomy of the farm.
These tools make it easier to compare performance of crops to improve yields and
reduce resource costs. Together this technology continues to raise productivity
and profitability per farmer.

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project integrates a
novel plant and weather sensing platform with analytics that synthesizes data
into actionable forms that can drive agribusiness decisions. The project bundles
a suite of capabilities into a single hardware unit that includes sensing,
communications, GPS, mounting, and solar power, which dramatically reduces the
cost and increases the simplicity of collecting agricultural data. These data
are uniquely designed to monitor crop performance and its sensitivity to weather
and management. Data synthesis is a critical pain point in transforming raw
numbers into insights for growers to act upon. By creating an integrated
hardware platform, the data is poised to provide useful advice that allow a
farmer to act on emerging situations, anticipate upcoming events, and even
predict the future. A research objective will be to generate probabilistic
forecasts that use the unique data from our hardware to estimate key crop growth
parameters and project forward for an operational yield forecast. This coupling
between highly informative quantitative in-field data and sophisticated
ensemble-based parameter estimation and forecast techniques could dramatically
improve marketing decisions and help farmers capture better prices for their
products.