* 1549349
* SBIR Phase I:  Deriving Event Models, Classification Heuristics and High Level Semantics Using Network Traffic Data
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2016,07/31/2017
* Srividya Iyer, CANIV TECH INC
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 07/31/2017
* USD 150,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is that it will provide greater visibility into
network behavior and help identify problems before they occur in the network.
Advances in cloud computing and network virtualization are changing the way
networks are designed and monitored. This project will help small and medium
businesses adapt to and take advantage of these advances by means of intelligent
analysis of network traffic data, resulting in an optimized network and
eliminating unnecessary additional capital expenditure. The resulting commercial
impact is that the technology will eliminate tedious data analysis currently
required of network engineers to isolate fault and performance issues, and help
them achieve a more efficient, streamlined design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project focuses on delivering
a predictive network behavior analysis product that will help small and medium
businesses better understand the behavior of their networks. Due to the rapid
growth of new network technologies and increasing application complexity, such
businesses have to constantly change and upgrade their networks. By not
understanding the overall network behavior under various load conditions, they
are forced to use ad-hoc methods to design and equip their networks. The
objective of this project is to build a prototype that will demonstrate the
proposed predictive network behavior analysis capability to potential customers.
The prototype will also be used with select partners for beta testing and
refining of requirements. The results will be used to further refine this
prototype into a commercially viable product that can be deployed in the
networks of small and medium businesses.