* 1549758
* Codemeta: A Rosetta Stone for Metadata in Scientific Software
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2018
* Matthew Jones, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Stefan Robila
* 09/30/2018
* USD 165,782.00

Software is critical to robust and efficient scientific discovery across
disciplines, and yet is rarely valued or even understood. Researchers need to be
able to discover and understand scientific software to apply it to their
projects, but the approaches for documenting software are typically language
specific and not interoperable. This project will have a broad impact on
multiple disciplines by increasing the interoperability and consistency of
software descriptions and by providing examples that illustrate the utility of
interoperable software repositories for citation, discovery, archiving and
preservation of scientific software. Research relies heavily on scientific
software, and a large and growing fraction of researchers must now develop
custom software to conduct their own research. Despite this, infrastructure to
support the preservation, discovery, reuse, and attribution of software lags
substantially behind that of other research products such as journal articles
and research data. This frustrates the progress of science in several ways:
lacking a way to discover and access software written by other researchers means
that multiple teams must re-invent the same wheel. Limited re-use or
accreditation of software also discourages researchers from investing more time
to improve the performance, reliability or usability of the software they write.
This lag is driven not so much by a lack of technology as it is by a lack of
unity: existing mechanisms to archive, document, index, share, discover, and
cite software contributions are varied among research disciplines and among
software archives, and rarely consistent with best practices. The project will
convene key stakeholders from software and data repositories to address this
issue by aligning existing software metadata approaches. This alignment of
software documentation will increase the efficiency and scale or research across
disciplines, and simplify the process for researchers to collaborate on
interdisciplinary projects.

This project will have three distinct phases:

1. Define a crosswalk table between exiting metadata schema for software 2.
Develop prototype applications illustrating the value of crosswalk metadata 3.
Assess and communicate impact of results.

The researchers will convene a meeting of repository and science stakeholders to
harmonize approaches to software metadata. Rather than try and define yet
another standard, they will map the correspondences between standards already in
use -- a Rosetta stone of software metadata. In this process, the investigators
will identify metadata use cases that have guided existing software metadata
descriptions (e.g. more or different metadata may be needed to install software
than to cite it, and even more to extend it), and then agree upon which metadata
concepts are needed for each use case. This phase will identify some use cases
that are not fully supported by existing software repositories (for instance,
Zenodo is interested in associating software with funders as a use case but does
not recognize funder identifiers yet). This will set the stage for the second
phase where the crosswalk table will be used to harmonize the implementation of
software metadata in three major repositories that support software deposition
(KNB, Zenodo, Figshare). The researchers will modify the software and provenance
metadata terms used in the DataONE federation to be interoperable with the
crosswalk, and create a tool for generating and uploading software with this
metadata to the KNB repository (a member repository of DataONE). Collaborators
will extend the existing integration between the software repository GitHub and
the data repositories Zenodo and figshare to provide interoperable software
metadata. In the final phase, the team will conduct an assessment with
researchers at a relevant scientific meeting to evaluate the effectiveness of
the crosswalk for the identified software use cases and will summarize results
in a scientific paper.