* 1549989
* EAGER:Renewables: Reversing the Death Spiral: Sustainable Integration of Renewables and Storage in Distribution Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2017
* Lang Tong, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/2017
* USD 300,000.00

This research develops new models and methodologies that address integrating
renewables and storage in distribution systems with the goal of reversing a
"death spiral" resulting from integration into the power grid of consumer-based
renewable generation sources such as solar and wind, as well as distributed
energy storage. The death spiral refers to a situation in which unplanned
integration of renewables and storage may drive the power grid toward a
suboptimal operating situation that is costly, if not impossible, to correct.
This project directly addresses this major obstacle to large scale integration
of renewable generation; it is expected that resolving this problem will have
major societal benefits. A key innovation of the approach is the development of
new integration models in which the utility owns and operates renewable
integration and storage operations. With a coordinated integration of
distributed renewable resources, the proposed integration model is able to
harvest renewable resources efficiently and, at the same time, provide more
economic benefits to consumers than what can be achieved by consumer-based
integration schemes. The expected findings will provide insights and general
guidelines for regulatory policy making for the future power grid. It has the
potential of providing insights allowing regulators and industry to reverse the
death spiral referred to above. The multidisciplinary nature of this research
will provide a rich experience for graduate students and will enrich the
undergraduate curriculum.

Utility-based integration models and hybrid models involving both utilities and
consumers are proposed and analyzed. Using a game theoretic approach,
interactions between utilities and consumers are characterized and fundamental
tradeoffs between retail profit and consumer surplus are quantified. Pareto
fronts of achievable tradeoff between retail profit and consumer surplus under
different integration models are characterized, from which optimal renewable
integrations and storage operations are developed. The project also addresses
practical issues involving various uncertainties and the lack of public
information in the interactions of multiple service providers. New online
learning techniques are developed for optimal dynamic pricing of retail
electricity. The research project advances the state of the art in theory and
practice and helps to establish an economically viable and operationally secure
pathway toward sustainable integration of clean energy sources.