* 1549881
* EAGER: Renewables: Collaborative Research:  Foundations of Prosumer-Centric Grid Energy Management
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2018
* Harold Vincent Poor, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Anil Pahwa
* 08/31/2018
* USD 100,000.00

This project considers the interaction of prosumers with the power grid using
prospect theory, a seminal contribution to behavioral economics that won the
Nobel Prize (?prosumer? refers to an electricity consumer who also takes the
role of a producer and seller of electricity). Prospect theory gives a
methodology for understanding people?s economic choices based on their actual
behavior and their assessment of potential gains and losses versus the assessed
levels of risk. Prospect theory thus helps one to understand the actual dynamics
of economic choices, without assuming that the outcomes that might be predicted
using game theory must actually come to pass. The project takes the stand that
achieving a sustainable smart grid requires transforming today?s power grid into
a prosumer-centric grid in which a significant portion of energy stems from
renewable sources and other prosumer-owned devices. The success of this vision
is contingent on large-scale, active prosumer participation in energy
management. However, just because such participation can be of significant
benefit to participants, it cannot be assumed that prosumers will actually
become fully involved in the smart grid. Empirical data shows that, despite its
exciting prospects, the widespread adoption of the smart grid has been hindered
by modest user participation. Motivated by emerging grid scenarios, this project
employs the mathematical framework of prospect theory to study smart grid energy
management. The results of the project will advance multiple disciplines
including power systems, game theory, economics, and cognitive psychology. The
behavioral experiments will pioneer the generation of new real life models for
user participation in energy management. This interdisciplinary research will
provide necessary mathematical foundations to expedite the realization of a
prosumer-centric, sustainable smart grid vision. The developed techniques will
provide a fundamental understanding of the role of prosumers in the smart grid.
It can also lead to new economic and regulatory grid protocols and policies. A
software tool will create a new platform for participation in smart grid
research and education. The unique marriage of smart grid design and cognitive
psychology will offer an innovative educational opportunity to involve graduate
and undergraduate students from both engineering and psychology via new and
existing courses as well as participation in behavioral experiments. Outreach
events targeted at high school and minority students will be
organized.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is ample evidence (anecdotal and
otherwise) that decision making in real life is often guided by perceptions that
deviate from the precepts of standard game theory. Using prospect theory to
understand the role of such users? perceptions in the smart grid, an
increasingly prosumer-centric system, is a stepping stone toward accelerating
its adoption. Preliminary investigation of prospect theory in energy management
reveals that deviations from standard game theory can lead to undesirable grid
performance, thus necessitating new prospect theory schemes cognizant of real
life prosumer behavior. Using prospect theory, a novel framework is introduced
to fundamentally understand the role of prosumer participation in energy
management. Due to an interdisciplinary mix of theory, algorithm design, and
cognitive psychology experiments, this research will yield the following key
innovations: 1) new fundamental results on the impact of prosumer behavior on
energy management, 2) prosumer-centric, sustainable energy management schemes
and associated pricing mechanisms that optimize grid operation by tightly
integrating the effect of user behavior and subjective utility perceptions via
novel prospect theory notions, 3) a new stochastic prospect theory game class
for grid-aware energy management that accounts for grid dynamics and uncertainty
due to factors such as renewables, and 4) real life cognitive psychology
experiments coupled with a new software platform that will yield new, realistic
behavioral models for smart grid prosumers.