* 1549973
* Collaborative Research: EAGER: Energy Harvesting via Thermo-Piezoelectric Transduction
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2015,11/30/2016
* Scott Thompson, Mississippi State University
* Standard Grant
* Eyad Abed
* 11/30/2016
* USD 134,925.00

This collaborative, EArly-concept Grants for Exploratory Research (EAGER),
research project focuses on a design concept that may allow energy harvesting
from waste heat, by converting the heat to electrical energy. The vision of the
research is to use heat pipes, in particular so-called oscillating heat pipes
(OHP). Inside an OHP, a series of serpentine-arranged mini-channels exist that
are partially filled with a working fluid. There has been limited, if any,
research in the area of energy-harvesting through the use of heat pipes. Heat
pipes provide salient mechanical work within their structure due to vapor
expansion and fluid flow. This research aims to harvest this internal work by
augmenting the OHP heat transfer to the environment through utilization of a
specially designed energy harvesting system that enables generation of
electrical work through a piezoelectric effect, namely thermally-actuated
piezoelectric transduction (TPT). This research project will contribute to
better understanding of the physics and application of TPT, improved
understanding of piezoelectric-materials, energy-harvesting using OHPs. This
research will bridge research perspectives and approaches from the thermal/fluid
sciences and power generation. Potential applications for these devices are
numerous, especially for waste heat recovery and/or renewable power generation.
The technology and basic science derived can result in: off-grid power
generation for communications devices (e.g., third world country cellular phone
charging and defense applications), more energy-efficient electronics packaging
schemes, and new opportunities for high heat flux thermal energy harvesting.
Geothermal temperature gradients may also be exploited for constant, renewable
power generation via the implementation of ultra-large OHP/TPT systems or
OHP/TPTs aligned in-series. This collaborative project will support both
graduate and undergraduate researchers that have been traditionally
underrepresented.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The OHP has yet to be
investigated as a means to destabilize natural temperature gradients for the
purpose of establishing a Stirling cycle, nor has it been investigated as a
means for power generation. A unique opportunity for using TPT is atop a flat-
plate oscillating heat pipe (OHP) - a device that effectively transfers heat via
cyclic phase change of an internal working fluid - giving rise to an oscillatory
temperature field on its surface. The research will investigate the use of both
TPT and OHPs for combined 1) power generation/energy harvesting, and 2) highly-
efficient heat transfer. To accomplish this, a unique energy harvester, which is
directly attached to the OHP surface, will be designed and will consist of a
micro-sized heat sink, encapsulated gas and suspended, spring-resisted
piezoelectric material. An aggressive schedule of well-designed experiments is
planned to determine how the effectiveness of TPT depends on OHP and energy
harvester design. A highly-coupled set of governing equations will be defined
and solved by joining common OHP thermo/fluidic models with the constitutive
equations of piezoelectric materials. Numerical multi-physics software will be
utilized to simulate the convective air flow in the energy harvester and
electricity generation inherent to the proposed method for OHP-integrated TPT.
The mechanical response and fatigue of various piezoelectric materials for TPT
will be evaluated. Thermoelectricity generation via the proposed OHP/TPT is a
unique and potentially transformative approach to enthalpy-to-electricity
conversion as the OHP/TPT can efficiently transfer heat from one location to
another (with ultra-high thermal conductivity) while also generating power.