* 1549642
* Earth Resources Engineering Workshop; Washington, DC; October 5-6, 2015
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2015,04/30/2017
* Charles Fairhurst, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 04/30/2017
* USD 32,674.00

A one-day Workshop will be held October 6, 2015, at the National Academy of
Sciences, Washington, DC. A primary goal is to develop a dialog between
representatives of government and the Earth Resources Engineering Section of the
National Academy of Engineering with respect to Research and Education in
Subsurface Engineering. The discussion will focus primarily on two topics: 1)
public fear that hydraulic fracturing may trigger damaging earthquakes, and 2)
the future of mining and rock mechanics research and education. Used with great
success in the petroleum industry since the 1940s, hydraulic fracturing is a key
element of several engineering initiatives such as geothermal energy,
underground storage of carbon dioxide, and disposal of wastewater from drilling.
The workshop will explore the factors that influence the triggering of
earthquakes by hydraulic fracturing, and the research that is needed to develop
sound guidelines for the safe application of this technology. Minerals are the
essential foundation of national economies in the United States and other
developed nations, and are of vital importance to national security. Research to
develop improved safety and efficiency is now critical as mines become deeper
and challenges of safety, economics and environmental concerns rise. In decline
at US universities for several decades, Mining Engineering is now close to being
eliminated as an accredited engineering major. The workshop will seek to
identify a realistic path forward for the U.S. to maintain mining engineering
expertise. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The past several decades have seen numerous
suggestions that the subsurface may provide solutions to a number of important
national problems. The geothermal energy resources of hot rock at depths of the
order of 5-6 km are enormous, provided a network of interconnected fractures can
be created and fluids circulated to extract the heat economically. This requires
understanding of coupled thermo-hydro-mechanical-chemical (THMC) processes and
observation of the initiation, extension, and adaptive control of the fracture
network. Essentially the same borehole technology will be needed for other uses
of the subsurface, such as CO2 sequestration, disposal of drill wastewater,
borehole mining. All these uses require a better appreciation of how the local
geology and tectonic/gravitational force environment affects the potential for
stimulation of damaging earthquakes. A significantly more detailed understanding
of the engineering behavior of rock at depth is needed than currently available.
This workshop will identify research needs to address these problems, while
informing the broader engineering community of the potential impact of rock
mechanics research on engineering grand challenges. The workshop will also
address the problems related to the diminishing number of U.S. universities that
offer a degree in mining engineering and courses in rock mechanics. With the
increasing importance of rock mechanics in the solution of many critical
problems, it is essential that the U.S. produce more, rather than fewer,
engineers trained in this discipline. The workshop will explore potential
strategies for addressing this issue.