* 1549182
* SBIR Phase I:  Novel chemistry for enhancing drought tolerance in field crops
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2016
* Eric Davidson, Asilomar Bio, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Ela Mirowski
* 12/31/2016
* USD 150,000.00

&lt;p&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is to enable
American farmers to adapt to climate change by reducing the water footprint of
major commercial crops. Drought is one of the most significant risks for
farmers, rural economies, and the food supply chain; limited precipitation and
irrigation acts as a major constraint on crop productivity. Climate change
threatens to further exacerbate crop losses due to drought by shifting rainfall
patterns and weather conditions across Americas most productive agricultural
regions. In 2012, US corn production was 20% below the previous year due to a
severe drought. Even in cases where drought related crop losses are not borne
directly by farmers, the effects are felt by the US economy. The Federal Crop
Insurance Program paid out a record $17.3 billion in insurance claims during
2012. While there have been promising advances in field management and in the
development of drought tolerant crops, there is currently no crop protection
product that enhances the robustness of field crops to periods of water-
limitation stress. A product that could be applied to fields to reduce
irrigation needs and boost yield would be first in class.&lt;/p&gt;
&lt;p&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will
develop chemistry for enhanced drought protection and yield enhancement in major
field crops, with a focus on corn. Abiotic stress (drought, salinity, and heat
stress, among others) is a major limitation on harvest yield, with few tools
available for growers to enhance yields and minimize risk in the face of limited
water. Asilomar Bio has discovered a synthetic compound that enhances crop
tolerance to abiotic stress and enhances yield in field trials. The novel active
ingredient is applied as a foliar spray or seed treatment to crops. The
objectives of this proposal are the determination of structure-activity
relationship of this novel class of compounds and benchmarking the dose-response
behavior of a representative compound in the field. Successful completion of
research objectives will result in enhanced understanding of stress protection
and water use in corn as well as provide context for commercialization of this
technology.&lt;/p&gt;