* 1549659
* STTR Phase I:  Development of a Novel Microfludics Device to Optimize Sperm Retrieval and Storage from Microsurgical Testicular Sperm Extraction
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2016,06/30/2017
* Raheel Samuel, NANONC inc
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 06/30/2017
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is (1) the significant
improvement in fertility rates among infertile couples and especially for
patients suffering from non-obstructive azoospermia (NOA), which is found in 1%
of the male population and in up to 20% of male infertility cases and is
associated with non-measurable levels of sperm in the ejaculate. Automated
systems to collect sperm from these samples would greatly reduce costs and
failure rates. (2) Second, the proposed devices will be used in the preparation
of insemination samples to isolate high quality sperm, or in the removal of
white blood cells from a heterogeneous sample to yield sperm samples that are
suitable for intrauterine insemination, again leading to higher fertility rates
and lower costs for infertile couples. (3) The sperm processing market could be
substantial: If approximately 50% of labs in the US used this system, the total
cycles per year would be approximately 44,000. At a cost of $250/each, the
market for NOA alone would be $11M. The utility in insemination and microTESE
come not only in its potential effectiveness to isolate sperm but also in the
decreased workload on technicians. The number of inseminations is much higher in
the US and would add additional room for market expansion of at least $30M/year.
Rates of insemination are much higher in Europe and growing in Asia, suggesting
the overall market could readily be more than
$100M/year.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Technology Transfer
Research (STTR) Phase I project is about improving current clinical procedures
for Microsurgical Testicular Sperm Extraction (mTESE) when used with patients
suffering from non-obstructive azoospermia (NOA), which includes a large
proportion of infertile men (10% - 20%). For patients suffering with non-
obstructive azoospermia (NOA), obtaining sperm presents a great challenge, and
thus, the rate of pregnancy for this group of infertile patients remains low.
mTESE procedures currently rely on manual microscopic inspection of testicular
tissue specimens to identify sperm in a mTESE sample that has very low
concentration of sperm cells and a large concentration of other cells and
bioparticles. Hence extracting sperm from mTESE samples is a long, inefficient
(low sperm recovery) and labor-intensive process. This project involves the
development of a microfluidic system that improves sperm recovery rates
specifically from NOA patients. The microfluidic system would utilize label-free
cell separation technologies to separate sperm from other cells/bioparticles and
then sort the separated sperm in groups for cryopreservation. The final outcome
of the project would be a system that inputs a mTESE sample and outputs groups
of sperm that can be cryopreserved at the group-level.