* 1549466
* SBIR Phase I:  High-throughput manufacturing of silicon blades with smart cutting edges
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2016
* Matthew Ombaba, Atocera, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 12/31/2016
* USD 149,997.00

The broader commercial potential of this project is in the realization of
atomically sharp disposable blades through standard semiconductor processing
techniques used by the microelectronics industries. The technology will address
the need for low cost blades used in cataract surgery, tissue cutting and hair
removal applications. In cataract surgery, a single-use blade is desirable.
Conventional metal blades experience oxidation and become blunt over time due to
micro-chipping, rusting and burr formation. However, surgeons in most countries
reuse them on several patients due to their high cost (around US$50 per blade)
resulting from a serial manufacturing process. Such practice may lead to a risk
of compromising patient safety. This project will result in massively parallel
blade manufacturing processes to produce several thousand identical blades from
a single wafer with atomic level sharpness and ultra-long durability at a
fraction of the cost of their existing counterparts. Similarly, existing shaving
blades technologies rely mainly on increasing the metallic blade count in a
single shaver for improved shaving experience. Silicon based blades offer
exceedingly high levels of shaving precision and closeness, all with a single
blade unit. Atomic sharpness achieved via micro-fabrication processes will play
a key role in breaking the status quo in the saturated hair removal blades
market. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; This Small Business
Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will pursue electrochemical
micromachining of silicon and ceramics to fabricate micro-ridges with atomically
sharp cutting edges. Unlike the sequential polishing process using harsh
chemicals for the fabrication of current blades, this project will develop and
employ massively parallel microfabrication processes commonly used by the
semiconductor industry. Commercialization of such blades will depend on
addressing several technology gaps that this project will address. These include
the (a) demonstration of full scale versions of the prepared models using high-
throughput fabrication protocol based on a combination of wet and
(photo)electrochemical etching techniques along with thin film coating
processes, (b) establishment of blade manufacturing processes, (c) obtaining
initial data from mechanical testing to establish the integrity of the
microfabricated blades, (d) developing functional photo(electrochemical) etching
equipment to perform deep anisotropic cuts on semiconductors, (e) conducting lab
tests for mechanical and maneuvering stability, and (f) process development for
large-scale production. The project will enable high-throughput manufacturing of
ultra-sharp semiconductor and ceramic based cutting tools with associated safety
features and potential integration of a variety of electrical, optical and
mechanical sensors that are not possible in metal based blade platforms.