* 1549726
* EAGER: Vertebrate mortality and decomposition hot spots: soil microbial community dynamics and nutrient cycling.
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2018
* Jennifer DeBruyn, University of Tennessee Institute of Agriculture
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 12/31/2018
* USD 234,153.00

Animals have limited life spans, and mortality is a common occurrence in
terrestrial ecosystems. What happens in nature to the body of an animal after it
dies? From an ecological perspective, a decomposing animal creates a localized
pulse (hot spot) of nutrient-rich organic matter, fertilizing the soil below.
Following death of an animal, the environment may be inoculated with
microorganisms from the animal's microbiome. Very little is understood about the
ultimate fate of these nutrients and microbes - how much is retained in soil,
recycled, or released into the atmosphere? These questions are important in
terms of understanding how nutrients are produced and consumed in ecosystems,
and evaluating the importance of carrion inputs across larger scales, following
massive die-offs, for example. The focus of this study will be to determine the
impact of decomposing animal carcasses on nitrogen (N) levels in soil. As a
result, this research will contribute to our understanding of terrestrial
nutrient fluxes, and will inform or expand existing models through the inclusion
of carcass-derived inputs. This research will provide foundational knowledge
about a natural decomposition process and the abiotic and biotic controls on
nutrient recycling. This knowledge has potential applications for agriculture
(livestock mortality disposal) and forensic science (time since death
estimations). This project will also provide interdisciplinary training for a
postdoctoral scholar in microbial ecology, soil biogeochemistry, forensic
anthropology, molecular biology, and bioinformatics and will support and
undergraduate trainee and the development of new curriculum on soil and
environmental science for Tennessee 4-H programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research will provide a comprehensive evaluation of N flux in carcass
decomposition hotpots. Preliminary research shows that microbial communities in
soils below a decomposing carcass include both native soil taxa and introduced
taxa from the carcass or insects that visit the carcass. These communities
change in both composition and function, shifting to more anaerobic metabolic
strategies over time. The objective of this research is to determine the fate of
N in carcass decomposition hotspots, and elucidate how abiotic (temperature and
oxygen) and biotic (decomposer community composition) factors control the fate
of N. The objective will be met using a combination of lab mesocosms and field
decomposition experiments with carcasses, manipulating abiotic and biotic
controls and documenting the effects on N pools (nitrate, ammonia, nitrous
oxide) and fluxes (nitrification and denitrification rates). Decomposer
microbial communities will be examined using functional gene expression of N
cycling genes and sequencing. This will reveal the types of microbes involved in
decomposition and the mechanisms by which they are transforming nutrients.
Ultimately this research will provide an understanding of the postmortem fate of
vertebrate nutrients in terrestrial ecosystems.