* 1549413
* SBIR Phase I:  Miniaturized, Low-Power Monitor for Particulate Matter
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2016,01/31/2017
* Justin Black, Aerodyne Microsystems Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 01/31/2017
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will investigate
the feasibility of a miniaturized, battery-powered, and inexpensive sensor to
provide real-time mass measurements of airborne particulate matter (PM). PM is
one of the leading global risks for mortality. There is an urgent need for
inexpensive devices that monitor PM pollutants such as diesel exhaust,
combustion sources, environmental tobacco smoke, power plant emissions, and
nanoparticles. The proposed technology has important societal impacts by
enabling those seeking to improve air quality in the environment, home, and
workplace. The PM mass monitor provides a compelling value proposition by
offering stand-alone operation, direct measurement of PM mass, and at least an
order of magnitude reduction in size, power, and cost in comparison to existing
aerosol monitors. Markets for the instrument include ventilation control,
industrial hygiene, power plant monitoring, cabin monitoring in aircraft and
automobiles, internet of things (IOT) applications, and indoor air quality
monitoring. The 2015 worldwide addressable market for the technology is over
$200 million annually.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this
project is in leveraging the thermophoretic deposition of particulates from a
sample stream onto a thin-film bulk acoustic wave resonator (FBAR), and the
determination of the mass deposited by measuring the frequency shift of an
electronic oscillator. Successful completion of this work will improve the
sensitivity and stability of the FBAR detector, demonstrate transformative
techniques to collect and analyze PM, reduce the monitor size and power
consumption, and improve the interface electronics. The anticipated technical
results include an improvement in the level of detection and a reduction in
power consumption and form factor of the sensor. This project will contribute to
scientific knowledge and understanding by investigating novel PM collection
techniques and enabling a highly-sensitive, portable, and low-cost particulate
matter mass monitor suitable for environmental monitoring and epidemiological
studies of aerosol exposure. Coupling the sensor to a cell-phone or other
wireless device could enable dense temporal and spatial wireless measurements of
air quality as well as personal exposure assessment.