* 1549697
* STTR Phase I:  SunDIAL: Slot DIscovery And Linking
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2016,08/31/2017
* James Kukla, RedShred
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 08/31/2017
* USD 247,500.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) Phase I project results from it improving the accessibility of
documents and providing a powerful tool for consumers and businesses to enable
routing, categorizing, and understanding of documents. By producing summaries of
opportunity documents for business developers, SunDIAL will accelerate pipeline
and business development decisions for businesses of all sizes through
automatically generated, SaaS-delivered structured summaries. SunDIAL will
advance the ability of practical information extraction systems by generating
summaries from any text document. Other broader impacts and benefits include
furthering the technology to empower individuals to get the gist quickly of
formal documents such as consumer credit contracts, health insurance policies,
complex industry request for proposals, grants and other difficult-to-read
documents. A successful outcome will allow users to quickly assess documents
through infobox displays, triage documents on mobile devices, write rules to
sort or filter them automatically, and review key information before ever
opening the document.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) Phase I project will discover unsupervised and unrestricted
slots and fillers (attributes and values) to construct structured summaries
based on keywords and hidden patterns in document collections. SunDIAL goes
beyond the state of the art by not requiring a manually crafted catalogue of
slots and complements supervised approaches by discovering new slots. While
conventional Natural Language Processing (NLP) approaches are effective on well-
formed sentences, the techniques described here are effective for semi-
structured content such as section headers, lists and tables. Furthermore, NLP
based approaches for fact extraction and text summarization are primarily
lexical, requiring further processing for disambiguating and linking to unique
entities and concepts in a knowledge base. SunDIAL further advances the state of
the art by eliminating these steps as it identifies keywords and links to
knowledge base concepts as a first step in the discovery process. Linking
concepts to a knowledge base provides the additional advantage that the terms
can be explicitly mapped to semantic concepts in other ontologies. SunDIAL will
lead to advances in knowledge discovery, and advance the methodologies for
information retrieval, information extraction, slot filling, and knowledge-base
population.