* 1549133
* SBIR Phase I:  Biomaterials and Chemistry to Enhance the Delivery of Medicines in the Body
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2016
* Jose Mejia Oneto, TAMBO, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 12/31/2016
* USD 179,999.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to improve a new technology to deliver
medicines in the body. Local medical problems are issues that affect only a
specific body part (e.g. left knee pain). These challenges are regularly treated
with medications that go everywhere, but only a tiny fraction of the dose given
actually reaches the area where they are needed. An ideal drug would concentrate
only at its intended target and have no interactions with the rest of the body.
Unfortunately, the vast majority of medications in the market are not ideal
medications. Before starting a patient on a given therapy, the beneficial
therapeutic effects and risk of deleterious side effects of a given medicine
needs to be carefully evaluated by the patient and the physician. Indeed, the
safety of a drug is one of the most critical hurdles for market approval and
contributes to the high cost of drug development and
prices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project recognizes that physicians and
surgeons often have temporary access to disease sites of local medical problems
via biopsies, local injections and surgeries. Our drug delivery technology
allows an implantable material to mark the spot of the body where the procedure
was done. For the next couple of weeks after implantation of the material, when
the patient takes a medication that usually goes everywhere, the dose is now
concentrated and activated at the specific area of the body where the material
was implanted. One of the technical hurdles being addressed is determining how
the technology is compatible with different drugs. The project will determine
our ability to release different drug payloads in vitro and in vivo. These
advances will bring medicines closer to ideal medications for local medical
problems, improving drug approval rates and reducing the cost of drug
development.