* 1549544
* Collaborative Research: Streaming and Steering Applications: Requirements and Infrastructure (October 1-3, 2015)
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2017
* Lavanya Ramakrishnan, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Edward Walker
* 08/31/2017
* USD 47,471.00

In association with the "big data" phenomena with greater volumes of data being
generated, there has been an increase in the need to analyze and process that
data in real-time. Example sources of this data include social media, robots,
scientific instruments and simulations. Real-time analysis of "big data" holds
great promise for industry, finance, communication, first responders, and public
safety, to name just a few promising areas. Common to these applications is the
requirement to process, analyze and respond to data immediately to make "live"
decisions and steer applications. This project will organize and hold a workshop
that will lay the foundations for a common understanding of the requirements and
help the scientific community prepare for data of ever greater volumes and
acquisition velocity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will support a community
workshop to understand the class of applications that entail streaming data and
related (near) real-time steering and control. Such applications are increasing
in their sophistication, pervasiveness and scale. The goal of the workshop is to
identify application, infrastructure and technology communities in this area and
to clarify challenges that they face. Workshop participants will focus on
application features and requirements as well as hardware and software needed to
support them and will identify recommendations for NSF's production distributed
cyberinfrastructure (hardware and software) for both the short and long term.