* 1549897
* RAPID: Collaborative Research: What are the Mechanisms of Tree Recovery after an Extreme Episodic Drought?
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2016
* Katherine McCulloh, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 07/31/2016
* USD 70,466.00

The 2011 drought in Texas, Oklahoma, and eastern New Mexico was the most severe
one-year drought in the region since meteorological record-keeping began in 1895
and potentially the worst single-year drought in over 1200 years. This drought
continued through 2014 and killed a half billion trees in Texas between 2011 and
2014. Research on trees during this drought documented patterns of mortality,
photosynthesis, and water use for individuals spread across several research
sites. This project examines how these same landscapes and trees respond to
alleviation of drought. Central Texas has gone from an extreme drought in August
of 2011 to essentially no drought in July 2015, due to one of the wettest spring
and early summer periods on record. This provides a unique "natural experiment"
in which to test hypotheses about those plant traits associated with resistance
to drought and recovery from drought. A primary hypothesis to be tested is that
species that were able to maintain greater photosynthesis during the drought
will recover more quickly (i.e. will maintain greater photosynthesis and will
exhibit greater growth) than those species that were unable to maintain
photosynthesis. Because more extreme and episodic climate patterns are predicted
for the near future, this research will contribute to the understanding of how
vegetation will respond to extreme variation in water availability. This
information will be particularly useful to land managers to ensure the presence
of vegetation and the maintenance of the ecosystem services that vegetation
provides. The project also involves training of undergraduate students and
postdoctoral associates in plant stress research.

The frequency and intensity of episodic droughts are predicted to increase in
the future, and these patterns have already been observed over the last 15
years. However, little information exists about what physiological changes occur
in naturally-growing trees that survive a severe drought. Central Texas
experienced the worst single-year drought in its recorded history in 2011. That
drought continued through 2014 and killed an estimated half billion trees. In
2015, Central Texas experienced late spring and early summer rainfall that
exceeded long-term averages by 10 times. Climate predictions for the area for
the next three months are for below average temperatures and above average
rainfall. This unusual combination of climatic events provides a unique
situation in which to study vegetation responses to rapid alleviation of
drought. A major advantage this project exploits is the previous
characterization by the investigators of physiological and hydraulic conductance
responses of trees to the severe 2011-2014 drought. These same individuals and
sites will be measured for physiological parameters (gas exchange, hydraulic
parameters), anatomy, and growth to allow the comparison of measurements taken
during and after the drought. The measurements will be used to parameterize a
process-based model to predict the carbon and water status of these trees under
different moisture availability scenarios. The project has significant broader
impacts in land management and conservation of forests under extreme variation
in water availability. Undergraduate students will be involved directly in the
research, along with postdoctoral associates. The results will be used for
public outreach at two of the participating institutions relating plant response
to changing environments.