* 1549812
* iPDC: Integrating Parallel and Distributed Computing in Introductory Programming
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2017
* Michael Rogers, Tennessee Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Sushil K Prasad
* 08/31/2017
* USD 49,973.00

The widespread deployments of multicore and manycore based systems in recent
years have changed the computing infrastructure landscape. However, most
undergraduate computer science (CS) and computer engineering (CE) programs
continue to train their undergraduates to think and program sequentially, and do
not sufficiently teach parallel and distributed computing concepts. The gap is
widening rapidly between the emerging highly parallel computer architectures and
the sequential programming approach taught in traditional CS/CE undergraduate
curriculums. A few CS/CE programs offer a parallel computing class as an upper
division elective, but very few programs introduce Parallel and Distributed
Computing (PDC) in the introductory programming classes (CS1 and CS2). The
challenges are significant. CS1 and CS2 instructors are typically not trained in
PDC, instructors lack resources, and there are only a few templates illustrating
how to infuse PDC topics into the already overloaded introductory courses. The
overall goal of this project is to prepare CS/CE undergraduate students for
their future careers in light of the technological shifts towards parallelism by
improving faculty expertise in PDC and providing them templates and resources to
integrate PDC topics in introductory programming classes. Many non-CS/CE majors
in the broader STEM disciplines also rely on CS1/CS2 or equivalent courses for
their computational preparation, and thus will be impacted positively. Moreover,
the resulting PDC course modules may be employed in other computational courses
of the broader STEM disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will conduct a
hands-on training workshop on PDC concepts and programming tools for the
introductory programming course sequence. The workshop participant pool will be
instructors of CS1, CS2 or equivalent courses from CS/CE and other STEM
disciplines. The project will follow the PDC curriculum guidelines for
undergraduates from IEEE Technical Committee on Parallel Processing (TCPP).
Hands-on modules appropriate to CS1 and CS2 will be selected from successful PDC
integration efforts (some funded by NSF). The instructors will be provided easy
to integrate modules consisting of lecture slides and/or handouts, hands on
activities such as programming assignments, and quiz/test questions with
answers. The workshop will follow active learning strategies that require less
lecture and more hands-on activities. The participants will write programs using
parallel programming tools such as OpenMP and Python and Java threads, and work
on the PDC modules as their students would be required to do. After the
workshop, the participants will integrate those modules into CS1 and CS2 or
equivalent classes at their respective institutions.