* 1549404
* SBIR Phase I:  Adapting Touchscreen Devices for Motion-Disabled Users
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2016
* Mark Arnold, Arnoldware Applications LLC
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 12/31/2016
* USD 149,930.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project includes not only
assistive technology for the severely motion-disabled, who currently find it
impossible to use a touchscreen, but also many who are not officially diagnosed
with a motion disability. Initial sales to this wealthier, typically elderly, US
audience will pay &gt;$50, helping to fund company growth. Phase I experiments
will add new scientific insights in HCI. Phase I will yield a low-cost accessory
that, in large-scale production, will ultimately have a ~$10 price that is
similar to the existing market for styli and texting gloves, which are of
limited benefit to the motion-disabled, and more cost effective than accessories
such as electronic pens. This low-cost, single-chip accessory can be scaled up
in manufacturing efforts to enfranchise hundreds of millions of motion-disabled
individuals worldwide. The proposed device will be operating-system and device
independent, and will require lower development costs than competing hardware
such as electric pens. If the proposed technology were to be commercialized
successfully at a reasonable price, millions in the US (and many times that
worldwide) marginalized by the touchscreen revolution will be able to fully
participate in the innovations these devices bring to society.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project has the potential to improve Human Computer Interaction (HCI) for (~34
million US) motion-disabled users who struggle with capacitive touchscreens.
These screens assume users' fingers act as intermittently connected capacitors.
The motion-disabled are unable perform such gestures. Software-only adaptations
and the well-established accessories (styli or texting gloves) do not help the
motion-disabled. This project combines an inexpensive hardware accessory, a
custom chip and an extra-software-layer running on the touchscreen operating
system (OS). Many motion-disabled are low-income individuals who require low-
cost, single-chip accessories?yet such chips have too much parasitic
capacitance. This project is designed to 1) demonstrate the feasibility of
fabricating touchscreen accessories that reliably encode low-bandwidth
information from the motion-disabled into the signals received by a capacitance
touchscreen; 2) develop extra-software-layer applications that interface such
accessories for motion disabilities in human-subject evaluation; and 3) design a
chip for such accessories that overcomes cost and parasitic-capacitance
problems. Feedback from human-subject and electronic measurements allow
simultaneously optimization of three interrelated issues: hardware reliability,
accessory form-factor, and the extra-software-layer functionality. Results will
include subjective and objective human-subject evaluations, accessory form
factor, low-parasitic-capacitance integrated-circuit design, code, and
OS/application interfacing techniques for such accessories.