* 1549896
* EAGER: Advancing the Foundations of Systems Engineering through Multiscale Decision Theory
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2015,10/31/2017
* Christian Wernz, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Rich Malak
* 10/31/2017
* USD 200,000.00

The complexity of engineered systems, ranging from microchips to spaceships, is
growing rapidly. Current design methods and management tools used during the
systems engineering process will not be able to support this growth in
complexity. For example, it is expected that the standard practice of system
requirements guiding the design process cannot ensure maximum value creation,
and performs worse as the number of subsystems grows and their interdependencies
increase. By moving from a requirement-driven to a value-driven design approach,
this problem may be overcome. A value-driven design approach focuses on the
value the system creates for the user over the system life cycle. However, it is
unclear how this value-driven design approach can be operationalized in
practice. How should organizations adapt their management structures,
information systems and reward systems? This award supports fundamental research
to advance the theory of systems engineering from an organizational perspective.
Insight from this EArly-concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) project
will enable organizations and systems engineers to create more value in shorter
time for their customers. The outcomes of this research thus have the potential
to benefit the U.S. economy and society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of
this research is to derive fundamental insights into the system design process
by mathematically modeling the effects and interdependencies of organizational
structures, incentives, time, and information on system value creation. The
mathematical modeling approach is based on multiscale decision theory, which has
been developed to capture the multi-level and multi-period interactions of
decision makers in organizations. It accomplishes this by integrating various
analytical methods, such game theory and Markov decision processes. The research
team will apply multiscale decision theory to identify organizational structures
and incentive mechanisms that motivate and guide systems engineers and managers
towards maximum value creation. To account for the role of information and
communication in the system design process, multiscale decision theory will be
advanced by incorporating partially observable Markov decision processes,
enabling the modeling of information uncertainty and asymmetries in
organizations while quantifying the benefits of communication.