* 1549562
* The SEaRCH: Towards the Development of a STEM Education Research Consortium at HBCUs
* EHR,HRD
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2018
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias, Morgan State University
* Standard Grant
* Claudia Rankins
* 07/31/2018
* USD 71,997.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities - Undergraduate Program (HBCU-
UP) provides support to undertake an institutional self-analysis in preparation
for a Broadening Participation Research Center. Broadening Participation
Research Centers are expected to serve as national hubs for the rigorous study
and broad dissemination of the critical pedagogies and culturally sensitive
interventions that contribute to the success of HBCUs in educating African
American STEM undergraduates. This project is a collaborative effort between the
initial members of an education research consortium: Tennessee State University,
Prairie View A&M University, Morgan State University, North Carolina A&T State
University, and Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University. The
consortium of schools and team of researchers will work to plan research
activities that will lead to the formation of a research center that delineates
which individual factors, environmental factors, institutional practices,
procedures, and policies are most effective in ensuring that students
successfully complete STEM degrees at HBCUs.

Activities of this project include: implementating a strategic planning
framework built upon the broadening participation education research expertise
of the collaborating institutions involved in the development of an expanded
education research consortium of HBCUs; using evidence-based strategies to
generate a high-quality plan for the research thrusts and research methodologies
of the resulting center; and addressing the gap in the literature regarding STEM
education research results, practices and policies pertinent to student
persistence and graduation at HBCUs. The project will be guided by an on-going
evaluation and an external advisory committee.