* 1549685
* STTR Phase I:  Semisynthetic Manufacturing of Core Natural Triterpenoids from Outer Birch Bark Extract
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2016
* Pavel Krasutsky, Betula Extractives, LLC.
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 12/31/2016
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Technology Transfer Research Phase I project is to facilitate the manufacturing
and commercialization of natural and semi-synthetic products namely core lupane
triterpenoids (betulin, betulinic acid, lupeol, betulinic aldehyde) as
precursors for drug development and other industrial applications. Research
shows that these triterpenoids can be useful agents for prevention and treatment
of cancer, chronic inflammation, HIV/AIDS, type 2 diabetes, tuberculosis,
metabolic disease, as well as next generation antimicrobials, and vaccine
adjuvants. Unfortunately, the complex isolation and/or chemical synthesis of
these compounds has resulted in low scale yields at costs of more than
US$10,000/kg. The fundamental potential of this project lies in the
demonstration of the use of certain selective organic reactions to produce these
high value compounds straight from the complex composition of the natural
extract found in the outer bark of the birch tree, a renewable, natural resource
found extensively throughout the northern climates. This approach is novel and
if successful, can result in significantly higher yields while eliminating
multiple complex synthesis steps, thus providing a large diversity of
triterpenoids that were previously not available in commercial quantities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical objective in Phase I research project is the
development of a principally new way of pure natural and semi-synthetic chemical
manufacturing from the triterpenoid extract found in the outer bark of the birch
tree. The specific objectives of this project are to develop the methods and
processes to 1) provide commercial quantities of outer bark, free from
impurities and foreign matter, 2) develop the processes to extract the natural
triterpenoids (BBE) from the outer bark and remove unwanted contaminants. 3)
Develop the synthesis processes to convert the triterpene extract to the semi-
synthetic precursors necessary with the quality and purity to be used for drug
development. This research will provide specially designed processes of bark
screening, separation and densification to provide a pure material that can be
efficiently and economically processed. Extraction methods will be developed to
remove traces of tannins, pigments, suberin, and other unwanted materials.
Innovative new ways for the straight semisynthetic production of the
triterpenoids directly from BBE, will be developed to lead to the creation of a
large scale production process for triterpenoids as fine chemicals.