* 1549297
* SBIR Phase I:  Development of a radiometric receiver for 183 GHz.
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2016,06/30/2016
* Marian Klein, Boulder Environmental Sciences and Technology, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 06/30/2016
* USD 150,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is in improving and
simplifying weather observations from various platforms, such as an unmanned
aircraft, small satellites in orbit, a buoy in the middle of the ocean or from
the ground, even in a remote location. The targeted customer for the radiometer
receiver is anyone who desires a more detailed, localized, short term forecast.
Such customers include meteorological organizations, both private and
governmental, operators of renewable energy plants ? onshore and offshore wind
farms or solar power plants, future unmanned or robotic aircrafts that observe
the atmosphere, military, and others. Sensors built with these receivers can
also contribute to remote detection of in-flight icing danger in general
aviation. Our sensor will simplify observations from small aircraft, piloted or
unmanned, thus allowing new observations of clouds, their water or ice content,
and the local thermodynamic status of the atmosphere. Such observations will
thus improve scientific understanding of clouds and their representation in
climate and Earth system models. More broadly, this project represents a new
technological concept of sub terahertz receiver design and assembly. Users of
sub terahertz receivers include airport security (body scanners), short range
high bit rate communications, industrial testing of paper, polymer, food,
pharmaceutical and agriculture, and medical imaging.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project proposes the
development of a novel, highly integrated, low power consuming, radiometer
receiver operating around 183.31 GHz, in the vicinity of a water vapor
absorption line. The receiver architecture was chosen to improve radiometer
sensitivity, calibration accuracy, and reliability, while keeping its weight,
size, and power consumption low. The goal of the effort is to develop a sensor
that would enable wide spread weather observations. The receiver would be
relatively easy to assemble, repair and its production cost would be low,
especially for large quantities. The Phase I project is focused on a feasibility
study of the receiver design. The major receiver components will be designed and
their performance modelled. The anticipated result is a preliminary design of
the whole receiver and characterization of its operational parameters.