* 1549517
* EAGER: Predictive Entropy-based State-Space Methodologies For Early-Warning of Critical System Transitions
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2015,05/31/2019
* Fathi Salem, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Anil Pahwa
* 05/31/2019
* USD 316,000.00

The project aims at developing a potentially transformative approach and
methodologies for early-warning indicators for impending critical transitions or
catastrophic failure in engineered and biological systems. The methodologies
will employ uncertainty measures, such as various forms of entropy ( a measure
of disorder in systems), and independent signal components to predict the
impending onset of critical transitions to failure. The availability of early-
warning system indicators would profoundly impact a broad range of engineering
and natural systems. Relevant examples of engineered systems include power and
communication networks, aircraft engines, industrial robots, electronics,
machines and bridge infrastructures; examples of natural systems include
epileptic seizures, organ failures, heart attacks and brain strokes.
Specifically, predictive indicators for the impending onset of power system
failures, based on sensory measurements, is crucial for taking steps to prevent
sudden failures, including blackouts.

The focus of the research is on entropy-based dynamically predictive indicators
that give warning signals prior to the onset of catastrophic critical
transitions. In the case of engineered systems, e.g., power generators and power
systems, the approach would exploit the existence of reliable compact models for
its predictive inference. For natural systems, e.g., predicting the impending
epileptic seizures from EEG measurements, the approach would adaptively identify
a viable model while simultaneously extracting indicators for its prediction. In
both domains, the goal is to extract ensembles of the state signal's independent
components and their statistical indicators from measurement profiles to infer
the impending catastrophic transition to failure. The approach is expected to
develop a new transformative framework of entropy-based core state independent
components and fuse it into the established realm of Kalman and nonlinear
prediction ideas as well as the dynamical systems concepts of critical
transitions to bifurcations and chaos. It thus advances and integrates the
disparate disciplines of (i) statistical independent component analysis, (ii)
dynamical systems bifurcations, and (iii) recursive prediction system theory
including the Kalman and nonlinear predictors. The goal is to develop the
approach and methodologies for early-warning predictive systems, and validate
their performance on specific prototype engineering models as well as natural
(biological) systems.