* 1549061
* SBIR Phase I: An interactive video-based educational software platform for improving high school student achievement.
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2016,06/30/2016
* Alan Marnett, BenchFly Inc
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 06/30/2016
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project is focused on the
challenge of significantly improving student achievement in Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Math (STEM) concepts through the development of an innovative
video software platform. STEM fields are widely regarded as vital to a nation's
economy, but a disconnect exists between the STEM knowledge and skills that
students acquire in schools and those that they need to succeed in an
increasingly global, technology-dependent workplace. Phase I research will
enable development and testing of an internet-based video and peer review tool
that will merge the core inquiry steps of successful scientists with state-of-
the-art video proprietary technology, and allow collaboration between students
and teachers located anywhere in the country. Commercialization of this video
software technology will provide school districts with a needed educational tool
to help teachers direct and assess STEM activities, and support students as they
learn critical thinking skills and master STEM concepts, a mastery fundamental
to successful careers in science and engineering. Encouraging the growth of
students? STEM competency through this technology will encourage the growth of
scientific innovations of the future, supporting domestic jobs and a strong
financial tax foundation for our country's economic prosperity.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical innovation in this SBIR project is a video
software platform designed for STEM critical inquiry, with proprietary source
code, student peer review, teacher assessment, analytics, searchable database,
and secure class-to-class video sharing. Each video-based project requires that
students work within a framework mirroring best practices of professional
scientists: Students organize concepts in terms of hypotheses, evidence, and
analysis, and communicate their evidence-based projects to be peer reviewed.
Successful results of this Phase I project will enable a secure software
learning platform that mirrors the scientific inquiry steps of scientists, and
is designed to be used with existing Learning Management Systems (LMS). The
goals and scope of the research are to develop the interactive video player
source code that supports the educational framework and then demonstrate the
results of this platform on student achievement utilizing a standardized
achievement test. These goals will be accomplished through several tasks focused
on software development to incorporate secure account creation, peer-review
interactivity, and LMS integration, followed by demonstration of class-to-class
connectivity of the platform. A pilot study will assess the software platform's
functionality and demonstrate its potential to significantly increase high
school student critical thinking and scientific inquiry measures on a
standardized test.