* 1549512
* Intensity and Amplification of Tropical Deep Convection
* GEO,AGS
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2021
* Larissa Back, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 05/31/2021
* USD 522,055.00

This research seeks to understand the basic mechanisms which control the
intensity and aggregation of deep convection in the tropics. Deep convection
refers to the overturning motions found in cumulus clouds and associated with
showers and intense precipitation. A central issue addressed by this research is
the contrast in convective intensity between land and ocean regions, which can
be inferred from the difference in lightning flash rate per unit rainfall seen
in satellite observations from the tropics. The higher flash rate is generally
accepted as an indication that the updraft and downdraft speeds above the
melting level are are greater for convective precipitation over land, thus the
flash rate serves as a proxy for the intensity of convection. It is sometimes
assumed that convection is more intense over land due to higher values of
Convective Available Potentially Energy (CAPE), but evidence for this claim is
somewhat ambiguous. Other hypotheses have been proposed, including one that the
difference is due to the more intense surface heating that occurs over land than
ocean for the same temperature and insolation due to the dryness of the surface,
another that the heterogeneity of land surfaces is at fault, and a third that
the greater abundance of cloud and ice condensation nuclei over land are
responsible. The working hypothesis here is that greater instability over land
is in fact the cause of the intensity difference, but that a systematic
examination of the full distribution of CAPE values is required, rather than a
simple comparison of land versus ocean mean values.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Further
research would address the aggregation of convection in the tropics, meaning the
tendency of precipitating convective clouds in the tropics to occur in large
organized aggregates. The work begins from the observation that episodes of
organized convection typically start out with a "bottom heavy" structure, in
which most of the latent heat of condensation (released as water vapor condenses
into cloud droplets) occurs at low to middle levels of the troposphere. As the
convection intensifies the clouds deepen and take on a "top heavy" structure,
eventually forming a broad stratiform region near the tropopause. The PI
hypothesizes that clouds with a bottom heavy structure are effective in drawing
moisture and energy into the region, thereby intensifying convection and leading
to the development of deep convective clouds. The PI argues that this self-
amplification can be understood in terms of a "drying efficiency" which
determines the gross moist stability of the atmosphere is above or below a
critical level. The research also considers variations in the effectiveness of
this amplification between short-lived and longer-lasting convective
aggregates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work is conducted through a combination of
observational data analysis and numerical model simulations. Simulations use a
cloud resolving model, often in a channel-shaped periodic domain with an island
on one end but otherwise covered by an ocean surface. Observational data comes
from reanalysis products and weather balloon soundings, and includes an
examination of CAPE over land and oceans.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research has
broader impacts due to the value of understanding, simulating, and forecasting
the intensity and organization of tropical convective precipitation. This is
clearly an issue of local concern in the tropics, and large regions of tropical
convection can also influence weather in middle and high latitudes. A better
understanding of the aggregation and organization of convection could thus lead
to improvements in weather prediction over much of the globe. The work also has
educational broader impacts, as the project will support and train two graduate
students, thereby providing for the next generation of scientists in this field.
The PI also works with the Expanding Your Horizons (EYH) program in Madison, WI.
EYH holds a one-day conference for that provides middle school-aged girls the
opportunity to explore careers that use math and science.