* 1549619
* EAGER: Structural Development of Organometal Halide Perovskites for Thin-film Photovoltaics
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2017
* Yueh-Lin (Lynn) Loo, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Nadia El-Masry
* 08/31/2017
* USD 100,000.00

Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Nontechnical:&lt;br/&gt;The ramping energy demand - spurred
by global economic growth, and so far largely met by conventional energy sources
- will increasingly strain society through soaring oil prices, pollution, and
destabilizing climate change. Solar energy is amongst the top contenders as a
viable alternative energy source. The current front-runner for solar power
generation is crystalline silicon photovoltaics. With the promise of
substantially lower processing and manufacturing costs and rapidly increasing
efficiencies; thin-film photovoltaics based on organometal halide perovskites
promise to be attractive alternatives. Yet, there are substantial technological
bottlenecks that prevent the wide-scale deployment of thin-film perovskite
photovoltaics. Among them are device stability and the widespread variability in
performance within a single batch and between batches of devices, which have
been attributed to the morphology of the perovskite active layers. This EAGER
proposal aims to elucidate the structural development of thin-film perovskites,
the results of which should facilitate a transformative improvement in device
performance and stability.&lt;br/&gt;Technical:&lt;br/&gt;Structural
heterogeneities in perovskite thin films span multiple length scales; its
development is rich and complex and highly sensitive to processing conditions.
The structure development of thin films perovskite is simultaneously taking
place with an ongoing chemical reaction that induces the perovskite formation.
Leveraging the principal investigator's experience in decoupling film formation
and structure development in polymer and organic electrically active materials,
they will quantify the kinetics of perovskite active layer formation, with which
they will elucidate the mechanism and impart control over the process, using a
combination of in- and ex-situ x-ray diffraction as well as high-resolution
microscopy techniques. The processing-structure-function relationships gleaned
from this undertaking will bring about approaches to stabilize the desired
morphology and thus improve the stability and reliability of perovskite
photovoltaics. This EAGER project is highly interdisciplinary and vertically
integrated. The students involved will have first-hand exposure to chemical
syntheses of perovskites and their precursors; quantitative structural
characterization and analyses; and device fabrication and testing.