* 1549883
* EAGER: Renewables: Fundamental allometric scalings for distribution networks with renewables
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Ian Dobson, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Anil Pahwa
* 08/31/2019
* USD 92,481.00

In the study of many large systems that evolve through choices made by many
individuals over time, mathematical relationships have found to appear that are
very similar even in different applications. These relationships are often in
the form of so-called scaling laws, giving an algebraic relationship between
quantities that involves an exponent of one of the quantities that may measure
the size of the system. As the system size grows, another system measure will
change based on the scaling law. Such phenomena can be viewed as allometric
scalings, since allometry has to do with the relationship between growth of
parts of an organism and the growth of the organism itself. This project will
study scaling laws in electric power distribution networks, and seek to
determine whether such laws could be used to design more reliable power
distribution systems. The design variables that could be considered include
system parameters such as cable properties and structural aspects of the overall
distribution network.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Allometric scalings are nonlinear,
power-law relationships that govern system parameters and performance. Inspired
by the remarkable allometric scalings in biology, initial work by the PI in
collaboration with a colleague at Oxford University has resulted in evidence of
allometric scaling in observed data for blackouts in distribution networks.
Moreover, the initial work suggests physics and engineering design principles
that could explain these scalings and relate distribution network parameters to
its reliability in terms of the possibility that customers will be disconnected
from the grid. Distribution networks must be redesigned and upgraded to
accommodate renewable sources and new loads. The project seeks to establish and
apply the new scaling theory to help ensure the reliability of the redesigned
distribution networks.