* 1549666
* STTR Phase I:  Soft X-ray Enhanced Electrostatic Precipitator for High Efficiency Air Purification in Indoor Environments
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2016
* Pratim Biswas, Applied Particle Technology, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 12/31/2016
* USD 223,865.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer Phase I project will be the development of an air purification system
that in a single step will achieve HEPA standard air filtration efficiencies
coupled with the removal of gaseous pollutants and inactivation of air borne
pathogens while reducing the overall energy required to provide clean air. This
would significantly aid in providing cleaner air thereby reducing chances of
airborne disease transmission. The implications of this technology are even more
significant for sensitive environments such as hospitals and clean rooms where
clean air is required, but is expensive due to the high energy cost associated
with current filtration technologies. This technology would be able to overcome
current drawbacks with filtration technologies by significantly reducing the
dependence of clean air on energy consumption. The technology also has potential
applicability in other specialty markets where HEPA filters are used.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical objectives in this Phase I project are to
develop a soft x-ray enhanced electrostatic precipitator (SXC-ESP) system for
the co-removal of particles, gaseous pollutants, volatile organic compounds and
the inactivation of pathogens from contaminated air streams. The project will
address significant scientific challenges associated with air purification by
providing a mechanistic understanding of the ultrafine (nanometer sized)
particle charging and capture process; and of the pathways of gaseous species
oxidation and pathogen inactivation in photo-ionizer coupled coronas. This
mechanistic understanding will form the basis of the design and scale up
parameters for the technology for high efficiency air purification with low
energy consumption. This model led design will be used to fabricate a scaled up
prototype for the co-removal of particulates, gaseous pollutants, and the
inactivation of pathogens. The prototype system will be tested under field
conditions in collaboration with facilities and maintenance professionals and
experts in the filtration industry.