* 1549525
* STTR Phase I:  Visual Information eNvironment for Effective agricultural management and Sustainability
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2016,06/30/2017
* Larry Ebert, VinSense, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2017
* USD 252,100.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) Phase I project will be to develop technology to conserve scarce
water resources and improve crop management practices. Agricultural production
uses a great deal of water. In California alone, 80% percent of all water usage
goes to agriculture. As communities expand and drought conditions develop, the
competition for scarce and expensive water resources has become intense. Growers
have to be able to minimize costs and water needs by making their irrigation
practices more efficient. While new irrigation application technologies have
reduced losses from wind drift, leakages and evaporation, large amounts of water
are still be wasted as it washes through the soil past crop roots. The
technology developed in this project will allow producers to track soil moisture
movement through the soil profile and across fields. This will allow producers
to develop irrigation strategies based on the unique conditions of their soil
types and topography and reduce water waste. It will save producers money and
enable them to stay in business and meet new governmental regulations regarding
irrigation. Improvements in water management efficiencies and better crop
management practices can increase crop production, reduce food costs, and help
preserve the environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This STTR Phase I project
proposes to develop a science-based approach to optimally determine the number,
location, and depths of sensors. The goal is to accurately measure and then
model soil properties throughout the root zone and across the field for use in
precise, effective and efficient water and crop management through the use of 3D
proprietary precision soil mapping. Integrated enological, viticultural, and
statistical predictive models will relate these environmental conditions and
historical data to crop quality and volume, and long-term tree/vine health.
Additionally, a novel interactive spatial and temporal visual analytics
environment will organize the resulting massive data flows and novel predictive
models to enable stakeholders to perform precision management of crops based on
soil moisture conditions. By developing this optimal sensing strategy,
affordable, precise soil maps and data-driven soil property models, crop
composition and volume models based on environmental and historical data, and
novel, understandable predictive visual analytic tools, this project will result
in new crop science insights and environmental associations, as well as a much-
needed precision water and crop management technology.