* 1549924
* Collaborative Research: EAGER: Renewables: A function space theory for continuous-time flexibility scheduling in electricity markets
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2018
* Masood Parvania, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Anil Pahwa
* 08/31/2018
* USD 149,798.00

Current electric power grid operating procedures have worked well for many years
in compensating for the variability and uncertainty of electric power load by
programmed changes in generation. This has contributed to the reliable and
economic delivery of electric power to millions of customers. However, the
rising level of renewable generation injected into the power grid adds a higher
level of variability and uncertainty. Moreover, in several markets that are
aggressively pursuing green energy, large, fast, and unexpected power changes
are leading to frequent sudden demands for ramping power generation, so-called
ramping scarcity events, while increasing the operating cost of the systems.
This project takes a new modeling that is expected to yield algorithms for
scheduling of generation resources that is more effective for systems with high
renewable penetration. The main focus of the work is what is known as the unit
commitment problem, which involves scheduling of generating units to compensate
for variability in power demand. While currently unit commitment is considered
in terms of generation schedules that change on an hourly basis, the project
considers a scheduling over shorter time intervals to adequately track changing
supply and demand in highly variable power networks. This research can eliminate
a fundamental barrier to large-scale renewable integration, thus paving the way
to sustainable, reliable, and economic integration of renewable electricity
resources. This would contribute to reaching national targets on energy
independence and greenhouse gas reductions. While the approach offers a
radically different point of view, it does not fundamentally alter the
architecture of the wholesale market, nor the complexity of the scheduling
problem, so the integration of the project's ideas in real markets is expected
to be practically feasible.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main hypothesis in this
work is that ramping scarcity events are evidence of a severe bottleneck that
lies in the prevalent discrete time formulation of the power system operation
problem in general, and in particular to two interdependent factors: 1) the
approximation behind the structure of the unit commitment (UC) problem decision
space, and 2) the structure of the operating cost functions of the generating
units and other flexible resources, who are allowed to bid for energy but not
for ramping. The current UC decision space includes only hourly commitment
decision points and hourly generation schedules, which form a piecewise constant
generation trajectory for each generating unit. These trajectories are a zero-
order approximation of their higher-order continuous-time counterparts that
populate the actual UC decision space. In fact, the information about the
variability of the net-load is poorly captured in the hourly UC model, and a
wealth of information about the variations of the net-load is lost. In order to
address the increased ramping demand, instead of limiting the decision space to
the commitment state and generation trajectory, it would be advantageous to also
include the first derivative of the generation trajectory, i.e. the ramping
trajectory, as a decision variable among the degrees of freedom, opening the
door to receiving competitive offers that capture the joint cost of generation
and of ramping at each time instant. Recognizing that a continuous-time
trajectory bears additional degrees of freedom that could be chosen as part of
the optimization decision space, a new approach is proposed that incorporates
variables that directly represent additional degrees of freedom and can
facilitate appropriately pricing them. The notion utilized is the well-
established notion of function space that allows the UC problem to be formulated
as a Mixed Integer Linear Programming (MILP) problem, currently in vogue, but
with additional degrees of freedom to balance the variability. Preliminary
results clearly show that the introduction of explicit ramping trajectory
variables alter the priority given to different units in the schedule, reduces
the total operation cost, and considerably reduces ramping scarcity events. It
is also noticed that introducing sub-hourly decision variables is more complex
and leads to decreased efficiency compared to the function space representation,
which is tailored to increase the accuracy in representing both objectives and
constraints.