* 1549509
* STTR Phase I:  Automated object contouring methods and software for head and neck radiotherapy planning
* TIP,TI
* 01/15/2016,11/30/2017
* Jayaram Udupa, Quantitative Radiology Solutions LLC
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 11/30/2017
* USD 269,998.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) Phase I project is in the field of radiation therapy (RT) for
head &amp; neck cancer patients. RT planning involves designing a radiation
treatment regimen so that tumors are irradiated to definitive doses while
minimizing irradiation to normal structures. For devising an optimal RT plan,
target tumors and critical anatomic structures need to be accurately contoured
on medical images. In current clinical practice, organ contour delineation is
performed mostly manually due to lack of automated contouring software. This
makes RT planning error prone, hampers throughput, and does not allow re-
contouring to handle changes taking place during RT. Such changes can cause
under dosing to tumor and overdosing to normal surrounding organs. In 2015,
1,658,370 new cancer cases are estimated to occur in the US, where nearly two-
thirds will have RT. Given that there are over 2,100 RT centers in the US, there
is a strong commercial opportunity for producing an auto-contouring software
system. Expected clinical outcomes are significantly improved speed, throughput,
and accuracy of contouring compared to current clinical practice, and improved
patient outcomes and cost-savings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business
Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I project addresses a technical hurdle related
to auto-contouring in RT planning for cancer patients. Current technical
challenges for auto-contouring occur since available contouring methods have
been developed mostly for a specific object on images of a particular modality.
This project will overcome these hurdles through a novel automatic anatomy
recognition methodology which will employ anatomy models derived from patient
populations by including all major objects in a body region. The models will
codify the rich object anatomic relationship, and will exploit this information
to automatically locate and contour objects in any given patient image. The
project will have two aims. Aim 1 involves the development of the method and
prototype software for contouring major head &amp; neck organs on CT and PET/CT
images. Models will be built from already existing image and contour data of 200
cancer patients. Aim 1 outcome will be prototype software technically validated
to be accurate within 1 pixel boundary distance compared to ground truth and
requiring 3 minutes or less per study. Aim 2 will be a preliminary clinical
assessment of the software in RT planning in patients with head &amp; neck
malignancies.