* 1549519
* EAGER:  External  Injection of Electrons and Holes in As- Manufactured  Nanomaterials to Understand Environmental Hazards
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2015,05/31/2018
* Amar Nath, University of North Carolina at Asheville
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 05/31/2018
* USD 149,942.00

1549519(Nath)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is well known that ultrafine particles
regardless of their origin or chemical nature are an environmental hazard. The
question arises as to why any material when subdivided to a very fine powder
(nanomaterial) becomes hazardous. Part of it has to do with the aerodynamics of
the lungs. More importantly, in very small particles where the surface is large,
some of the atoms or molecules on the surface are displaced from their regular
sites forming what is known as "defects". These intrinsic defects often trap
stray electrons, which are loosely bound according to our proposed model. The
nature and concentration of the defects varies from material to material. No
systematic study has been made about these defects. We believe that once these
ultrafine particles are inhaled, the loosely bound electrons are released on
interaction with the lung tissue and trigger a chain of biological events
resulting in damage, which is not well understood at present. Nanomaterials like
carbon nanotubes and titanium dioxide are playing ever increasing role in modern
technology. They find application in electronics, drug delivery, cosmetics,
sunscreens, catalysts, solar cells, energy storage devices and as composites
(e.g. carbon nanotubes in Boeing 787 jet). The problem of health hazard posed by
respiration of nanomaterials by mild thermal treatment in ambient of electron
accepting (oxidizing) or electron donating (reducing) vapors is addressed to
find out which of the treatments is likely to pacify (deactivate) the defect
centers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Why are nano- and meso-sized particulates of
different origin including auto- and industrial emissions and of the widely used
materials in nanotechnology like Carbon Nanotubes, TiO2, ZnO, MgO, and SiO2
toxic to inhalation? Proposed Model: Electronically active surface defects
release shallow trapped electrons or holes on interaction with biomolecules in
the lung tissues which are primarily responsible for toxicity. Once the model is
put on a firm footing by experimentation several technologies of great societal
benefit follow logically. We propose to conduct the following experiments with a
couple of systems to check the veracity of the proposed model. For example,
ultrafine powder of Ã¢lpha phthalocyanine would be divided in three portions. One
portion will serve as reference. One of the other would be thermally treated in
an ambient of ethanol vapors, which is known from our previous work to be an
electron donor (A. Nath, "Studies of Isotopic Exchange in Solid State Healing of
Damaged Molecules" Accounts of Chemical Research 17, 90, 1984). The third
specimen would be subjected to mild thermal treatment in oxygen ambient. The
chemisorbed O2 would grab electrons and make the material hole conducting. The
three samples of phthalocyanine would be checked for toxicity by our
toxicologist collaborator. Whether the toxicity is enhanced or reduced by the
treatments would shed light on the electronic nature of defect centers. Similar
experiments with TiO2 and carbon nanotubes would be in order.