* 1549388
* SBIR Phase I:  Science-Based Networked Tools for Effective Design and Manufacture of Green Buildings and Green-Building Products
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2016,01/31/2017
* Daniel Glaser, Light Foundry, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 01/31/2017
* USD 150,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project relates glare in the
design of buildings. The construction industry is currently stifled by the
problem of glare, given the limited ability of tools to provide immediate and
rigorous analysis that could help users understand where, when, why, how much
and how to remedy glare in their buildings. This SBIR project will create the
first tool that enables users to automatically perform annual, whole-building
glare analysis on their projects without having expertise in daylighting,
modeling or simulation. This tool makes possible what was inconceivable before;
glare analysis will undoubtedly be a part of the everyday design process of all
buildings. Building owners and occupants will require glare analysis. Architects
will be able to incorporate these studies during schematic design, and still
meet schedule and budget constraints. Manufacturers will be able to refine their
products to meet the glare specifications of architects. The market for this
technology includes architects, sustainability and lighting consultants, and
manufacturers of daylighting products, building owners/homeowners and educators.
This tool will directly help make better day lit, energy-efficient buildings,
and more importantly help reduce visual discomfort for all occupants who have
learned to "accept" glare as a part of
life.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research
(SBIR) Phase I project will develop a novel glare probe to advance the state of
the art for glare analysis thousands fold, plus provide actionable information
for manufacturers to specify their products on a range of design problems.
Through the use of cloud computing, advanced algorithms in conjunction with
user-input will be researched to highly streamline robust glare analysis on a
building-wide scale. This probe will report back both interactive graphical maps
as well as several metrics of performance. Users will be able to flexibly and
quickly assign and compare different manufactured products. This technology will
be used by manufacturer salespeople to easily and robustly incorporate their
products into high-performance buildings. It also will be used internally by
manufacturers for R&amp;D purposes to evaluate and position their own products
for sales and marketing, as well as for developing their next generation
technologies. The specifier community of architects, consultants, and engineers
will also benefit from these models since they can verify if their buildings
will perform as designed. Building occupants will benefit from improved access
to usable daylight and will have less reliance on electrical lighting.