* 1549259
* Evaluating Convective Parameterization Schemes and Their Scale-awareness Using Simulated Convection in a Hierarchy of Models
* GEO,AGS
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2020
* Guang Zhang, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 03/31/2020
* USD 626,629.00

This project will yield new insight into factors governing the onset and amount
of convection. It will lead to a much better understanding of the strengths and
weaknesses of existing representations of atmospheric convection in major
climate models in the world. As the global climate model grid spacing decreases
to ~10 km or less, representing atmospheric convection in such models is a great
challenge. The proposed work to use cloud-resolving model simulation of
atmospheric convection to evaluate the accuracy and scale-awareness of widely
used algorithms for representing convection is innovative, and will pave the way
for further improving global climate models. The representation of convection
and associated clouds strongly affects the statistics of extreme events in both
current and future climates. It is also a major source of uncertainty in climate
change projection. Thus, the proposed research will contribute to the simulation
and prediction of the occurrence of natural disasters associated with climate
variability at different timescales. The project will also contribute to
educating future generation climate scientists through training of a
postdoctoral researcher and providing learning opportunities for undergraduate
summer interns.

The representation of the effects of atmospheric convection is one of the most
challenging scientific issues in climate modeling. Over the last few decades,
despite tremendous efforts going into improving the treatment of physical
processes in climate models, major problems still exist in simulating important
climate systems. These deficiencies are largely associated with the lack of
accurate representation of atmospheric convection in the models. This project
proposes to systematically investigate the criteria used for determining the
onset of convection and assumptions that determine the amount of convective
activity (known as closure assumptions) in representations of atmospheric
convection using a hierarchy of numerical models. The goal is to evaluate the
many different ways of representing atmospheric convection in state-of-the-
science global climate models, thereby identifying their strengths and weakness
and further improving them. To achieve this goal, simulations of atmospheric
convection by fine-resolution numerical models that can resolve convection are
used to evaluate the onset criteria and closure assumptions for convection.
Statistical analysis methods, including skill score calculation, lead-lag
correlation, and composite techniques, will be used to analyze the model output
data. The simulations of convection will also be used to investigate whether the
algorithms of representing convection in current global climate models can still
be used when the grid spacing of the models decreases to ~10 km or less, the so-
called grey zone scales, from the current spacing of ~100 km or larger. New
ideas and formulations for representing convection in global climate models
resulting from the analysis will be tested using the Community Atmosphere Model,
CAM5.