* 1549418
* SBIR Phase I:  Development and Evaluation of Novel Polymeric Sheet Membranes for Membrane Bioreactors
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2016,06/30/2016
* Subir Bhattacharjee, Water Planet Engineering LLC
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 06/30/2016
* USD 148,902.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research Phase I project is that it delivers a novel polymeric membrane
filtration material that is resistant to fouling by sticky organic matter
present in wastewaters treated in membrane bioreactors (MBRs). Membrane fouling
is a leading problem encountered in MBR systems, and is poorly served by
incumbent technologies. Filtration membranes made from the proposed engineered
polymer material could be significantly more fouling resistant, easily
cleanable, and display enhanced chemical resilience compared to conventional
polymeric membranes used in commercially available MBRs. The global MBR
applications market is at its early growth phase, with no clear dominant
technology and market leader. The proposed membrane technology will be highly
differentiated and is expected to substantially improve the economics and
reliability of MBRs.

The technical objectives of this Phase I research project are to develop a flat
sheet membrane with (1) high water permeability, (2) hydrophilic and super-
oleophobic surface properties, (3) high mechanical/thermal/acid/base resistance,
and (4) high oxidant resistance. Membranes with high water permeability require
lower operating pressures (lower energy requirements). Membranes that are
extremely hydrophilic are more fouling resistant, and membranes that are highly
oleophobic are more oil-tolerant. Mechanical, thermal, and chemical (acid, base,
chlorine) tolerance are critical for enabling aggressive membrane cleaning. The
oxidant tolerance is specifically desired to render the membranes functional in
high purity oxygen membrane bioreactors (HPO-MBR), where high organic loading is
maintained in persistently higher oxidation potential (high dissolved oxygen)
media. Thus, polymeric membranes with better long-term oxidant resistance could
exhibit longer lifetimes, and lower cleaning frequencies and downtime in an HPO-
MBR process. This project aims to molecularly design the side chain
functionality of the backbone polymer entity to create such an oxidation
tolerant membrane. A polymeric membrane with these specifications has never been
made, but would be very attractive to customers that need to treat wastewater
with high chemical oxygen demand (COD) in advanced MBR processes.