* 1549214
* SBIR Phase I:  Enabling Techologies for Energy-Centric Mobile App Design to Extend Mobile Device Battery Life
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2016,10/31/2016
* Charlie Hu, Mobile Enerlytics LLC
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 10/31/2016
* USD 179,999.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project can be summarized as follows. (1) Societal
impact: The PI's initial ground-breaking research on dissecting the energy drain
of AngryBirds and exposing its inefficiency was covered by over 500 news media
outlets worldwide. This interest reflects the growing importance of mobile
computing devices in all strata of society. The importance of this work is
heightened by smartphones being an important enabler of Internet access for
disadvantaged people in both developed and developing countries, and hence being
an important tool in overcoming the "digital divide". (2) Commercial impact: The
technologies developed in this project for enabling energy-efficient app design
will lead to longer battery life, which in turn leads to longer mobile eye time
of users, which ultimately translates into millions of dollars of increased
revenue to large businesses today as they transition towards mobile. The
commercial outcome of the proposed SBIR project will lead to a marketable
product and/or process. (3) Technological impact: This work will extend the
performance profiling technology foundational to the software industry to the
energy dimension, which is critical to the mobile software
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project will tackle several key technical challenges in helping app
developers to write energy-efficient apps, which holds the promise of extending
the battery life of mobile devices and ultimately improving user mobile
experience. The research objectives are (1) to develop energy analytics of
mobile apps running on millions of users' phones and incentivize developers to
adopt an energy-centric app design paradigm; (2) to develop technologies for app
energy profiling with multiple resolutions which will make it easier for
developers to adopt them in their app design process; (3) to develop energy-
efficiency programming guidelines and templates for helping app developers to
write energy-efficient apps in the first place. These objectives pose
significant technical challenges. While similar challenges on the performance
metric (e.g. running time) have been well studied for traditional software, in
particular in high-performance computing, this project will take them to the
energy dimension for the mobile software industry, which has not been attempted
before. The company expects to develop the first set of solutions to these
fundamental challenges in optimizing the energy drain of millions of mobile
apps.