* 1549695
* Renewable Energy: Solar Fuels GRC/GRS: Converting Sunlight into Chemical Energy - February 27 &amp; 28, 2015 Lucca, Italy
* ENG,CBET
* 11/01/2015,10/31/2016
* Gary Brudvig, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 10/31/2016
* USD 24,930.00

Principal Investigator: Gary W Brudvig&lt;br/&gt;Proposal No:
1549695&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Solar fuel processes harness the energy in sunlight
to convert carbon dioxide and water into chemicals fuels using catalysts
inspired by photosynthesis processes in living plants. Although this process has
the potential to replace petroleum fuels and provide an environmentally
sustainable supply of transportation fuel, present processes do not work well -
they cannot take carbon dioxide all the way to chemicals and fuels in a single
step, and the catalysts are expensive and not very efficient. More fundamental
research is needed to make solar fuels a viable technology. The 2016 Gordon
Research Conference (GRC) and the Gordon Research Seminar (GRS) on Solar Fuels
focus on identifying the progress, challenges and opportunities of
interdisciplinary scientific research for the development of new catalysts based
on nature-inspired processes to advance scientific understanding and development
of better solar fuel processes. The Solar Fuels GRC is an international
conference under US leadership, and will be held on February 28 to March 4, 2016
at the Il Ciocco Hotel and Resort, Lucca (Barga), Italy. The 2016 Solar Fuels
GRC has an associated GRS on Solar Fuels, which is a gathering dedicated
exclusively to contributions from graduate students and post-doctoral research
associates. The Solar Fuels GRS immediately precedes the GRC on February 27
&amp; 28, 2016 at the same location. This award will provide partial support for
both the GRC and GRS. The GRC program will include invited oral presentations by
early career researchers who are already showing potential for making new
breakthroughs, as well as established researchers, and poster presentations from
which some will be selected for short oral presentations. The award will be used
support the registration fees of selected participants for the GRC and the
GRS.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Solar Fuels GRC will focus on five fundamental
scientific and technological challenges needed to realize solar fuels: 1)
Efficient coupling of light-driven water oxidation catalysis with proton or
carbon dioxide reduction; 2) Understanding of charge transport processes between
photoactive components and across multiple interfaces of solid state inorganic
or molecular integrated assemblies; 3) Carbon dioxide reduction at low
overpotential, in particular to more deeply reduced products beyond CO or
formate; 4) Novel materials for light capture and photocatalysis; 5) New design
principles for biological photosystems with applications to artificial
photosynthesis and integration artificial photosynthetic components with
microbial catalysis. The Solar Fuels GRS will focus on artificial photosystems.
Given the interdisciplinary nature of these challenges, the participants include
chemists, physicists, materials and computational scientists, biophysicists,
chemical engineers, and bioengineers. Furthermore, the fundamental experimental
and theoretical topics underlying solar fuels - charge transfer, catalysis,
materials discovery, nanoscience, molecular and biological dynamics, interface
engineering, and others - discussed at the meeting go beyond just the chemical
and materials sciences. The participants will share their recent results and
ongoing effort in their specific area of work, and at the same time expose
themselves to the challenges and progress in areas beyond their immediate
expertise or field of specialization. The latter is a critical educational
aspect for graduate students, postdoctoral fellows and early career scientists
in particular who will meet and brainstorm with established scientists and
leading members of this community.