* 1549958
* Symposium on Advances in Multidisciplinary Engineering; International Mechanical Engineering Congress and Expo; Houston, Texas; November 13-19, 2015
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2015,12/31/2016
* Sang-Gook Kim, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 12/31/2016
* USD 44,240.00

This grant provides partial funding for a special Symposium to be held in
conjunction with the International Mechanical Engineering Congress and Expo,
November 13-19, 2015, in Houston, Texas. The overall event, the ASME Annual
Congress, is organized by the American Society of Mechanical Engineers (ASME)
and is perhaps the foremost conference covering the broad range of fields that
comprise mechanical engineering: applied mechanics, thermal and fluid systems,
heat transfer, materials engineering, engineering design, energy, manufacturing,
and engineering education. This Track is focused on Advances in
Multidisciplinary Engineering.

The Symposium on Advances in Multidisciplinary Engineering will highlight the
importance of the multidisciplinary approach in engineering research, design,
and education. The symposium will focus on Mechanical Behavior of Materials,
Tribology, Cutting Tools and Machining, Polymer Processing, Design Theory,
Complexity Theory and Multidisciplinary Engineering Education. A diverse and
international group of individuals from academia and industry will participate
in the panel discussions to identify future challenges and research needs from
both industrial and academic perspectives. Papers will be published on the DVD
issued by the ASME and included, along with the summary recommendations of two
discussion panels and the abstracts of the presentations that do not include
full manuscripts, in the printed proceedings.