* 1549009
* SBIR Phase I:  Ushering in a New Paradigm of Real-Time Tactile Graphics for Visually Impaired Students
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2016
* Corrine Mueller, JLG Innovations Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 12/31/2016
* USD 179,997.00

This SBIR Phase I project aims to create a new form of tactile (touch) graphics
for blind and visually impaired (BVI) students in Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Math (STEM) education. To illustrate, consider learning in a
traditional mathematics classroom without being able to see the graphics
presented on the board. This is the challenge that BVI students face on a daily
basis in STEM classrooms, and the current technologies available require
intensive manual preparation, cannot be presented in real-time causing a delay
in student learning, and are expensive. This project addresses these challenges
by developing software that translates visual images into images that can be
felt (through vibrations) and heard (through sound) on commercially available
touchscreens. This work, rooted in understanding how people see through touch
toward bettering the STEM learning experience, directly relates to NSF's
mission. This project will push U.S. classrooms into new heights of learning and
inclusion that will create opportunities for students of all learning styles to
access, participate, and succeed in STEM classrooms and professions. This will
have an economic impact through the creation of a competent, diverse U.S. STEM
workforce and will position the U.S. as a clear leader in inclusive, accessible
educational experiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The innovation in this work is in
conveying visual graphics via vibrations and sounds on touchscreens, such that
an end user could interpret information from the image without needing to see
it. Toward meeting this grand challenge, this project addresses a fundamental
barrier to touchscreen-based tactile graphics identifying and following lines.
Lines or combinations of lines form the basis for most graphic representations.
Because touchscreens are flat, however, there are no physical edges or depth
changes that can be used to represent lines, making line following on these
surfaces (and subsequently interpretation of graphical information) incredibly
challenging. Upon completion of this Phase I project, this work will have (1)
demonstrated the feasibility of the algorithms and nonvisual representations
needed to promote more efficient line following via vibrations and sounds on
touchscreens and (2) demonstrated pilot software in three classroom settings
with BVI students and their teachers to understand how the software could be
integrated into traditional educational settings. This project will contribute
to the movement of propelling touchscreens beyond visual input/output devices
and will shed new light on how individuals perceive, interpret, and learn
through vibrations, while creating a paradigm shift in what is considered today
as tactile graphics.