* 1549851
* EAGER: Properties of ultra-sparse resonant photonic lattices
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2015,02/28/2018
* Robert Magnusson, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 02/28/2018
* USD 113,489.00

EAGER: Development of ultra-sparse nanoscale resonant reflectors and
polarizers&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this proposal is to design,
fabricate, and characterize wideband resonant reflectors and polarizers that
require extremely small amounts of matter in their embodiments. Polarizers are
essential components in every-day optical systems. They are used, for example,
in liquid-crystal television screens and computer and cell-phone displays.
Similarly, reflectors are widely used in optical imaging systems,
telecommunications, and laser technology. Shown here is the remarkable and
counterintuitive fact that a nanoscale periodic layer that is 95% empty space
can reflect light at 100% efficiency across a 100-nm-wide spectral band. This
simple device exhibits impressive polarizing performance as well. We call these
elements ultra-sparse reflectors and polarizers. As these devices incorporate no
metals, they are lossless and thus operate on incident light with high
efficiency and without generating any heat. The project contributes to
fundamental understanding of this class of devices and thereby lays foundation
for its applications in common photonic systems. The proposed research project
will focus on a spectral region spanning from the visible region into the
infrared range where common telecommunication systems operate. However, it is
noted that the fundamental physics of these elements does not limit their
deployment to these regions. Hence, future developments in longer wavelength
regions such as the far-infrared and terahertz bands may enable compact low-loss
elements to be realized in these regions as well. The proposed project therefore
lays a foundation for devices with new operational regimes and attendant
possible applications in multiple practical spectral regions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We introduce ultra-sparse reflectors and polarizers based
on original new ideas in photonic device engineering. Under the project,
prototype devices will be fashioned in nearly lossless semiconductors and
dielectrics as membranes surrounded by air or glass host media. Initial focus is
on spectral operation within the 400-2400 nm region. Using available
nanofabrication processing facilities, we will fabricate representative devices
as proof-of-concept prototypes, measure their spectral response, and compare
with theoretical predictions. From a fundamental physics standpoint, it is
extremely significant that the wideband spectral expressions presented can be
generated in these minimal resonance systems. The proposed research is justified
on that basis alone. Therefore, the project has strong potential to advance the
state of knowledge and understanding in nanophotonic resonance systems. Contrary
to widely accepted views, interference between two grating-ridge located Fabry-
Perot modes is not the cause of the observed wideband reflection. Therefore, it
follows logically that the number of such modes in a grating ridge is immaterial
as far as the fundamental physics is concerned. We show that wideband reflectors
are indeed achievable with a single supported ridge mode. This fact allows us to
conceptualize resonant elements that are mostly free space with minimal physical
bulk, an extremely interesting and important finding. To improve the state of
understanding in this field, we plan on wide dissemination of the results of the
research. This will broaden the design space available to scientists and
engineers innovating within this device class.