* 1549290
* SBIR Phase I:  Breaking the Cycle of Poverty, Unsupported Educational Pathways and Stagnant Social Mobility via Mobile Apps
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2016,06/30/2016
* Renee Romero, CyclusBreak
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 06/30/2016
* USD 150,000.00

This SBIR Phase I project is targeted to support two end users; one being,
first-generation college students who do not have the resources or college
knowledge to get them through degree completion; and two, college
advisors/counselors whose caseloads have reached insurmountable proportions
making it impossible to provide quality attention to students with numbers
spiking at rates not seen before since before the 2008 recession. Using
technology that supports both users and research suggesting a need for
innovative methods will find that this project can positively impact both. In
the form of a mobile app, students are connected to their college advisor 24/7
and can send questions or concerns. Through this technology, students receive
responses, notifications, and weekly guidance directly on their smart device,
laptop or desktop. Implementing this app system not only teaches students and
breaks down college policies and procedures, it also supports college
advisors/counselors with reports and real-time data that enhances their role to
perform efficiently through digital advising. Compared to the traditional
methods currently being used today, significant differences can be found in the
number of times and ways apps can provide service in just a matter of minutes.

The product and platform during Phase I consists of 29 different native, web-
based, mobile applications to be accessed through the Google Play Store, App
Store and used on any Internet-based smart device and/or computer by post-
secondary students. The curriculum has been created from a psycho-cultural
perspective - meaning considered the beliefs, behavior, and emotions of
historically underrepresented first generation students and used that data in
developing the app curriculum. This system also serves college
advisors/counselors to generate a number of reports including number of advisor
to student connections (up to 48 times per semester), student engagement as well
as periodic and strategic grade checks. The apps are a stand-alone product with
no need to integrate into any existing system and takes 15 minutes to learn.
This app system is designed to supplement student support services via their
college advisor/counselor and overall goal is to increase student retention,
persistence, and graduation efforts. To measure usability and feasibility,
research team will use system data reports and surveys completed by students and
college advisors/counselors to interpret and summarize results to provide a
solid foundation for Phase II R/R&D.