* 1549531
* STTR Phase I:  A Closed Loop Process for the recycle of End-of-Life Li-ion Batteries
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2016
* Eric Gratz, Battery Resourcers LLC
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 12/31/2016
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer Phase I project is to improve the recycling rates and efficiency of
lithium ion (Li-ion) batteries, as well as lower the cost of cathode materials
for Li-ion batteries. This research project will accomplish these goals by
recovering cathode material from a broad spectrum of Li-ion battery regardless
of size, shape or chemistry. By lowering the cost of cathode materials, this
project has the potential to make green technologies more viable by making
energy storage more affordable. This project will seek to develop a novel method
of recovering active cathode materials from spent Li-ion batteries that does not
require any sorting. The recovery of active cathode materials from spent Li-ion
batteries is a key advancement for Li-ion battery recycling because the cathode
material is the most expensive part of the battery. This advancement is critical
because traditional recycling processes only recover individual metals from the
batteries. Recovering the cathode material also requires less energy than
synthesizing virgin cathode materials. This project seeks to be able to offer
low cost cathode materials while reducing the carbon footprint of the battery
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical objectives of this Phase 1 research
project are to improve the electrochemical performance of the recovered cathode
materials by developing methods to control the particle morphology and increase
the particle density. These improvements will increase the capacity and cycle
life of the cathode materials. The conditions that control impurity removal will
be closely monitored to facilitate producing cathode materials from spent Li-ion
batteries with impurity levels similar to virgin materials. The process recovery
efficiency will also be optimized. The process will be scaled from 1kg to 50kg
which will provide enough material for Battery Resourcers LLC to have its
material independently tested. In addition to recovering active cathode
materials from spent lithium ion batteries, steel, copper, aluminium and
plastics will also be recovered.