* 1549700
* STTR Phase I:  Refractive correction using non-invasive laser-induced refractive index change
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2016,06/30/2017
* Wayne Knox, Clerio Vision, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 06/30/2017
* USD 269,999.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I project enables the
development of laser-induced refractive index change (LIRIC) for non-invasive
vision correction in cornea and hydrogel materials. In the United States, 150
million adults use some form of vision correction, and this number is projected
to increase steadily with the aging population. LIRIC has the potential to
transform how laser refractive surgery is performed and how hydrogel-based
solutions (e.g., contact lenses, intraocular lenses) are produced. For use in
the cornea, LIRIC is a process that can alter the optical quality of the cornea
without cutting, ablating or removing tissue. Also, only a thin layer of the
cornea is treated, which allows a patient to continuously adjust their optics as
their prescription changes over their lifetime. This is vastly different from
current laser refractive surgery techniques, which are highly invasive and do
not allow for future adjustment. In hydrogel materials, traditional
manufacturing techniques use diamond-turned molds to achieve desired lens shape.
LIRIC can change the production paradigm by enabling just-in-time manufacturing,
reducing inventory costs. Additionally, because arbitrary refractive corrections
are achievable with LIRIC, patients will be able to receive prescriptions with
customized corrections. This capability is unavailable using today's typical
manufacturing methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this
project resides in operating an ultrafast femtosecond laser below the damage
threshold to modify the refractive index of corneal or hydrogel material. By
dynamically changing laser parameters (power and/or scan velocity), it is
possible to create arbitrary refractive-index profiles in cornea or hydrogel,
enabling the optical correction of myopia, hyperopia, astigmatism, presbyopia
and higher order aberrations. Research objectives for this proposal are centered
around the optimization of the LIRIC process. By investigating the impact of
laser parameters and optical design of the laser delivery system, it will be
possible to enhance the efficacy and safety of in-vivo LIRIC. In addition,
visual performance will also be assessed in eyes wearing LIRIC contact lenses.
By correcting the eye's wavefront aberrations, LIRIC optical devices are
expected to significantly improve visual quality in patients beyond the capacity
of currently available techniques.