* 1549608
* EAGER: Advancing the Engineering of Complex Systems through Automated Mechanism Design for Complex Network Formation
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2018
* Mario Ventresca, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Rich Malak
* 07/31/2018
* USD 172,396.00

Traditional engineering methodologies have proven highly effective for designing
complicated systems, such as automobiles and computers, where the sum of the
parts equals the whole. However, these methodologies are not very useful for
designing complex systems that are greater than the sum of their parts, such as
global supply chains, the Internet of Things, social networks and smart power
grids. The rapidly increasing and critical role such systems play in U.S.
social, industrial and economic infrastructures necessitates new principles for
designing complex systems in an inherently efficient, robust and sustainable
fashion. This EArly-concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) award
supports fundamental research to provide engineering principles for designing
such complex systems. Knowledge from several disciplines including computer
science, game theory, optimization and machine learning is integral to this
research. Moreover, the emphasis on complex systems will help broaden interest
in engineering research and positively impact engineering education.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The highly interdependent nature of many physical, virtual
and cyber-physical complex systems and our increasing reliance upon them, demand
a sound basis upon which to base their design. This research will provide
principles for designing complex systems by considering the problem as one of
automated mechanism design within the context of strategic Bayesian network
formation games to automatically devise incentives such that multiple global
design objectives are achieved. The local and stochastic nature inherent to many
complex systems motivates a behavior-based perspective on network formation
rules, permitting the consideration of more realistic scenarios and may provide
deeper insight into network formation itself. The research team will perform
simulations, devise models and perform analytical derivations under different
system design objectives in order to establish hidden relationships, vary
complex system size to better understand adaptation and evolution, consider
fixed system interactions to reveal the role of legacy or backbone
infrastructure on future systems and mechanisms, and integrate online machine
learning as a means for providing feedback thus allowing for adaptive
mechanisms.