* 1549561
* Oceanography Magazine Special Issue on Graduate Education in the Ocean Sciences
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2016
* Nancy Marcus, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 07/31/2016
* USD 13,000.00

In order to support an understanding of and improvements to graduate education
in ocean sciences, the PIs will develop a publication for distribution at the
Ocean Sciences Meeting (OSM) to be held from February 21-24 in New Orleans,
Louisiana. OSM is a bi-annual conference supported by the American Geophysical
Union (AGU), the Association for Limnology and Oceanography (ASLO), and The
Oceanography Society (TOS). It is the largest national gathering of ocean
scientists. Florida State University proposes to publish a special issue of the
TOS journal Oceanography with the title "Graduate Education in the Ocean
Sciences" in March 2016. This journal will be distributed at the conference and
will stimulate discussion of the challenges and opportunities facing faculty,
administrators, and students in today's US graduate programs in the ocean
sciences at this conference. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The special publication will:
(1) consider future research directions and workforce needs that depend on
advanced education, (2) describe key elements of the graduate degree and
professional development programs offered today, (3) call attention to the
unique interdisciplinary and international training opportunities offered by
these programs, (4) identify changes that may be needed to better support and
prepare today's students for the workforce of tomorrow, (5) reflect on (and
provide guidance for) meeting the challenges of recruiting and supporting a more
diverse future student cohort, and (6) catalyze discussion on what both
individual programs and the broader community can do to help our students
prepare for successful careers and life after graduate school. The proposed set
of peer-reviewed articles plus sidebars and scientist profiles will further
these objectives.