* 1549945
* EAGER: Renewables: Selling Demand Flexibility in The Future Electricity Grid
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2018
* Pravin Varaiya, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/2018
* USD 293,558.00

The future electricity grid will have significant renewable generation. This
generation is variable it is intermittent, unpredictable, and uncontrollable.
Using conventional generation to back-up this variability defeats the emissions
benefits of renewables and is very expensive. So the future grid must turn to
demand flexibility which will play a critical role to mitigate renewable
variability. Consumers will be transformed from passive recipients of power to
active participants in providing services to balance supply and demand. This
project seeks to explore business cases, market mechanisms, and pricing for
various balancing services that demand flexibility can provide. These services
include balancing supply and demand as the retail distribution level, and
reducing congestion on lines at the wholesale transmission level. The broad
agenda of this work is to support the deep penetration of renewable generation
by developing and understanding the underlying economic research issues.

The future will have geographic clusters of distributed loads, generation, and
storage. A load serving entity (LSE) represents the cluster in transactions with
the grid. The LSE buys bulk power from the transmission grid in one hour blocks.
At finer time scales, most of the power balance can be arranged internally by
modulating storage and flexible loads within the cluster. This reduces the
reliance on expensive and dirty reserve generation. We explore appropriate
market instruments such as options and forward contracts that support harnessing
demand flexibility for balancing. These instruments allow for the lead-time to
organize flexible loads, and account for the randomness in their availability.
We will study equilibria and price discovery for these instruments under various
market models. Excess flexibility or storage capacity from a cluster can also be
sold to other clusters. Bilateral arrangements between clusters can be clumsy. A
better alternative is for clusters to submit their available flexibility to the
system operator (SO). The SO conducts multi-period economic dispatch to minimize
the social (fuel) cost. It determines optimal generation schedules and demand
flexibility set points. Our value proposition here is that storage and
flexibility can reduce congestion in transmission networks. We will quantify the
system benefit of demand flexibility in this context, and explore incentive
schemes necessary for load participation, as well as the degree of coordination
and control across buses necessary to realize these benefits.