* 1549391
* SBIR Phase I:  NETUP: Boosting Mobile Internet by Combining WiFi and Cellular
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2016
* Anh Le, Shoelace Wireless, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 12/31/2016
* USD 150,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is in the area of wireless access and can be
significant given the unprecedented growth in mobile devices and services and
the scarcity of wireless spectrum. The technology developed in this project can
improve the mobile user experience in terms of speed, reliability and security.
It can also optimize the use of cellular and WiFi infrastructure, it can disrupt
pricing of cellular data and better utilize wireless bandwidth, which is
ultimately a societal resource. We have identified two main customer segments,
namely mobile users and telecom providers, which lend themselves to B2C and B2B
business models, respectively, and which correspond to large markets.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project develops a novel solution that exploits the opportunity of having
multiple network interfaces on mobile devices, primarily cellular and WiFi, in
order to improve mobile Internet. The technology will intelligently and
seamlessly combine all available networks on a device so as to offer higher
speed and higher reliability, compared to each individual network, at
potentially lower cost and with enhanced security. The solution is software-only
and consists of a client and a cloud component. The main objective of the
project is to design, develop, deploy and evaluate an android prototype, which
will run as a service in the background and will seamlessly boost the speed of
all applications on the mobile device. The key innovations lie both in the
system design and implementation and in the algorithms for utilizing multiple
paths depending on network conditions and user/operator preferences. If
successful, this will be the first bonding solution on mobile devices that
combines all aforementioned features.