* 1549716
* STTR Phase I:  Triboluminescent sensor system for quasi-distributed load sensing on wind blades for active control of wind turbines
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2016
* David Olawale, Nanotechnology Patronas Group Inc
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 12/31/2016
* USD 224,999.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer Phase I project is for the development
of a triboluminescent sensor system (ITOFPress) for quasi-distributed load
sensing along the length of a wind blade for active control of wind turbines.
According to experts, this innovation could result in a 20% increase in wind
turbine power generation through enhanced inputs for active turbine control and
better understanding of the load profile along the span of a blade. Such
knowledge is critical as wind blades become larger and are installed higher.
This new system will also help to protect the blades and other expensive
components from damage and overload, thereby reducing operation &amp;
maintenance (O&amp;M) costs and making wind energy more attractive to investors.
The installation of the ITOFPress system would increase the initial capital
costs of a large wind turbine by a very small amount (about a half a percent),
creating a strong value proposition for turbine manufacturers and operators. The
estimated market potential for this system is expected to be $1.5 billion in
2018. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this project addresses the
technical hurdles in developing the proposed sensor system. The ITOFPress
technology is highly sensitive to deformation-induced excitation and can
withstand high loading cycles. The sensor combines the light-emitting property
of ZnS:Mn with the highly desirable features of optical fibers (i.e. they are
lightweight, smaller, immune to electromagnetic interference, and have the
capacity for distributed sensing). The ITOFPress does not require external power
at the sensing location or for signal transmission to the blade's hub, which
makes it very attractive for use in wind turbines. The sensor can accurately
detect loads that are not anticipated by models which rely on inputs from inflow
sensors like anemometers. In this effort, increased sensor sensitivity will be
achieved through experimental design studies involving critical design factors.
The sensor's long term stability will be studied by subjecting samples to
flexural and compressive load cycles. Finite element analysis will be performed
to establish relationships between sensor response, sensor deformation and
applied load. Strain gages and load sensors will be used for sensor calibration.
A lab-sized wind blade will also be instrumented and tested under compressive
cyclic loading to demonstrate quasi-distributed load sensing with the new sensor
system.