* 1549144
* SBIR Phase I:  The Sentence Wheel Mobile App
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2016,06/30/2016
* Robert Meissner, ESOL Skill Builder Sentence Wheel, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 06/30/2016
* USD 150,000.00

This SBIR Phase I project will assess the feasibility of a mobile application
(App) designed as a supplemental teaching tool to aid the acquisition of English
grammar skills of adult learners taking formal ESOL (English for Speakers of
Other Languages) classroom instruction. The genesis of this projects flows from
the experiences of an experienced ESOL instructor who realized that traditional
textbooks and workbooks do not provide his students sufficient practice
developing grammatically correct sentences. A search revealed a plethora of
related English language Apps and software programs ranging from digital
dictionaries to self-paced courses. Yet none were adequate to the need. The
product envisioned will enhance and accelerate acquisition of English language
skills of the adult non-English speaking population. The anticipated result will
be an increase ESOL student retention levels and an increase classroom
throughput because students will progress more quickly. This project supports
NSF's mission to advance the national health, prosperity, and welfare and has
the potential for huge economic impact in terms of higher tax revenues, not only
due to the 10-20 new jobs created directly by the company, but much more
importantly by higher salaries that will be earned by successful graduates of
ESOL programs.

The novel hypothesis behind the Phase 1 project is that a well-structured,
engaging mobile App specifically designed as a supplemental teaching tool for
the Adult ESOL classroom can lead to improved student confidence, raise class
participation, and ultimately increase the acquisition of English language
skills. The proposed project distinguishes itself from existing (and known
planned product introductions) along two key dimensions: 1. focus on providing
contextualized content for adult students and; 2. being specifically designed as
a supplemental teaching tool. The goal of this phase 1 project will answer the
question: "Can the basic concepts be incorporated into an actual product that
achieves the desired level of user engagement and interactivity?" The primary
method of assessment will be a pilot test. The pilot test will consist of
implementing the App in at least 2 intermediate adult ESOL classes. The students
and instructors in these classes represent the targeted customers. The results
of the pilot will be assessed using a Think Aloud Study, a Student Focus Group,
and Instructor interviews. The secondary research method, intended to expand the
scope and diversity of the feedback, will be an ESOL Instructor Focus Group.