* 1549855
* STTR Phase I:  Enzymatic Synthesis of Chiral Cyclopropanes for Pharmaceutical Drug Synthesis  and Agricultural Crop Protection Applications
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2016
* Frances Arnold, Provivi Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 12/31/2016
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research Phase I project is to develop novel, breakthrough enzyme-catalyzed
reactions that can be applied to the production of pharmaceuticals and crop
protection agents. By establishing a broadly applicable biocatalytic alternative
to produce an important class of compounds called chiral cyclopropanes, Provivi
will create safer, cleaner, and lower cost synthetic routes. In most cases the
application of this new biocatalytic reaction will reduce the number of steps
and lower the required capital investment for the synthesis of these key
building blocks. The new enzyme technology being developed in this research will
improve the synthesis of both existing drugs and compounds in current drug
development pipelines. Further applications are envisioned in the production of
new crop protection agents. The enzymes being developed have the advantage of
being optimizable for each specific target product using modern molecular
biology methods. Furthermore, performing the reactions in aqueous conditions
will reduce the need for organic solvents, improving the sustainablility of the
processes. Replacing existing chemical routes with the more efficient and
sustainable enzyme-catalyzed steps will reduce the cost and improve the purity
of many advanced pharmaceutical intermediates used in drug synthesis.

The technical objectives of this Phase I research project are to demonstrate the
application of the novel enzymatic cyclopropanation reaction to the production
of a variety of commercial drug substances. Chiral cyclopropanes are key
substructures found in a number of pharmaceutical and crop protection compounds.
The cyclopropane-containing building blocks used in the synthesis of these
compounds contain at least one, and often more than one, chiral center. Since
biological activity typically requires having a single stereoisomer, chemical
methods that achieve high stereoselectivity are continually sought. For
cyclopropanation reactions, the existing methods typically rely on transition-
metal catalysts such as rhodium bearing chiral ligands. The biocatalytic method
offers clear advantages over the contemporary chemistry in that it will
circumvent the use of rare, expensive metals and costly auxiliary ligands for
these types of reactions. High temperatures and harsh conditions will also be
avoided. In this research, high-throughput screening will be used to identify
improved variants that catalyze desired cyclopropanation reactions at greater
rates and with increased stereoselectivity. By developing an expanded set of
cyclopropanation biocatalysts with capabilities to act on a wider range of
starting materials, the scope and utility of this novel enzymatic reaction will
be increased.