* 1549867
* STTR Phase I:  An integrated platform for the analysis of patient health record data to enable predictive clinical decision support
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2016,05/31/2017
* Ritankar Das, Dascena
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 05/31/2017
* USD 224,903.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) Phase I project is to reduce preventable patient readmissions,
streamline triage, and detect multi-organ diseases early. Currently, failures of
care delivery and care coordination, overtreatment, and administrative
complexity cost the American healthcare system an estimated 300 billion dollars
per year, and are among the largest contributors to mortalities within clinical
settings. The recent transition of the healthcare industry to electronic health
records offers new opportunities to reduce these costs and mortalities through
use of clinical decision support systems. However, existing clinical decision
support systems have had limited impact, due in part to their failure to detect
trends in patient status and neglect of risk factor interdependence. Further,
these systems must be updated manually on a regular basis to combat declining
accuracy over time. Thus, there exists a pressing need to improve the technology
underlying clinical decision support systems. The proposed technology directly
addresses the current limitations of clinical decision support technology while
placing no additional burden on clinicians, thus easing its adoption into
clinics. In addition, the large value proposition and life-saving potential lend
broad commercial appeal to the clinical decision support system being developed
in this study.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project advances the analysis
of trends in patient health information and the identification of correlations
among physiological data that are useful in predicting patient outcomes. The
vast amounts of patient health information that are collected in electronic
medical records present opportunities for improving the quality of health care,
as well as practical challenges that are associated with interpreting such data.
These challenges include the processing of measurements taken unreliably and at
irregular intervals, the quantification of the interdependence of health risk
factors, and the development of infrastructure for effectively interfacing
medical records with suites of tools for clinical decision support. This project
entails the implementation of sophisticated data imputation procedures for
repairing imperfect time series measurements and building trend features for use
in disease prediction and patient transfer recommendation tools. Trend
information will be combined with correlations between sets of vital signs and
lab tests, and then optimized using a statistical scheme for reliably predicting
patient outcomes. The integration of this analytic technology with existing
clinical information technology infrastructure will empower clinicians to more
effectively use the data available to them, reduce the costs associated with
overtreatment and extended stay, and improve patient health care outcomes.