* 1549724
* STTR Phase I:  Bio-based Manufacturing of An Anticoagulant Precursor 4-Hydroxycoumarin
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2016,06/30/2017
* Yuheng Lin, BiotecEra Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2017
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) project is to establish a bio-based manufacturing process for
the production of the commodity chemical 4-hydroxycoumarin (4-HC) in an
economical and renewable way. 4-HC is a direct synthetic precursor used to
manufacture widely used oral anticoagulants, such as warfarin, acenocoumarol,
and phenprocoumon. In addition, 4-HC-derived anticoagulants are commonly used as
rodenticides to kill rodents. Traditionally, 4-HC is commercially manufactured
through chemical synthesis using petro-related aromatic chemicals as starting
materials, which is neither economical nor environmentally friendly. The
proposed technology to be developed in this project is expected to dramatically
lower the production cost, and reduce the reliance on petro chemicals.

This STTR Phase I project proposes to create an optimal 4-HC-producing microbial
strain that can be readily used for large-scale production. The strain is
expected to have high genetic stability without the need for antibiotics or an
inducer for production. Preliminary research has shown the microbial production
of 4-HC from a renewable carbon source, glycerol, in shake flasks, which
demonstrates great commercialization potential. However, the approach at this
stage still uses host-plasmid systems that involve antibiotics and the inducer
IPTG. This will not only increase the production cost but also will raise
environmental concerns. Additionally, host-plasmid systems may cause instability
in genetic properties, which is undesirable for large-scale production of
commodity chemicals. To address these issues and achieve the goal of this STTR
Phase I project, the following research objectives will be pursued: Integration
of constitutively expressed 4-HC biosynthetic pathway genes into E. coli
chromosomal DNA and its optimization; and inactivation of the E. coli endogenous
enzymes responsible for unwanted degradation of 4-HC biosynthetic intermediates.