* 1549773
* STTR Phase I:  An On-Demand Protein Engineering Platform
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2016,06/30/2017
* Zachary Sun, SYNVITROBIO INC
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2017
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) project will be the development of a platform technology for
high-throughput protein expression. The current standard for expressing panels
of proteins involves extensive bioinformatics, cloning, in vivo expression, and
assays. This method takes significant expertise in disparate fields, and weeks
to months of time to perform successfully. Furthermore, it can be difficult to
express complex proteins due to toxicity or purification difficulty, requiring
labor-intensive diagnosis of expression and purification conditions. The
proposed platform allows characterization of hundreds of protein sequences at
significant cost and time savings by providing a combined ex vivo computational,
expression, and assay system. This allows rapid access to biological data, and
on-demand protein sequence prototyping. The methods developed as part of this
platform also will allow greater access to biological engineering for K-12 and
undergraduate students, requiring little capital or prior biological experience.
By reducing costs and time for protein engineering, and by working in a simple
system that requires no knowledge of bioinformatics, cloning, cell culturing,
and biochemical characterization, biologists and non-biologists alike will be
able to conduct relevant biological engineering research and rapidly test
protein design hypotheses. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This STTR Phase I project
proposes to develop a high-throughput and computationally assisted platform to
rapidly collect biochemical data on a diverse set of proteins. Using this
platform, researchers will be able to conduct expression of hundreds of relevant
protein variants from a single reference protein. The yields are micromolar-
values, providing up to 50ug/50uL per run. Therefore, enough protein can be
generated for detailed biochemical characterization and activity assays. The
proposed platform is an all-encompassing ex-vivo computational, expression, and
assay system. In this project, engineering and prototyping of cytochrome P450
enzymes, important industrial and pharmaceutical catalysts, will be demonstrated
with an end-Phase II goal to prototype 1,000 diverse cytochrome P450 enzymes
from design to characterization in less than a week.