* 1549708
* PLANTS II:  Increasing the diversity of plant scientists
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2021
* Ann Sakai, Botanical Society of America
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 08/31/2021
* USD 106,310.00

This award will provide support for 12 students (10-11 undergraduate students,
1-2 graduate students) per year from diverse backgrounds to attend the annual
meetings of the Botanical Society of America (BSA). The goal is to increase the
number of students from underrepresented groups who attend these meetings and to
increase their motivation to complete advanced degrees in the plant sciences.
The PLANTS (Preparing Leaders and Nurturing Tomorrow's Scientists) program
supports a mentoring network of graduate students, post-doctoral scholars, and
faculty who assist the students before, during and after the meetings. The
program promotes retention of students in graduate school by encouraging the
academic development of those in the pipeline (including but not limited to
PLANTS alumni), encouraging them to serve as role models and mentors, and to
participate in other PLANTS activities (e.g., panel workshops, admissions
committees). Recognizing that the vitality of the discipline depends upon
inclusion of people from the broadest possible base, and given the low diversity
of the membership within the plant sciences, the BSA actively seeks to increase
participation of underrepresented groups. The BSA includes a broad membership,
with members with different ages, types of institutions, and academic areas.
This breadth offers far-reaching opportunities for students to explore their
interests in the plant sciences and to broaden their career opportunities.
Greater visible involvement and engagement of all BSA members in these
activities emphasizes to all the critical need for continued diversity
recruitment for the vitality of the discipline

At the annual meeting, each undergraduate is assigned a peer mentor (usually a
graduate student), and a senior mentor (post-doctoral scholar, faculty, or other
professional). The student and mentors determine the talks of greatest interest
to the student, attend and discuss the content of those talks together, attend
required activities and networking events together, and mentors introduce
students to faculty, postdocs, and students in their academic field. The PLANTS
graduate students serve as peer mentors and role models. The mentors not only
interpret the content of scientific talks to students, but also point out their
broader relevance and pass on to students the genuine intellectual excitement
and involvement of the conference participants. Required sessions include
research talks, professional development workshops (e.g., how to apply to
graduate school, careers in the plant sciences), and application of the plant
sciences to societal needs.