* 1549157
* SBIR Phase I:  Prototype and Manufacture of Small-scale Axial Permanent Magnet Generator
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2016,06/30/2016
* Hahna Alexander, SolePower
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 06/30/2016
* USD 149,015.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is to address the
deficit in portable power across sectors due to a lag in innovations in battery
technology. Access to portable power is a universal problem. Wearable energy
harvesting devices offer part of the power solution - human motion provides
enough energy over a day such that ?wasted? energy can be captured and converted
to enough usable electrical energy to power a variety of portable electronics.
Wearable harvesters, such as a foot charger worn in a shoe, can seamlessly
integrate into a user?s natural motion without causing the user any fatigue.
Therefore, wearable energy harvesting technology is applicable to a wide variety
of applications, including developing regions, military/aid organizations,
consumer electronics and outdoor gear. Devices that implement mechanical systems
have high theoretical power to weight ratios and produce enough power to charge
small mobile electronics. To improve these devices, additional optimization on
the limiting feature - the PMG - is necessary.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small
Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will reduce the size and
increase the efficiency of axial permanent magnet generators (PMGs) for energy
harvesting applications. There are two types of PMGs used in current mechanical
harvesting applications: radial and axial generators. Both produce multi-phase
AC power, can be optimized for geometry and weight, and are used extensively in
wind turbines on a large scale. Radials, because of their relative ease of
manufacture, are designed for small-scale energy generation applications, most
popularly in hand-crank generation devices. However, wearable energy harvesting
applications have very strict volume requirements. The small, flat profile
required for volume optimization suggests that axial PMGs are more space
efficient for wearables. Essentially, to achieve a flatter profile in which
height of the overall mechanism is minimized at the expense of increasing
diameter, an axial generator would produce more power. The objectives of this
project are to validate axial PMG simulations with physical prototypes, prove
axial PMGs create a power increase of at least 10% over radial PMGs in existing
commercial systems, and to evaluate the feasibility of manufacturing axial
implementations at scale.