* 1549833
* STTR Phase I:  Building a Trustworthy Cyberspace through Data Security as a Service
* TIP,TI
* 01/15/2016,12/31/2016
* Mohit Tiwari, Privasera Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 12/31/2016
* USD 0.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) Phase I project lies in protecting against data breaches that
affect healthcare, financial, and other enterprises, especially breaches on
cloud-based systems due to third-party developers. Using the proposed
technology, enterprises can innovate faster - utilizing cloud computing and
application market stores without exposing data to breaches - while third-party
developers can sell applications to improve citizens' health and finances
without being slowed down by regulations and compliance. The technology will
spur innovation by securing data and through new applications that are deployed
within weeks instead of years.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business
Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I project breaks new ground in controlling data
as it is used by untrusted applications and in making secure applications easier
to build. Specifically, an enterprise can control access to their data through
use of the proposed technology, which ensures that data in use cannot be leaked
to an unintended recipient. Currently, encryption and HIPAA compliance only
protect data at rest or in transit - but most breaches are when data is in use.
For developers, the technology provides an application design pattern that
scales to large applications and does not require security expertise to develop
for. Hence, developers can iterate on functionality quickly and instead of
wasting time with security regulations, focus on providing the best healthcare
and financial benefits possible. In summary, the proposed innovation is crucial
to unlocking the potential of exponentially growing cloud- and application-
markets.