* 1549153
* Collaborative Research:  A Multidiscilpinary Study to Determine the Fundamental Mechanisms of Rock Friction through Coordinated Experiments and Simulations
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2020
* Izabela Szlufarska, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 07/31/2020
* USD 270,960.00

Earthquakes are among the most devastating natural disasters, in some cases
causing extreme loss of life and untold damage to infrastructure. Earthquakes
are the result of rapid sliding along fractures ? called faults - within Earth?s
interior. The fairly regular recurrence of earthquakes stems from the
interaction of the rocks that apply forces to a locked fault, and the mechanical
behavior of fault rocks as they begin to slide past each other ? i.e., their
frictional behavior. Existing mathematical descriptions of the frictional
behavior of rock, which are employed in computer models of earthquakes, are
based on estimates from experiments. It would be far better if such descriptions
were based on a fundamental understanding of the underlying physics, as this
would make their use in earthquake models far more reliable and potentially
could lead to the ability to predict the timing of earthquakes, which is
impossible presently. Incredibly, the initiation of earthquakes depends on
physical and chemical processes that occur at very small scales on faults ? at
micrometer- to nanometer-sized regions where fault surfaces are actually
touching. This extreme range of relevant length scales ? from the kilometer to
the nanometer scale - thus necessitates a multi-disciplinary approach, including
experiments and computer simulations of rock friction behavior down to the
nanometer scale. In this highly interdisciplinary project, tribologists,
geophysicists, and materials scientists will merge their expertise to study the
frictional behavior of rocks at small scales, and will integrate the knowledge
of friction mechanisms thus gained with existing mathematical descriptions of
rock friction to revise, if not replace, those models. The ultimate goal of the
proposed work is to better understand the earthquake process, and ultimately
translate that understanding to societal benefit through applications to
earthquake prediction. The project will further the education of three PhD
students and several undergraduates, recruited from underrepresented groups when
possible. Scientific results will be incorporated into coursework, reported at
materials science, engineering, and earth science meetings, and published in
high impact journals across multiple disciplines.

Rate- and state-variable friction ?laws? form the basis for our limited
understanding of the frictional behavior and stability of rocks in the
laboratory, and are the foundation for models of earthquake nucleation and
recurrence. The physical basis for these laws, however, remains incomplete to
unknown, making a reliable extrapolation of them to the Earth, beyond the
limited ranges of conditions explored in the experiments that form their basis,
fraught with uncertainty. Incredibly, the nucleation of fault-scale slip events
(earthquakes) depends on micro-to-nanoscopic physico-chemical processes that
occur at frictional contacts on faults. This extreme range of relevant length
scales thus necessitates a multi-disciplinary approach, including experiments
and atomistic simulations of Earth materials down to the nanoscale. The goal of
this project is to develop physically-based constitutive laws for the frictional
behavior of rocks that can be extrapolated to the Earth with confidence. To
achieve these goals, the PIs will apply a highly interdisciplinary approach that
explores the physical mechanisms of rock friction over a wide range of length
scales using a broad range of cutting-edge experimental methodologies, including
atomic force microscopy (AFM), nanoindentation, and nanolithography. Critically,
these experiments will be coupled with, and will inform and validate, atomistic
simulations of the key physical processes that contribute to the frictional
behavior of Earth materials. Specifically, the team will 1) Study adhesion and
indentation creep of silica and quartz using AFM, in situ electron microscopy,
nanoindentation, and atomistic simulations to determine the role that
interfacial chemical bonding and plastic asperity creep play in frictional aging
(the ?evolution effect?), 2) determine the physical mechanism underlying the
?direct effect? by extrapolating the mechanisms revealed in single-contact AFM
experiments and simulations to macroscopic friction behavior of rocks via multi-
contact models, and 3) use microstructural analyses and innovative
nanolithographic techniques to determine the relative proportions of elastic and
plastic contacts in loaded rock interfaces, and provide quantitative links
between single-contact and multi-contact aging behavior.