* 1549256
* SBIR Phase I:  Brain Wave Adaptive Learning for Accelerated Adaptive Learning for STEM Education
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2016
* Nishikant Sonwalkar, EDWISETECH INC
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 12/31/2016
* USD 172,250.00

This SBIR Phase I project will develop a Brain Computer Interface (BCI) for
Accelerated Adaptive Learning for STEM education. For the first time, the brain
computer interface using Electroencephalogram (EEG) headband will be applied to
the learning strategies based adaptive learning. Electroencephalogram is a none-
invasive method for measuring brain wave pattern for identification of
electrical activities in the brain. The proposed learning system will provide
five learning strategies - apprentice, incidental, inductive, deductive and
discovery with real-time learner analytics. The EEG headband based BCI for
adaptive learning will provide real time neuro feedback to learners for
identification of optimum learning strategy. It is expected that the direct
collection of brain wave data using multi-channel EEG headband will lead to
faster convergence to optimum learning strategy for learners to reach the
maximum learning outcome. This approach will allow us to combine brain wave
analytics with the real-time statistical inference to improve performance of the
learner. The combination of brain wave data and multivariate correlation
analysis of the learner performance will enable validation of the proposed BCI
approach for accelerated adaptive learning. With the growth of EEG headband
technology and low energy blue tooth interface it will be possible to
commercialize proposed approach for STEM education in schools and colleges.

Brain Computer Interface for accelerate adaptive learning using EEG headbands
will break numerous new technical grounds. For the first time the brain wave
data of the individual learner will be used to identify personal learning
preferences and learning strategy. The distribution of Alfa, Beta and Gamma
brain waves will provide wealth of information on the brain state of the learner
exposed to the differentiated learning strategies. The BCI approach will lead to
accelerated identification of learning strategy for the best learning outcome
based on the real- time brain wave analysis for individual learners. The
proposed project will also provide unprecedented opportunity to assess effect of
neuro feedback on the learning outcome of the STEM students. This project will
spark a new technology trend of brain wave adaptive learning that will yield
numerous new applications and products for high-stack learning and training. The
brain computer interface based adaptive learning will also help students with
cognitive disability (autism spectrum), ADD and ADHD as study aid for
educational programs. The brain wave adaptive learning with data-driven feedback
will be extremely useful for improving completion and graduation rates for STEM
education.