* 1549081
* SBIR Phase I:  Wearable device and methods for sleep assessment and management in the home environment
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2016
* Madhvi Upender, Awarables, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 12/31/2016
* USD 179,928.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to bring to market a platform for monitoring
and management of sleep disorders that is cost effective, easy to use for
multiple nights in the home environment and delivers clinically valid and
actionable results. The many consumer devices that claim to provide sleep
quality data are not clinically relevant or accurate and are not accepted by
healthcare providers. On the other hand, the clinical state-of-the-art is a
single night, expensive, highly obtrusive and uncomfortable procedure at a sleep
laboratory that only works for detection of moderate/severe sleep apnea.
Awarables is dedicated to providing devices and technologies that can be
validated by institutions specializing in sleep medicine and approved by the
FDA. Starting with the pediatric population, including children with ADHD and
Autism, we are bringing the ability to monitor and improve sleep, an integral
part of every person's overall health and well-being, in populations suffering
from insomnia (30M+), apnea (18M+), and other sleep disorders that require
longer term home monitoring. As we progress through a landscape at the
intersection of consumer applications and mobile healthcare, Awarables will
challenge the existence of archaic sleep laboratories.

The proposed project addresses the research and development challenge of
monitoring sleep quantity and quality i.e. sleep stages and other clinical
metrics, and detecting critical sleep events such as apnea events per hour,
snoring, and posture for multiple nights in the home environment. This entails
miniature hardware of the size of a quarter instead of machinery-sized single-
night sleep laboratory equipment, while providing the clinically validated
analytics provided in the sleep laboratory. A comprehensive system comprising
hardware, analytics, mobile user app, and clinician report will be developed
leveraging a multi-disciplinary team of hardware and software engineering, and
medical researchers and sleep clinicians. The detection of apnea events using a
multi-sensor, multi-method approach is also proposed on re-engineered Awarables'
hardware housing EKG/heart-rate and acoustic signals. The methods to be used
include sensor fusion and intelligent classification algorithms, such as neural
networks, that leverage both time and frequency domain features. The absence of
such a product in the industry indicates the inability of existing competing IP
to solve the problem at robust product level. The apnea detection and improved
patent-pending sleep staging enhancements in this project will also be
statistically validated on data from public clinical trial databases.