* 1549719
* STTR Phase I:  Piezoelectric Self-sensing Shoe Insole
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2016
* Jason Van Camp, Nano Composite Products, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 12/31/2016
* USD 206,105.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project lies in an ability to
provide information regarding human movement in a way that is less expensive,
more robust, and more accurate than existing methods, in order to improve human
health and performance. The project advances several technology areas including
?smart? wearable sensors, mobile assistive technology, and multi-sensor
networked decision-making. The insole launches into the rapidly growing
?wearable device? market, which is anticipated to grow by 200% over the next 3
years. The introduction of an economical self-sensing material that can
transform current foam and compliant components into high-accuracy deformation
sensors has huge potential in almost all fields of consumer products and
engineering. Initial interest has already been expressed from manufacturers of
running shoes, athletic helmets, car bumpers, airbag sensors, and mattress
manufacturers. Other applications are numerous: self-monitoring artificial spine
segments, self-sensing furniture, smart mounts for vibrating equipment, etc.
Furthermore, the collaboration with Brigham Young University (with a specific
focus on undergraduate mentoring) introduces a large number of future engineers
to the works of high-tech startups, and a wide variety or ?real world?
engineering issues. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Technology
Transfer Research (STTR) Phase I project will demonstrate feasibility, in terms
of both technology and market, of a self-sensing piezoresponsive insole. Using
novel and robust technology, the insole will quantify 3D ground reaction force
characteristics during various human movements, potentially assisting an
American society that is aging and overweight in becoming more healthful.
Research objectives will focus on the exploitation of an entirely new class of
nano-composite foam sensors to capture gait characteristics that were previously
only measurable in highly controlled laboratory conditions. An insole will be
created with the ability to detect all necessary components of ground reaction
force, while remaining almost impervious to moisture, with a very low power
requirement. The technology will be configured using wireless data transfer and
smart-phone apps to provide ?smart? wearables for four specific user
applications: exercise analysis, video game input, physical therapy aid, and
gait biofeedback. Examples of specific objectives include accurate estimates of
caloric expenditure and retraining of movement patterns that are detrimental to
lower-extremity musculoskeletal health. The commercial feasibility of the insole
will be validated, including a large-scale manufacturability review and market
testing of the beta-stage product.