* 1549231
* SBIR Phase I:  Learning from nature - Marine educational games that assess scientific knowledge transfer through game play
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2016,06/30/2016
* Jessica Hendrix, Killer Snails, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 06/30/2016
* USD 150,000.00

This SBIR Phase 1 project will create an engaging online learning game using
venomous marine snails as a conduit to explore scientific issues in nature
through creative problem solving. The USA is currently ranked 52nd in the world
in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) education. This is
detrimental intellectually and economically to the future of American society.
Recent studies have indicated it is not what we teach, but how we teach that
enhances student-learning abilities, particularly as it pertains to STEM. A
strong case is being made for using learning games to convey educational
content. This project is driven by the research objectives to understand how
children learn specific science content and why certain game elements are better
suited to convey scientific material. The outcome of this project will be a
propriety digital learning game including a unique parent/player assessment tool
used to measure novel STEM content during game playing and extending
opportunities for learners to engage in ongoing scientific research ("citizen
science"). Commercialization of the products created in this project will
transform scientific discoveries in predatory marine snail research for social
and economic benefit to meet the NSF's mission of supporting education
initiatives that improve the lives of U.S. Citizens, and generate income for tax
revenue and jobs via the employment of software designers, educators and
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will build proprietary assessment
tools into online games that continuously engage users in the scientific process
of discovery and application of science learning using a novel player/parent
data aggregator dashboard. Our inventive two-sided player/parent dashboard will
allow players to measure their progress and attain unique, educational rewards
such as unlocking new game components, and identifying local citizen science
projects to enhance their STEM learning. The goal of this project is to disrupt
the status quo of STEM learning and address STEM learning market needs by
combining gameplay, content learning, and assessment tools to develop high-
quality, creative, science learning games. A three-component Play-Break-Fix
strategy will be used to design and develop all games: 1. Iterative prototyping
to generate novel ideas and integrate any existing content. 2. Repetitive
evaluation to test the usability of demos and the initial feasibility of the
learning games created and parent/player dashboard concept. 3. Commercialization
testing of the products from this project that are the best of the build and
analyze model. The parent/player assessment dashboard developed in this project
will provide a template for furthering parental engagement with children's
learning to significantly improve STEM knowledge and will engage players in
citizen science experiences that will strengthen their connection to STEM
learning.