* 1549770
* STTR Phase I:  Additive manufacturing processes for iron based amorphous metal components
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2016,03/31/2017
* Mattias Unosson, Sindre Metals, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 03/31/2017
* USD 224,831.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project lies in development of a
new class of amorphous metal alloys that could benefit society as a whole.
Theoretical calculations have shown that 90% weight reduction of components can
be achieved with Iron-based amorphous and nano-composite alloys. By reducing the
weight of components in automotive and aerospace, significant fuel savings can
be achieved. Fuel savings will result in both reduced cost as well as reduced
emissions of greenhouse gases. Another field of application for amorphous
ferromagnetic alloys is electromagnetic cores in electrical motors, transformers
and filters. Ferromagnetic amorphous alloys allows for reduced energy losses in
these applications by up to 80%, which correspond globally to 50 Million tons of
CO2 emissions from fossil fuel power plants per year or 1/10 of the nuclear
power production per year in the US. Amorphous metal could also have big impact
on healthcare. Amorphous metals could address extremely costly metallosis issues
currently experienced by the medical implant industry due to recalls and
lawsuits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Technology Transfer Research
(STTR) Phase I project is aimed at demonstrating the feasibility of metal based
additive manufacturing (AM) of Iron-based amorphous metal components. AM
processes for alloys with superior mechanical and/or magnetic properties will be
developed, and increased scientific understanding of the material mechanisms
achieved. While preliminary research show promising results for fabricating
larger components with amorphous bulk properties, there are still issues that
need to be resolved. To address these challenges, it is important that proper
process parameters for forming dense, crack-free, material are established by
extensive experimental work using both Electron Beam Melting and Direct Metal
Laser Sintering technologies. To support the experimental work, phenomenological
Finite Element (FE) models will be developed. The FE models will first be
validated through initial experiments and then be used to make informed choices
regarding process parameters such as building temperature, part orientation and
scanning strategy.