* 1549239
* SBIR Phase I:  Feed Forward Hydraulic Ripple Cancellation
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2016,07/31/2016
* Jack Ekchian, Levant Power Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 07/31/2016
* USD 149,804.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is expected to be
realized in two principal areas. There have been extensive efforts to mask
hydraulic noise, but the proposed effort is directed at eliminating the
hydraulic ripple before it is created at the source. Traditional passive methods
of masking noise are insufficient because they work effectively only in a
limited operating range. This is inadequate because hydraulic systems typically
must operate over a wide range of speed and loads. First this project is
expected to make hydraulic active suspension systems quieter, more responsive
and robust and, therefore, more readily and widely adopted by industry. The
resulting likely increased use of active suspension systems will, therefore,
have the added societal benefit of improved vehicle safety and comfort. This
project is also expected to have a much wider impact on the hydraulic noise that
has been a chronic pain point for the hydraulics industry for decades. It will
allow for the manufacture of quieter and more durable hydraulic pumps for many
applications beyond active suspension.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project is an investigation of
the feasibility of using an active buffer to eliminate flow ripple from a
hydraulic pump, such as a gerotor pump. In a representative hydraulic system,
the gerotor pump is at the heart of an advanced electro-hydraulic, active
suspension actuator. Due to their geometry, positive displacement pumps provide
small fluctuations in their fluid flow rate at a constant pump RPM. These small
changes in flow rate create pressure fluctuations that can create significant
mechanical movement that results in objectionable or unhealthy noise. The
proposed effort is directed specifically at mitigating acoustic and structural
vibration noise caused by such a pump. The proposed effort will utilize a
combination of advanced experimental and computer simulation techniques to
demonstrate the viability of the approach in the representative hydraulic system
(an active suspension actuator). Hydraulic system noise is a widespread pain
point in numerous applications involving hydraulic pumps. A key difficulty with
hydraulic pumps is that they are often required to perform over a wide range of
speeds and pressures. Conventional noise control devices typically can only be
optimized for a relatively narrow portion of this range.