* 1549983
* Standard Grant: Geoengineering, Political Legitimacy and Justice
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2016,01/31/2019
* Augustin Fragniere, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 01/31/2019
* USD 99,772.00

General Audience Summary

This standard research grant will enable the PI and co-PI to foster the creation
of an international research community that focuses on the ethical and political
issues concerning geo-engineering. The grant will support the organization of
two conferences, the editing of a book, and their own research on the subject.
The core of the project involves the organization of two workshops, one at the
University of Washington, the home university of the PI, and the other at the
University of Lausanne in Switzerland, the home university of the co-PI, who is
also an affiliate of the PI?s institution. The first workshop is to be funded by
the National Science Foundation, and the second is to be funded separately by
the Swiss National Science Foundation. The edited book will be aimed at an
interdisciplinary audience of philosophers, political scientists, policymakers
and students; the research of the PI and co-PI will be published as chapters in
the book. Funding is provided for two graduate students to assist them in
organizing the first conference and in editing the book, and to cover their
travel and lodging expenses for attending the second conference that is to be
held in Switzerland.

Technical Summary

Although some preliminary work has been done on the governance of geo-
engineering, it has mainly focused on institutional aspects and on the
perspectives of international law and economics. This project will focus instead
on the normative aspects, and in particular on the core notions of legitimacy
and justice. Specifically, the participants of two workshops will focus on the
issues of political legitimacy, procedural and distributive justice, and
governance. They will address a number of questions, such as whether
consideration of these issues provides reasons to favor some forms of geo-
engineering over others, or to resist some more vigorously than others, and
whether different interventions raise distinct issues for institutional design.
They will serve to create an international research community around geo-
engineering issues, they will expand the debate among academics as well as the
wider public, and they will lead to the publication of an edited book. Broader
impacts include the involvement of graduate students prospects for policy
recommendations.