* 1549955
* EAGER: Fabrication and Characterization of 3D Ceramic-Coated Polymer Scaffolds
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Bridget Rogers, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 08/31/2019
* USD 155,416.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: This EAGER project capitalizes on new deposition
technologies and investigates the formation of ceramic films deposited onto
polymer structures to better understand how the composition and microstructure
of the ceramic depends on the deposition conditions. This information is
critical to be able to fabricate three-dimensional ceramic structures by coating
a polymer template with a ceramic film. Three-dimensional ceramic structures
have a wide variety of applications, from catalyst supports for energy
conversion or chemical processing to medical implants and biological studies.
The target application for this work is ceramic structures that mimic the
chemical composition, microstructure, porosity, and surface morphology of bone.
With properties similar to bone, these structures are being used to perform
fundamental studies, such as investigation of tumor cell migration and invasion
as well as drug screening. Graduate and undergraduate students are actively
involved in this multidisciplinary work, gaining skills important to their
future success.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: This EAGER grant
investigates fundamental mechanisms controlling the
processing/property/performance relationships of calcium phosphate (CAP) films
deposited onto 2D and 3D polyurethane (PUR) templates to form structures with
properties similar to bone. For most applications, the surface composition and
microstructure of the ceramic, and the pore size/porosity of the structure
significantly impact a porous ceramic structure's performance. 3D printing is an
exciting new way to fabricate polymer structures with defined porosity and pore
size. The conformal CAP coatings are deposited using a low temperature atomic
layer deposition process. The scientific issues involved in this project
encompass two of the eight grand challenges for ceramic science that were
identified during a 2012 NSF-sponsored workshop: 1) predicting and controlling
heterogeneous microstructures, and 2) control of ceramics far from equilibrium.
Prof. Rogers uses 2D structures on silicon, fabricated using a process identical
to that used to fabricate the 3D structure, to study how the chemical
composition, microstructure, and mechanical properties of the CAP/PUR system
evolve as a function of processing conditions. The as-deposited CAP films are
amorphous due to the low synthesis temperature. Post-deposition annealing is
used to investigate how the amorphous CAP crystallizes as a function of
temperature profile and overall heat duty. The inherently non-equilibrium rapid
thermal annealing process facilitates the formation of phases and
microstructures in the thin CAP films that are not attainable through
thermodynamically-controlled processing of bulk materials. The breadth of topics
involved in this project (hard and soft materials, processing, characterization,
computer programming, reactor design/construction, 2D vs. 3D materials) exposes
the graduate and undergraduate students on the project team to many aspects of
academic and industrial research and problem solving. The skills they attain
through this project will benefit them throughout their career.