* 1549771
* STTR Phase I:  Cooperative Selection of Aptamer Pairs by Unlocking Parallel Enrichment Paths
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2016,06/30/2017
* Joonyul Kim, Proximity Biosciences LLC
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2017
* USD 240,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) Phase I project will be to develop reliable technology for the
production of aptamer pairs. Aptamers are core reagents in emerging markets,
regarded as alternatives to monoclonal antibodies in therapeutics, diagnostics,
and imaging. They possess several appealing qualities: Ease of in vitro
synthesis, flexible modification, broad target ranges, reusability, and high
thermal/chemical stability. The market value is expected to reach $5.4 billion
by 2019 with a compound annual growth rate of 73.5%. One prominent negative
aspect of aptamers in practical use is the lack of aptamer pairs. Pairing of
monoclonal antibodies is fairly easily accomplished due to their tailor-made
target binding sites. In contrast, aptamers are enriched from a random pool
without such knowledge, so that it is impossible to assign the binding site of
individual aptamers in pools with currently available methodologies. The
proposed innovation in developing aptamers permits screening of pairs of
aptamers directly from random pools. This type of direct selection from
uncharacterized pools with the proposed simple workflow is a market driver to
generate high revenue potential in the aptamers industry.

This STTR Phase I project proposes to further develop and validate methodology
for screening aptamer pairs from uncharacterized aptamer pools. Currently,
available tools involve massive screening with multiple post-selection steps
that heavily depend on instrumentation such as next generation sequencing,
automated cloning tools, and bead-based multiplex binding assays. These "brute-
force" strategies may eventually produce aptamer pairs, but they are time-
consuming, expensive, and inefficient, perhaps explaining why few aptamer pairs
exist today. The proposed aptamer pair selection methodology addresses this
unmet need in the industry by allowing only pairs to survive during the
selection process against free-solution targets. The homogeneous nature of the
proposed selection platform enables this tool to be scalable and multiplexable.
This technology has been reduced to practice in preliminary proof-of-principle
experiments. During this NSF STTR Phase I project, the objective is to test the
generalizability of the innovation by applying/improving the tool to find more
DNA/RNA aptamer pairs against variety of protein targets.