* 1549769
* EAGER: Renewables:  A New Framework in Power System Protection with High Levels of Renewable Generation
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2018
* Surya Santoso, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Anil Pahwa
* 08/31/2018
* USD 295,024.00

High penetration of wind and photovoltaic (PV) generation in transmission and
distribution systems poses a threat to maintaining security and dependability of
the protection system using existing approaches. Historically, several major
cascading outages have involved mis-operation or mis-coordination of protective
relays. Such outages demonstrate that relay mis-coordination during stressed
system conditions---concurrent high load demand, changes in circuit topology,
equipment outages, and short-circuit fault conditions---can result in a fragile
distribution network. In the past, variable generation was at a significantly
lower level than at present and thus did not contribute to relay mis-
coordination. With levels of wind and PV projected only to increase in the
future, large-scale variable generation can present an additional point of
vulnerability to the existing protection system. The objective of this project
is to pursue the development of new tools for the fundamental understanding of
how protection and control systems should operate in the presence of highly
variable renewable energy sources. The project aims to develop a radically
different framework and potential solutions built upon on model-based
distributed relay intelligence, real-time dynamic relay settings, and stochastic
optimization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the envisioned framework, the calculation
of relay operating settings is formulated as a stochastic optimization problem
with real-time inputs from local relay intelligence, i.e., the predictive
circuit model. The data collected by a relay is input to circuit simulations in
order to accurately predict real-time fault currents at the relay location.
Settings can then be adapted in real time based on updated generation profiles.
Methods proposed in the literature for optimal relay settings have been limited
and did not account for the stochastic nature of renewable energy sources. This
project will develop a probabilistic formulation of optimal relay settings that
naturally adapts to the randomness introduced by the high penetration of
renewable generation. Input is provided from the predictive circuit models in
the form of estimated remote system parameters for each individual relay. The
optimization allows each relay to make the best possible decision based on known
information (system structure and local measurements) and estimated values (non-
local conditions) to update the optimal relay response in real time. The work
will provide insight for protection methodologies that incorporate randomness
introduced by renewable energy sources. The work will contribute to allowing
increased penetration of renewable generation sources to the grid, which
contributes to reduction of carbon emissions. The developed methods will be
implemented in hardware, facilitating discussions with and technology transfer
to industry.