* 1549670
* EAGER: Renewables: Demand response algorithms to improve electric power system stability margins
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Johanna Mathieu, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Anil Pahwa
* 08/31/2018
* USD 278,835.00

Power systems with high penetrations of renewables operate with relatively low
stability margins. Spatial demand response (DR), i.e., ways of controlling the
demand for electricity throughout a geographic area, can be used to improve
power system stability margins and may be less expensive and/or less
environmentally impactful than alternative approaches to maintain power system
stability. Additionally, increasing the potential uses of DR increases its
value, making it more attractive for load aggregators and consumers to invest in
sensing and communication technologies that enable it, in turn benefiting all DR
applications. Results obtained through the the project will inform energy
policy, for example, the design of new electricity markets and/or out-of market
products to compensate loads for improving power system stability. The work will
contribute to the training of one PhD student and the PI will develop a course
module for a new graduate course on electricity markets and optimization.
Additionally, the methods and results will be communicated to practitioners
through "Spatial DR Fact Sheets."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators will
survey existing stability margin measures and develop a short list of measures
that exhibit a good trade-off between accuracy and computational complexity. The
researchers will then formulate variants of the spatial DR problem, considering
varying levels of realism and complexity. They will develop algorithms to solve
variants of the spatial DR problem, focusing on the development of
approximations that improve solvability at the expense of solution accuracy, for
example, simplified representations of stability margins. Additionally, the
research team will analytically and empirically evaluate the developed
algorithms to determine expected and worst-case performance (in terms of
stability margin improvement). Empirical testing will also allow for
quantitatively exploring a variety of topics including: (i) how the parameters
of flexible load impact the ability of DR to improve power system stability
margins; (ii) how renewables impact stability margins and how spatial DR can be
used to mitigate those impacts, enabling higher penetrations of renewables; and
(iii) how the value of spatial DR changes as the level of renewable generation
increases.