* 1549624
* STTR Phase I:  Commercialization of Synthetic Metabolic Valves
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2016,06/30/2017
* Michael Lynch, DMC Limited
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2017
* USD 241,250.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) project will be the development of technology to decouple growth
from product formation in microbes used for biomanufacturing. The goal is to
address current limitations in the field of metabolic engineering for the
production of high value products. Current approaches must balance the complex
requirements of both biomass growth and product formation. Furthermore,
advancements at screening scale often do not translate to improvements at
commercial scale, resulting in long and costly development timelines. This
project will deploy a novel technology platform - Synthetic Metabolic Valves
(SMV) - to demonstrate the dynamic metabolic control of microbial metabolism for
the cost superior production bio-based products. This approach represents a
paradigm shift in biochemical engineering. Importantly, this technology enables
the standardization of a set of bioprocesses independent of product, greatly
simplifying and reducing the costs and risks currently associated with
bioprocess R&amp;D.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This STTR Phase I project proposes to
demonstrate the potential of the Synthetic Metabolic Valve technology to provide
an innovative and disruptive approach to rapidly commercialize bio-based
products. The SMV technology is enabled by inducible enzyme degradation in
combination with gene silencing techniques, utilized in a standardized two-stage
bioprocess. Unlike traditional approaches, the SMV technology is generalizable
to any production pathway, any microbial host, and enables rapid metabolic
engineering strategies for the production of a broad diversity of molecules.
Importantly, this technology provides for the generation of robust microbial
hosts with unparalleled reproducibility across scale, from micro-well to
commercial production. The technology reduces the cost and risk currently
associated with production of bio-based products, enabling more rapid and lower-
cost product development. To demonstrate this platform technology, this proposal
specifically targets production of malonic acid and derivatives at cost superior
metrics. Success in this program will demonstrate the feasibility of this
technology, which can then be applied to the production of numerous renewable
chemicals.