* 1549282
* SBIR Phase I:  Designing High-Strength Thermally-Stable Aluminum Casting Alloys for Cylinder Head Applications
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2016
* Nhon Vo, NanoAl LLC
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 12/31/2016
* USD 149,991.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project involves development of
a new family of thermally-stable, high-strength aluminum casting alloys for
engine cylinder head applications. There is a strong push globally to improve
internal combustion (IC) engine efficiency, through down-sizing, turbo or
supercharged boost, and through the use of alternative fuels. All of these
approaches increase the operational temperature of the engine beyond what
current aluminum engine alloys can sustain, leading to dimensional changes which
can cause engine failure. At these higher temperatures, the new alloys to be
developed will retain engine performance and life, while maintaining the low
weight, castability, and cost-effectiveness of standard aluminum alloys. Our
initial focus is on two-wheeled motorcycles and other recreational vehicles that
represent a total market capitalization of $35 million, just for cylinder heads.
There are many follow-on markets including diesel generators, and engines for
outboard marine, small aircraft and even automobile vehicles, where the total
markets are estimated in the billions of dollars. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual merit of this project is the replacement of traditional gravity-
and die-cast aluminum alloys with higher performing materials at a competitive
cost. These aluminum alloys will contain heat-resistant nano-precipitates, which
will not dissolve at high operating temperature and pressure, thus retaining the
component strength, toughness and microhardness. With production of millions of
IC engines each year, a new high-temperature alloy will lead to significant
energy reductions. Current automotive and motorcycle aluminum engine components,
such as cylinder heads, blocks and pistons, are limited to an operating
temperature of roughly 220 deg. C. Modern and future engines require higher
operating temperatures of up to 290 deg. C and pressures up to 21 MPa to meet
demands for higher engine efficiency, reduced vehicle mass and fuel consumption,
increases in the power-to-mass ratio, and lower emissions. The 2025 Corporate
Average Fuel Economy (CAFE) regulations require an efficiency of 54.5 miles per
gallon for light duty vehicles by 2025. The need for improved IC engine
efficiency is urgent, thus increasing the demand for novel high temperature
aluminum casting alloys.