* 1549767
* STTR Phase I:  Recombinant production of anthocyanins in a GRAS microorganism
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2016,06/30/2017
* Jens Plassmeier, Conagen inc
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2017
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) project will be the microbial production by fermentation of a
group of natural food colorants, called anthocyanins, which will benefit the
environment, the food industry, and society as a whole. The fermentation
production process provides a "green chemistry" approach to issues usually
encountered in traditional chemical synthesis, such as hazardous catalysts, and
eliminates a solvent waste problem typically associated with extraction of
natural compounds from botanicals. The proposed work will lead to a greater
understanding of the anthocyanin biosynthetic pathway, and result in a lower
cost of production of these compounds. Innovation and understanding of the
biochemical pathways and process optimization will help serve the potentially
multi-billion dollar global market for high purity natural food colorants as
food ingredients, as health care products, and in therapeutic
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This STTR Phase I project proposes to
engineer microorganisms that are Generally Regarded As Safe (GRAS), and are
currently used for the production of several food additives as microbial cell
factories for the production of various anthocyanin molecules. Preliminary work
on the biosynthesis of the anthocyanins, using metabolically engineered
Escherichia coli recombinant strains, has demonstrated feasibility of this bio-
economic approach. Initial work will involve the introduction of plant metabolic
pathways in microorganisms via various gene-splicing methods. Further process
optimization will be undertaken by improving fermentation conditions and by
performing an initial scale-up using the recombinant microorganisms. This
microbial fermentation strategy will help enhance the production of such
beneficial natural food colorants through a biomanufactuing approach utilizing
principles of synthetic biology and metabolic engineering and other emerging
biotechnologies.