* 1549292
* SBIR Phase I:  Highly-sensitive, Self-calibrating Pressure and Temperature Sensors for Next Generation Human-computer Interfaces
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2016,06/30/2016
* Ranulfo Allen, Pascalor Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 06/30/2016
* USD 150,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project begins first are
foremost with integration of these 3-d interactive displays with mass produced
electronic devices. From the small scale (watches, smartphones) to the large
scale (collaborative workplace displays), adding pressure and temperature
sensitivity could introduce a whole new level of input and functionality. In
addition to improving functionality and productivity, these displays could widen
the capabilities of gesture-based input for the elderly and disabled. The multi-
touch display market exceeds $10 billion and continues to grow, indicating a
massive commercial opportunity. However, combined pressure- and temperature-
sensitive films can have broader applications beyond displays. A natural
extension for these sensors is wearable devices, especially those aimed at
preventative and diagnostic healthcare (e.g. monitoring blood pressure, core
temperature, wound healing). Another logical application is robotics, where
combined pressure and temperature sensor arrays can function as ?electronic
skin?, mimicking the pressure and temperature sensitivity of human skin.
Finally, since this class of sensors is compatible with large-scale
semiconductor manufacturing processes, they are expected to be low in cost,
which would enable a future in which walls, windows, floors, and other surfaces
can be infused with pressure and temperature sensitivity, adding significantly
to the Internet of Things.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is focused on developing multi-touch displays
that are responsive to both pressure and temperature, in order to create a truly
3-dimensional interactive display experience. A handful of commercial touch
displays already offer pressure sensitivity, which extends user input ?into the
screen?, but including sensitivity to temperature could allow user input ?above
the screen? as well. It may now be possible to introduce both temperature and
pressure sensitivity to displays by using a new class of transparent, polymer-
based, thin-film pressure and temperature sensor arrays. These sensor arrays
utilize finely-tuned transparent polymers that are highly sensitive to either
pressure or temperature. The goal of this research is to develop a single
transparent film with both pressure and temperature sensitivity, and to
integrate this film beneath the glass of a display. This will first require
combining the pressure- and temperature-sensitive films without deteriorating
the sensitivity of either one, by experimenting with lamination and deposition
techniques. Another key activity will be to improve the transparency of the
temperature-sensitive film by adjusting its material composition. Finally, the
sensitivity of this film under a glass cover will need to be evaluated through
extensive input testing.