* 1549808
* STTR Phase I:  Commercializing an intelligent reading tutor for mobile devices
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2016,05/31/2017
* John Carney, Carney Labs, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 05/31/2017
* USD 224,609.00

This STTR Phase I project will commercialize a reading intelligent tutor and
take it from a university-based research environment to a commercially viable
product. Phase I will concentrate on the research objectives of finalizing
technical innovations and testing and hardening the software for commercial use.
A unique feature of this intelligent tutor is its content authoring capability
that provides teachers and support staffs the ability to create reading material
to best meet the needs of their learners without having to know anything about
programming, linguistics or speech recognition. Another innovation of this tutor
is the ability to provide error correction while reading and promoting fluency.
The initial impact of this project is the ability to improve literacy for
children using an intelligent tutor that's commercially available on today's
mobile devices and easy to use and author personalized content. The broader
impact is to leverage and design the software for adult learners. Literacy
itself is more important than ever in today's global, high-tech economy. The
proposed research of this STTR project will address literacy at all ages using
an environment that's personalized, accessible, mobile, and adapted for all
users.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Technology Transfer Phase I
project will focus on the commercialization of a research based reading
intelligent tutor. The two technical hurdles are user interface (UI) and
providing fluent speech recognition. One of the major difficulties in developing
content that relies on the computer to provide coaching is providing the needed
pronunciation information for each word. A crucial success is the ability for
the reading tutor to allow the teachers and others to create content for the
system without having to know anything about programming, linguistics or speech
recognition. Another crucial success is the ability to allow the teachers to
specify custom word pronunciations for out of dictionary words using brackets
and the normal 26 characters of the English alphabet. There are not any reading
fluency programs in the commercial market that combine this technical process
with a "teacher friendly" user interface. This innovation enables teachers to
truly create and add relevant reading materials to the reading intelligent tutor
for their learners. The goal of the research in this proposal is to address the
technical hurdles and prepare the reading intelligent tutoring software for
commercialization across multiple platforms and mobile devices.