* 1549220
* SBIR Phase I:  Resonant Light Detection and Ranging
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2016
* Christopher Brown, Z-senz LLC
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 12/31/2016
* USD 179,969.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project seeks to conduct
research and development of a resonant light detection and ranging (R-LIDAR)
distance sensing technology. This technology will advance the development of
robotic and autonomous systems (RAS) by providing improved distance sensing
performance and order-of-magnitude reductions in sensor size and cost. The
commercial impact of this project is that it will enable development of RAS
technologies that are expected to increase the productivity of many industries
including mineral extraction, transport, manufacturing, construction,
agriculture, and defense. RAS technologies are currently limited by the size,
performance, and cost of existing light detection and ranging (LIDAR)
technology, and users of these sensors are in need of improved solutions. Thus,
the R-LIDAR system can be expected to make a significant commercial impact in a
LIDAR sensor market that is expected to reach $625 million by 2020. Development
of high-performance resonant optomechanical scanners for R-LIDAR systems would
also benefit related disciplines that use beam scanning technologies such as
microscopy, endoscopy, light machining, and displays.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual merit of this project concentrates on the development of resonant
light detection and ranging (R-LIDAR) technology based upon use of an
optomechanical scanning element actuated at resonant frequency. Resonant
scanners provide robust high-speed and high-performance operation that addresses
limitations of incumbent light detection and ranging (LIDAR) distance sensors.
The research aims of this project are to (1) develop and characterize key
resonant scanner performance metrics such as scan stability, field-of-view,
resolution, and frame rate and (2) integrate a resonant scanner element into a
prototype R-LIDAR instrument to compare size, weight, and power specifications
to incumbent LIDAR technology. R-LIDAR technology could provide an estimated
ten- to hundredfold reduction in instrument size, fivefold increase in
performance, and a tenfold decrease in instrument cost compared to currently
available high-performance LIDAR distance sensors. These improvements will
dramatically enhance the utility of distance sensing for unmanned and autonomous
systems.