* 1549527
* History of Ixil Language Contact
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2016,05/31/2021
* Daniel Law, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Tyler Kendall
* 05/31/2021
* USD 358,363.00

In a multilingual and multicultural world, the languages we speak can change in
different ways as speakers of those languages come into contact with one another
for diverse purposes. Decades of linguistic research have investigated how
languages can change as a result of this language contact. The research shows
that both the linguistic details of the languages in contact and the social
circumstances in which that interaction takes place, can effect what changes and
what does not, but more precise details still remain to be established. One
hypothesis is that more extensive change in a language's grammar can happen in
situations of contact between languages that are very similar, for example
languages that descend from a common ancestor, as is the case for Spanish,
Italian and French, all of which share a common ancestor language, Latin. How
this increased susceptibility to change in contact interacts with changes in
society is crucial for understanding the ways in which multilingual interactions
are changing language today. Such investigation,however, requires a long-term
perspective, one that considers centuries of changing social relations and
shifting linguistic forms. The Mayan language Ixil provides a useful case study
for the investigation of language contact between similar languages in shifting
social circumstances.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ixil is spoken today in vibrant rural
communities in highland Guatemala, as well as in immigrant communities in
Virginia and elsewhere in the United States. Speakers of Ixil have been in
contact with speakers of several related languages, particularly
K'iche',Q'anjob'al, and the Lowland Mayan (Yukatekan and Ch'olan) languages.
These languages are similar to Ixil to different degrees, and have had contact
with Ixil at different points in time in distinct social contexts, providing a
range of test cases to trace the relationship between linguistic form and social
relations. Hieroglyphic writing and colonial manuscripts provide linguistic data
for languages involved in these linguistic exchanges spanning more than two
thousand years. This project will complement those available resources by
gathering an extensive corpus of Ixil linguistic material. It will use those
data to identify and contextualize Ixil linguistic innovations resulting from
contact with Lowland (Yukatekan and Ch'olan) Mayan languages over more than a
thousand years. The type and degree of Lowland Mayan linguistic influence on
Ixil will provide insights into the nature of the historical interaction between
Lowland and Highland languages prior to the Spanish Conquest. It will also
provide a rich case study of the interplay between structural similarity and
socio-historical factors in conditioning the outcomes of language contact.
Another focus of the project is to involve students in cutting-edge linguistic
research and to engage with the communities that speak Ixil today, aiding
efforts to revitalize the language and to communicate the history of Ixil to the
people most directly connected to that history.