* 1549920
* Collaborative Research: Geological Evolution of the Midcontinent Rift as a Hybrid Rift and Large Igneous Province
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2021
* Carol Stein, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Audrey Huerta
* 05/31/2021
* USD 60,368.00

The 1.1 billion year-old Mid-continent Rift is a 3,000 kilometer-long band of
buried igneous and sedimentary rocks that is one of the most prominent features
on gravity and magnetic maps of North America. One arm of the rift extends from
Lake Superior to Oklahoma and the other through central Michigan to perhaps as
far south as Alabama. Where exposed in the Lake Superior (or Keweenaw) region,
surface observations and geophysical data indicate that the rift basin is filled
with flood basalts, which are unusual landforms whose formation can have a
devastating influence on climate and life. Most flood basalts around the world
occur in so-called Large Igneous Provinces in which rapid eruption of a large
volume of basaltic magma, created by deeper mantle processes (mantle plumes),
flows great distances over existing topography to form a thick stack of lava
flows. However, flood basalts of the Mid-Continent Rift depart significantly
from this norm, occupying a relatively small space and erupted significant
volumes for about 20 million years. These characteristics are difficult to
explain solely through the traditional mechanisms proposed for the generation of
flood basalts. This project explores the idea that the Mid-Continent Rift formed
as a combination of rifting and interaction with deeper a mantle plume thus
having characteristics of both a rift and a Large Igneous Province. Besides
forming a fundamental structure of the North American continent, the Mid-
continent Rift hosts important copper ore deposits in the Lake Superior region.
The project would advance desired societal outcomes through: (1) improved STEM
education and educator development through development of teaching modules and
workshops for formal and informal educators; (2) increased public scientific
literacy and public engagement with STEM through continuation of ongoing place-
based outreach in national and state parks; and (3) development of a competitive
STEM workforce through training of graduate students and by providing research
opportunities for undergraduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In contrast to
typical rifts that are filled with a mixture of clastic sediments,
volcanoclastics, and lava flows, the 3000-km Midcontinent/Keweenaw Rift is
filled with flood basalt with thicknesses that exceed even most large igneous
provinces. These observations can be resolved by considering the
Midcontinent/Keweenaw Rift as a hybrid rift and mantle plume-generated large
igneous province. In this model, the volcanics were deposited during an initial
rift phase where flood basalts filled a fault-controlled extending basin, and a
post-rift phase where volcanics and sediments were deposited in a thermally
subsiding sag basin without associated faulting. This project addresses the
question of how the rift and plume interacted, including the possibility of
lengthy interaction between an initially distant plume via material flow at the
base of the lithosphere. Specifically, the project will use major and trace
element analysis, isotopic characterization (Sr, Nd, Pb, and Hf), and argon
geochronology of rift basalts to determine: (1) the geochemical signatures of
the source reservoirs contributing to the basalts and their change over time;
and (2) the temperatures, pressures, and source composition(s) of melt
generation. The project employs a 2D parallel primitive variable particle-in-
cell finite-difference method to study the behavior and melt formation of
rifting under Precambrian mantle conditions in the absence or presence of a
plume and geodynamic modeling to constrain the extent of lateral migration of
plume material under Precambrian mantle conditions coupled with a model for
melting and melt extraction. Rifting history is determined from the cusp in the
apparent polar wander path and microplate kinematics from gravity modeling.