* 1549011
* SBIR Phase I:  Low-cost, wireless, energy harvesting environmental sensors
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2016
* Margaret Sutton, Radiator Labs, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Rick Schwerdtfeger
* 12/31/2016
* USD 178,825.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project would be commercial availability of a low-cost,
wireless, energy-harvesting environmental sensor for high-granularity sensing,
feedback, and control to a number of markets including buildings, industrial,
agricultural, and any other application that would benefit from monitoring where
power or access is in short supply. The primary target market for this
technology is the buildings sector, where the proposed wireless sensor network
will be transformational for building monitoring and control. The high temporal
and spatial resolution of the data delivered by this system additionally
contains, given the proper analysis, actionable information with impacts on
system operation, efficiency, and safety. The data analysis development proposed
will take a first important step towards the automatic identification and
extraction of this high value actionable information. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project focuses on the
development of a low-cost, wireless, and energy harvesting environmental sensor,
and a data aggregation / visualization platform to enable effective
communication of data to users and control systems. This project addresses major
barriers in the main market, the application of Internet of Things to the
buildings sector, where complexity is encountered in the placement and powering
of sensors in monitoring locations where access is limited. By reducing the
upfront and maintenance costs of wireless sensor networks, the project allows
cost-effective building sensor data collection of unprecedented longevity and
density. These rich data sets in turn enable myriad benefits, including more
effective building management controls and in-depth automated energy
evaluations.