* 1549648
* STTR Phase I:  Harnessing CRISPR-mediated silencing for the one-step optimization of protein production strains
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2016,06/30/2017
* Ellen Brune, Boston Mountain Biotech, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2017
* USD 269,757.00

The broader/commercial impacts of this Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR)
project will be the development of a technology to engineer E. coli that will
simplify the removal of contaminating cellular proteins as part of protein
purification. Despite major advancements in biopharmaceutical manufacturing,
protein purification remains one of the most costly and restrictive aspects of
production that impacts negatively impacting start-ups and Fortune 500 companies
alike. This STTR project seeks to directly tackle this challenge by developing a
platform to identify the cellular proteins that exert the greatest burden on
downstream processing, and then shut off these genes in the production strain.
This platform could be readily implemented across much of the biomanufacturing
industry, with the potential to reduce costs to consumers in the ever-burgeoning
healthcare market and ease the time and investment required to bring new
therapeutics to market.

This STTR Phase I project proposes to develop a single construct that can
coordinately and tunably silence expression of the most burdensome contaminating
proteins that are encountered when purifying protein therapeutics via ion
exchange chromatography. The resulting construct could be readily incorporated
into virtually any E. coli strain, offering a simple add-on to both
commercialized and proprietary production strains. The planned outcome of the
proposed Phase I work is a minimal viable product that substantially boosts the
capture and purity of a representative biotherapeutic protein purified via ion-
exchange chromatography. The associated construct will coordinately and
completely turn off the expression of contaminating, non-essential genes, and
finely tune the expression of contaminating, essential genes to improve target
capture and purity while preserving cell growth. This construct will represent
an important step toward a commercial product that could revolutionize how
downstream processing is conducted in the expansive biopharmaceuticals industry.