* 1549094
* SBIR Phase I: An embedded and in-context professional learning platform for math problem-solving instruction
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2016
* Sheela Sethuraman, CueThink
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 12/31/2016
* USD 177,500.00

This SBIR Phase I project proposes to research and develop a web-based prototype
that provides teachers with individualized, interactive, and timely supports for
improving students? problem-solving skills and math communication. Despite the
expectations placed on math teachers by the Common Core State Standards, most of
them are insufficiently prepared to teach students how to become effective
problem solvers. Research shows that the largest struggle for teachers is not
learning new strategies to teaching but actually implementing them in the
classroom. This project addresses this challenge by offering professional
development that is embedded and ongoing and sets the stage for educators to
develop essential 21st Century skills including critical thinking,
communication, collaboration and creativity. These are essential job skills not
only for educators but for the young minds they coach and mentor. Additionally,
teachers who themselves approach problem solving with confidence and enthusiasm
inspire students to do the same. This has great implications for how many
students will continue to seek and enroll in STEM programs. The annual market
for professional development is expected to grow to $1.8 to $2 billion dollars
within 5 years just for math and science in K-12 schools, a significant market
for this project to target.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project
will result in a prototype that works seamlessly with the existing student-
facing peer-to-peer application, developed by the same company and already in
the marketplace. In order to achieve this level of embedded instruction, the
project intends to build a sophisticated recommendation engine that not only
analyzes the teacher's user profile but also their actions in using the student-
facing platform and responds with suggested pathways to improve their teaching.
This is a unique approach to professional development, enabling educators to
determine how to introduce, instruct, and assess problem-solving skills in a
sustained manner. This study is anchored in National Council on Teachers of
Mathematics' (NCTM) "Principles to Actions: Ensuring Mathematical Success for
All" and is designed to directly address three of their eight recommended
essential practices and six of the specific recommended actions. The proposed
project consists of a five-month iterative, formative evaluation-based
development phase followed by a one-month pilot study where classroom teachers
will evaluate the functional prototype.