* 1549126
* SBIR Phase I:  Clinical-Trials-on-a-Chip
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2016
* Jelena Vukasinovic, Lena Biosciences, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 12/31/2016
* USD 150,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is a breakthrough
innovation that will revolutionize preclinical drug testing, provide valuable
information for the first-in-human clinical trials, rescue drugs, decrease time
to optimize therapies, and reduce the incidence of safety hazards and adverse
reactions. Clinical-Trials-on-a-Chip will serve as the pioneering platform for
predictive in vitro testing of humanized biotherapeutics that have become first
line therapies for cancer, inflammatory, autoimmune, infectious, cardiovascular
and neurological diseases; a market worth $200 billion. The platform will also
help rescue drugs by identifying genomic and molecular signatures of human sub-
populations and disease sub-types for which these drugs are efficacious and
safe; thus, saving pharmaceutical industry over $1 billion per failed drug and a
decade of research while bringing safe drugs to patients. Lastly, the platform
will serve in a $42 billion personalized targeted therapies market to optimize
therapies of cancer patients at a lower cost and faster than is currently
attainable using xenografts implanted in mice; thus, saving lives. Ultimately,
this project will lower cost of bringing safe and efficacious drugs to market
and expedite development of frontline therapies for the benefit of patients,
health care and society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project will provide Clinical-Trials-on-a-Chip platform
for predictive efficacy and safety testing of humanized biopharmaceuticals; a
market worth $200 billion. Due to lack of appropriate testing solutions,
targeted therapy and immunotherapy drugs are tested in animals which immune
system is compromised to be able to carry the disease. For example, cancer
immunotherapeutics are tested in immunosupressed mice to avoid rejection of
tumor grafts. Next, the correlation between animal and human studies is low
because these drugs are humanized and active only in humans. Lastly,
biopharmaceuticals are large molecules which cannot be appropriately tested in
vitro either. In vitro platforms are made for testing small molecule, Tylenol-
like, drugs clearing in 3-4 hours, not in 1-30 days like antibodies do. This
project will solve this problem by providing novel in vitro platforms and
methods for efficacy and safety assessment of high molecular weight
therapeutics. Specifically, Clinical-Trials-on-a-Chip will enable drug
researchers to mirror drug distribution, half-life elimination, and conduct
repeat dose testing to better predict antibody specificity and efficacy in
diseased organ models, cross-reactivity with normal tissues, and off-target
organ liabilities such as unexpected off-target organ toxicity in a simple and
easy to use research tool.