* 1549330
* SBIR Phase I:  Precision Farming Operating System for Personal Unmanned Aerial Vehicles with Intelligent Field Adaptive Data Collection Protocol
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2016,09/30/2016
* Lei Tian, Ag-Sensus, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 09/30/2016
* USD 150,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project lies in the
accessibility and accuracy of the proposed system. By eliminating the hurdle of
using Unmanned Aerial System (UAS) for farmers, agricultural field scouting
becomes more accessible and will lead to wider adoption, which will lead to
significant new market for UAS in agriculture. This system will provide
significant savings to crop-growers by allowing targeted application of
chemicals. More than $8 billion dollars are spent on herbicide and pesticides in
US annually, and the high quality data from the proposed system will lead to a
more efficient use of resources in agriculture, which will provide significant
savings to farmers, while at the same time, help reduce the release of chemicals
and other pollutants into the environment. Wide spread usage of this system will
also allow greater data accumulation from a wider geospatial, higher temporal
spectrum that is desperately needed for the agricultural Big Data efforts aimed
at further advancements in the precision farming decision support
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project will examine the feasibility of developing a system that will
have near real time agricultural data collection/processing capabilities using
Unmanned Aerial Systems (UAS) and tablet computers. The lack of a high-
resolution data collection system is a great stumbling block to current
precision agriculture technology. Existing methods of data collection are time
consuming and yield low-quality data. Current aerial data collection methods
(include some that utilize UAS) preclude on-site image processing, and delays
the delivery of time-sensitive field situation reports. The proposed system will
test novel data collection and data pre-processing methods that eliminate
computationally expensive algorithms thereby allowing on-site data processing
using tablet pcs. This goal will be reached by utilizing over a decade worth of
accumulated crop data to develop the optimum data collection processes and data
processing algorithms. The end result will be a prototype system that will
provide high-quality agricultural data that meet the farmers? requirement in
spatial and temporal resolutions.