* 1549964
* EAGER:  Moving Beyond the Leaf Decay Analogy: Root Trait Controls on Decomposition and Soil Carbon Dynamics
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Chris Blackwood, Kent State University
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 08/31/2018
* USD 150,000.00

The decomposition of plant roots is not well understood. A significant amount of
organic carbon (C) is bound up in roots, and the roots are the part of the plant
that interacts with the soil, taking up nutrients and water. Not all roots are
the same - they come in a great variety of shapes and sizes, with different
characteristics and chemistries. This project will, for the first time, test new
ideas about how dying roots are decomposed in soil, interact with soil minerals,
and contribute to forest C cycling. An experimental system will be used to
approximate what is taking place underground so that the mechanisms and rates of
root decomposition can be better understood. The project will involve training
opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students at Kent State University,
as well as outreach activities for grade school students through Holden
Arboretum in Kirtland, OH. Researchers will also coordinate with established
programs at Kent State University (Science Learning Community, Upward Bound, and
Ohio Science &amp; Engineering Alliance) to attract students from the greater
Cleveland area, including those from under represented groups and first-
generation college attendees, which make up 46% of the student body at Kent
State.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding how root traits affect soil C dynamics
is key to accurate C modeling at local and global scales because roots provide
the majority of C that is stabilized in soil. However, despite obvious
differences in morphology, chemical composition and surrounding environment
between roots and leaves, root decomposition is currently conceptualized and
modeled almost entirely based on what is known about leaf decomposition. Fine
root decomposition occurs at a fundamentally different spatial scale than leaf
decomposition, resulting in closer interactions between the plant tissue,
decomposer organisms, and mineral and molecular mechanisms involved in soil C
stabilization. This proposal posits that root morphology is a key control over
decomposition rates, and is the reason why plant species have different effects
on soil organic matter pools. Decomposition rate is expected to be affected by
root morphology, as well as root chemical traits, because morphological traits
control surface area as well as breaks in the epidermis available for microbial
colonization. Moreover, root morphology likely has another, perhaps even larger,
impact on the form of organic matter deposited in soil during root
decomposition. It is predicted that plant species with thin and brittle first
order roots are more likely to fragment, being deposited directly as particulate
organic matter that can become further stabilized inside soil aggregates. By
contrast, thick roots that are resistant to fragmentation during decomposition
are predicted to sustain greater microbial activity, accompanied by production
of dissolved organic C (DOC) and translocation of plant C to the surrounding
soil. These hypotheses will be tested using field and controlled laboratory
microcosm experiments, by measuring mass loss rates of root systems representing
a gradient of trait combinations and by taking advantage of differences in 13C
signature between C3 and C4 plants to track root litter-derived C into different
soil C pools. This study will test a new framework linking root traits to soil C
dynamics in forests. The framework bridges an important gap between emerging
information on 1) physical-mineralogical mechanisms by which C is stabilized in
soil and 2) the distribution of tree root traits and their independence from
leaf traits. Traits are particularly variable for woody arbuscular mycorrhizal
plants, a dominant plant type in the tropics and many deciduous temperate
forests. Biogeographical and phylogenetic patterns in root traits will
facilitate their use in future modeling efforts, if a framework for soil C
dynamics is developed that more broadly incorporates root traits.