* 1549602
* STTR Phase I:  Reconfigurable Over-the-air Chamber for Wireless Device Testing
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2016,06/30/2017
* Michael Jensen, Wavetronix LLC
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 06/30/2017
* USD 211,607.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project has several facets. From
the standpoint of scientific understanding, using a reverberation chamber with
time-varying and non-homogeneous reflection from the walls is a new concept, and
successful understanding of this technology may impact a variety of
applications. More specifically for wireless device testing, the fact that the
most accurate traditional testing methods for wireless device performance are
costly, they are unavailable to all but the largest companies or research
organizations. The development of an accurate, low-cost, and rapid testing
capability levels the playing field among wireless device development
organizations and introduces consumer-benefitting competition into the market.
Furthermore, the low cost fosters the development of emerging technologies that
may offer low initial revenue but provide high social value. Finally, because
the low-cost and accurate testing capability will enable wireless device
designers to improve performance and offer increased spectral efficiency, it
will foster increased access to the limited radio spectrum, enabling more people
to have the access to information that they need for personal and economic
development. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Technology Transfer
Research (STTR) Phase I project is motivated by the observation that emerging
wireless devices must offer increased levels of sophistication in order to keep
pace with the growing demand for data throughput. Achieving this objective
requires development of new testing methods that can rapidly and accurately
assess the effectiveness of emerging devices at a low-cost. The innovative
reconfigurable over-the-air chamber (ROTAC) proposed in this work promises
dramatic improvement in wireless device testing. The proposed activities focus
on three key technical challenges: 1) generation of a detailed simulation model
that allows detailed understanding of the behavior of a ROTAC for wireless
device testing; 2) exploration of optimization algorithms that can quickly
determine the reconfigurable parameters that achieve the desired channel
characteristics; and 3) implementation of algorithms on an experimental ROTAC
prototype. Successful completion of these activities will demonstrate the
feasibility of the technology as a commercial product and enable observation of
the technology limitations and strengths.