* 1550435
* Conference: The 25th Silver Anniversary Meeting of The International Environmetrics Society (TIES) Nov.21-25,2015,United Arab Emirates(UAE) University,Al Ain,United Arab Emirates
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2015,02/29/2016
* Yulia Gel, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* William Cooper
* 02/29/2016
* USD 12,000.00

1550435&lt;br/&gt;Gel&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The 25th Silver Anniversary Meeting
of The International Environmetrics Society (TIES) to be held between November
21 -- 25, 2015 at the United Arab Emirates (UAE) University, Al Ain, United Arab
Emirates, aims to provide an open interdisciplinary forum for cross-
fertilization of ideas and enhancing cohesion between experts from statistics,
environmental engineering, computer science, ecology, hydrology, social
sciences, geography, and other environmental disciplines. The objective of the
proposal is to request support for US graduate students, junior researchers and
under-represented minorities working in the field of quantitative environmental
sciences to participate at the 25th Annual Meeting of The International
Environmetrics Society (TIES). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The rampant growth of
digital technologies and information storage have revolutionized the volume,
velocity and variety of collected information, leading to the so-called "Big
Data" paradigm. In turn, this alters the way in which environmental scientists
sense and analyze the available information dramatically, and ignites an ever-
increasing interest in the Big Data phenomenon virtually everywhere, from smart
and sustainable cities to renewable energy to health and business analytics.
However, Big Data is not only about managing massive data volumes, it is much
more on developing pioneering ways to connect various knowledge domains and fuse
information from non-traditional sources. Indeed, what is substantially less
discussed at the workshops on Big Data is the whelm of new ground-breaking
interdisciplinary links that emerge from these massive information volumes. For
example, what is common between Facebook, natural disaster awareness and
ecological foodwebs' Who is responsible for increasing house insurance rates:
outdated building standards, city infrastructure or climate change, and what can
be done in the short and long-term perspectives' In the era of massive multi-
platform, multi-scale and multi-source data, there appear increasingly more such
examples that fall well beyond the scope of any single discipline or field of
research practice and that connect across domains with new fascinating
capabilities. Such problems must be addressed simultaneously from different
perspectives, ranging from modern statistical sciences to pure and applied
studies of Earth systems and their exposure to physical and human influences to
environmental engineering and public policy. TIES2015 conference will highlight
an interdisciplinary dimension of modern environmental research and will
facilitate a better understanding of implications of climate change on
ecosystems, economics, policy and our society as a whole.