* 1550299
* UNS: Experimental and Theoretical Investigation of Thin Film Evaporation in Superhydrophobic-Superhydrophilic Hybrid Micro\Nanotextures
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/2015,06/30/2020
* Jiangtao Cheng, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Ying Sun
* 06/30/2020
* USD 271,985.00

Because liquid evaporation takes away a large amount of heat from a surface,
rapid evaporation is desirable. The research team will fabricate new types of
surfaces from which thin liquid films can evaporate faster than in a typical
boiling process. As a consequence, these surfaces enable removing heat at very
high rates which is demanded in many industrial applications. Not only graduate
students but also K-12 students from the Dallas area will be involved in this
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Thin film evaporation in capillary wicking
structures can potentially yield higher heat transfer rates as compared to those
of nucleate boiling. To further enhance the film evaporation heat transfer, the
PI proposes to explore a novel avenue with the help of electro-wetting on
dielectric (EWOD) to initiate and sustain thin film evaporation in micro/nano
porous bi-wick structures decorated on hot spot surfaces. The PI will first
develop multi-scale textured surfaces with micro- and nano-scale structures with
treatments to make them super-hydrophobic or super-hydrophilic. The EWOD fluidic
operations will be used to generate precisely controlled liquid volume on the
surface. The project will be concentrated on detecting fluid meniscus
distributions and wetting flow dynamics, using micro-PIV (particle imaging
velocimetry) on different surface structures to determine the interdependency of
the surface texturing on the wicking dynamics and thin film thickness in the
presence of high heat fluxes and the effect of surface texturing on heat
transfer rates.