* 1550748
* EAGER-NEON: Exploring Ecosystem Contributions of Microbial Diversity to the Vertical Atmosphere
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2019
* Kathryn Docherty, Western Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* Betsy Von Holle
* 12/31/2019
* USD 314,995.00

Little is known about airborne microbial communities (AMCs), which include
bacteria and fungi. The project will sample the composition of AMCs at five
altitudes above four natural ecosystem types in North America that are
characterized by NEON core sites. A novel combination of tethered and launched
balloon-borne samplers will be used to collect samples up to 25 km in the
atmosphere. Within the ecosystems, samples over urban and non-urban areas will
be collected. The characterization of this little know life zone will contribute
to a basic knowledge of the life around us and help to better understand
biosphere function and human impacts on it.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
exploratory research will sample bacteria, archaea, and fungi in the atmosphere.
Validated aerial microbial samplers using balloon technology will be employed.
Atmospheric measures will be compared with surface samples. Abundances will be
quantified by genetic sequencing. NEON data will be used to determine soil
microbes and dominant vegetation, which will be evaluated as predictors of AMCs.
Descriptions of the data and hypothesis tests on the similarity of samples by
ecosystem, altitude, season, and urbanization will be carried out using
statistical methods common in vegetation community studies. Broader impacts, in
addition to increasing basic knowledge, will include training opportunities for
undergraduate honors students, pairing biology and engineering majors and
targeted at under-represented groups.