* 1550689
* Public Project Works And Social Integration And Control In A Traditional Society
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2016,02/28/2022
* Payson Sheets, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 02/28/2022
* USD 126,732.00

Risk perception and natural hazard mitigation traditionally are done by federal
agencies in the US and other developed nations. Research, planning, and
mitigation have been top-down for many decades. A recent development is to
reverse that directionality, embedding hazards planning and mitigation in local
communities. Even the American Planning Association in 2014 recognized the
importance of granting planning and mitigation authority to local communities.
Experiences of other cultures and at other times when they faced disasters can
assist hazard planning in contemporary societies. The predominance of
scholarship of the ancient Maya in Central America is that the elite controlled
everything, a thoroughly top-down picture of the elites running the power
hierarchy, economy, society, and religion. Because elite architecture is
regularly built out of solid stone, the palaces, pyramids, temples, and tombs
preserve better than commoner architecture. And archaeologists have favored the
elite architecture and artifacts, leading to the perception of elites as being
all-powerful. Archaeologists have spent proportionally little effort in
examining the lives of commoners, in part because of poor preservation of their
remains. Only rarely is a "clear window" into commoner life discovered, and
fortunately one of them is the Ceren site in El Salvador. It is a village
exclusively of Maya commoners buried by a sudden volcanic eruption in AD
660.&lt;br/&gt;The project has been investigating levels of authority, and has
discovered a surprisingly large roadway from the village leading south.
Excavations will reveal the beginnings of the roadway in the village, and
therefore its functions. Its construction and maintenance evidently were decided
within the community. Geophysical instruments will search for the roadway under
the 15 feet of volcanic ash that bury it. Ground-penetrating radar and
resistivity tomography are the instruments that will be employed. Test pits will
confirm and follow the roadway. One apparent branch of the roadway began at
Structure 10, the community ritual structure where the harvest ceremony was
being held when the eruption began. There was very little time between the
initial warning and the arrival of the hot volcanic ash, but what is striking is
the emergency evacuation was successful even though it was at night. People
literally "headed south" on the roadway, and we have discovered their footprints
while they were fleeing. This is an example of local authority successfully
reacting quickly to an emergency, without having to wait for a top-down decision
from elite authority. The roadway may branch in the village, and lead to a
structure that may be at the social or political end, and that building will be
excavated in the second year of the project. A team of the finest experts in
earthen architecture preservation have been assembled to improve conservation of
this World Heritage archaeological site.