* 1550967
* An International Network to Consider the Ethical Use of Emerging Technologies
* SBE,SMA
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2019
* Roger Bingham, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Soo-Siang Lim
* 08/31/2019
* USD 304,550.00

The global acceleration in technological innovation and transformation is
incidentally leading to a scientific culture in which technology is often
designed and launched without providing ethical guidelines for its use. Thus,
the mere pace of technology mandates an urgent need for establishing ethical
guidelines as part of the natural course of science. Ultimately, a sustainable
landscape of innovation will include a culture of partnership between the
scientific community and ethicists, allowing capitalization on the benefits of
discovery while mitigating the liabilities to society. This movement must be
driven as a team effort at the outset. Thus, a primary purpose of this proposal
is to formulate a cross-disciplinary team of scientists and ethicists to
consider the ethical use of a select set of emerging technologies for
application to the science of learning, education, rehabilitation, medicine, and
augmented humans. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At the outset, a team of engineers,
cognitive scientists, psychologists and educators will work alongside ethicists
with expertise in the ethics of virtual reality, neurorehabilitation, robotics,
wearable sensors, and augmented humans through a workshop-style forum, set at
the University of Queensland, Australia, in order to forge a path for
establishing ethical guidelines as part of the scientific process. A virtual
organization will be formed to sustain these efforts and to create a secure
forum for continual interaction between scientists and relevant ethicists and
policy makers. The international component of this grant is absolutely essential
not only to the training of a diversity of students who will be trained to lead
sustainable science in the future, but also to balance the venture as an
international problem worthy of coordination and international collaboration at
the outset. Both the international component and the virtual forum also
establish the fact that ethical guidelines and policy need to be an inherent
component of STEM education. Educational activities for graduate students are an
inherent component of each goal of the grant and programs for recruitment and
inclusion of under-represented students are embedded in the plan. Additional
STEM education materials, and established routes for broader dissemination to
under-represented students, will be produced as a byproduct of the high level
scientific program. The activities will conclude with a fully articulated
process for establishing ethical guidelines as an integral part of technology
development.