* 1550122
* EAGER: Exploiting Keystroke Logging and Eye-Tracking to Support the Learning of Writing
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Evgeny Chukharev-Hudilainen, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 08/31/2018
* USD 299,519.00

The Cyberlearning and Future Learning Technologies Program funds efforts that
will help envision the next generation of learning technologies and advance what
we know about how people learn in technology-rich environments. Learning how to
write and communicate well is one of the core challenges for becoming a
productive member of society, and much is known about the psychology of the
writing process. Yet, most writing instruction focuses instead on the product of
writing, with limited ability to teach and support the moment to moment parts of
writing, and only supporting the writing process after the fact. This project,
an EAGER (EArly-concept Grant for Exploratory Research) explores the possibility
that technology allowing the computer to tell where a writer is looking
(reading), and what they are typing, can detect important aspects of their
writing process and provide real-time feedback. Additionally, recording where
learners look and what they type and allowing playback might support instructors
of writing to teach some of the techniques that research shows can improve
writing skills.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will prototype and test a
scaffolded interactive online writing environment that synchronizes keystroke
logging with eye-tracking gaze detection to enable automated detection of
writing strategies. Through a co-development process including instructors of
introductory college writing for primarily English as a Second Language learners
and their students, the team will explore the pedagogical strategies that real-
time analysis of eyetracking and keystroke logging enable, the constraints and
affordances of using such technology in a classroom environment, and the types
of formative feedback that have the greatest impact on writing strategies and
outcomes. Initial phases of the research will validate that the software can
accurately link gaze and keystrokes to an edit trace, and that the technology to
do so can practically be disseminated in real classroom environments. The later
phases of the research will focus on pedagogical strategies and their impacts;
14 focal students per semester will be recruited from the college level courses
hosting the pilot, and these students will conduct a variety of writing tasks
designed to elicit varied writing strategies; retrospective verbal protocols
prompted by recordings of the technology use will be analyzed using macro-level
coding conducted collaboratively by multiple researchers, and then subjected to
both inductive and deductive qualitative analysis.