* 1550251
* Innovative tools for incorporating continuous data from fossils in phylogenetic tree-building: leveraging the MorphoBank platform
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* David Ferguson, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Raleigh Martin
* 08/31/2021
* USD 189,898.00

The Web application/database MorphoBank is a modern tool giving scientists a
digital workspace to collaborate on matrices in teams worldwide - and in real
time. In MorphoBank scientists can add annotated digital images to matrices to
support observations of phenotypes. All data are permanently archived in a
highly reusable format at no cost to the investigator. Powerful new algorithms
have emerged in the last decade that allow investigators to use continuous or
morphometric data directly in phylogenetic tree-building. This project will
develop new web-based tools to allow investigators to collect and display
continuous data in phylogenetic matrices in Morphobank. In this context users
can integrate both continuous and discrete variables, can illustrate and label
this information and can share the data with the scientific community and the
public following publication.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Continuous and morphometric
data (e.g., relative length of jaw to skull, absolute body size) are commonly
collected scientific practice and recognized to be phylogenetically informative.
However, integrating continuous with discrete data in online matrices with
images is not yet possible. By introducing new tools to organize and graph
continuous data through the stable online platform, MorphoBank, paleontologists
can better examine how coding practices affect tree-building and can present
more robust descriptions of how continuous data from fossils inform the Tree of
Life.