* 1550470
* EAGER: HAWKEYE: A Cross-Layer Resilient Architecture to Tradeoff Program Accuracy and Resilience Overheads
* CSE,CCF
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2019
* Omer Khan, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 07/31/2019
* USD 250,000.00

With semiconductor technology scaling to sub-nanometer scales, minute
perturbations in lithography patterns and manufacturing processes make the
computing hardware vulnerable to unpredictable deviations in functionality.
Further, with increasingly strict power constraints, hardware designs are now
reliant on dynamic voltage scaling between nominal and near-threshold regions,
which exacerbates the reliability problem. These trends motivate the need for
system resiliency without increasing power consumption. This project proposes a
new method to achieve efficient resiliency, where hardware's coverage is bounded
with certain guarantees, while computational efficiency is traded off at the
cost of affecting program accuracy. The strategy focuses on data analytic
applications since they naturally offer tradeoffs in program accuracy due to the
unstructured nature of inputs, and the approximate algorithms used to solve
these otherwise intractable problems. At the software level, the project is
developing methods to classify crucial versus non-crucial code regions in a
program: the crucial code affects program correctness and outcome, its
functionality cannot be altered in any way; non-crucial code affects program
accuracy, therefore it could tolerate errors. The hardware subsequently
implements stronger resiliency methods (e.g., redundant execution) only for
crucial code. For the non-crucial code, lightweight resiliency schemes ensure
program correctness. If successful, this project will be a major step towards a
new rigorous framework to reason and guarantee system resiliency alongside a
program's performance, power, and accuracy of computation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research provides for significant broader
impacts related to curriculum development and student training through
integration of modules in existing computer architecture and system design
courses, and outreach through established REU sites and enrichment programs. The
project promises transparent resiliency guarantees and this will have a major
societal impact: enterprises and mission agencies will be able to reason in a
quantifiable way about the resiliency versus efficiency tradeoffs in their
software and hardware infrastructure. This is a crucial step forward given the
increased awareness of system reliability in many application domains, such as
healthcare, defense, finance, transportation, and automotive.