* 1550887
* Collaborative Research: Open Core Data: Transformative Data Infrastructure for Integrating and Accessing Scientific Drilling and Coring Data
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2021
* Kerstin Lehnert, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* James Allan
* 06/30/2021
* USD 228,039.00

Scientific drilling and coring is crucial for the advancement of the Earth
Sciences. Vast&lt;br/&gt;resources have been invested in drilling and coring
operations around the world: on land,&lt;br/&gt;in the oceans, and in the polar
regions. The return of these investments must be maximized&lt;br/&gt;by ensuring
optimal access and re-usability of the data generated through drilling and
coring&lt;br/&gt;projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project, Open Core Data
(OCD), is a next-generation approach to data management that will&lt;br/&gt;open
vast stores of existing and future geoscience data to new and innovative
scientific use by&lt;br/&gt;radically improving discoverability, accessibility,
citability, preservation, and integration&lt;br/&gt;of data from past, current,
and future drilling and coring projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research
objectives of the International Ocean Discovery Program and
Continental&lt;br/&gt;Scientific Drilling communities provide impressive
examples of the breadth of scientific&lt;br/&gt;themes that drilling and coring
helps address, ranging from the nature of the deep biosphere&lt;br/&gt;and
oceanic sub-seafloor, to understanding environmental change, species evolution,
fault&lt;br/&gt;zone dynamics, magmatism, and tectonics, among many others. The
scientific potential enabled&lt;br/&gt;by OCD is therefore large and expected to
impact many geoscience domains. OCD will form the&lt;br/&gt;nucleus of a
federated data infrastructure that will support entirely new scientific
approaches&lt;br/&gt;and lines of inquiry by facilitating integration of
continental and marine data for
synthesis&lt;br/&gt;studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;OCD will align with NSF data
policies to provide open access to all scientific drilling data.&lt;br/&gt;Both
research and the process of transferring data to archives for permanent curation
will&lt;br/&gt;be simplified and streamlined through this effort. Open Core Data
will structure and integrate&lt;br/&gt;scientific drilling data optimally to
enable data-driven science that faces substantial barriers&lt;br/&gt;at present
related to data heterogeneity in discovery, access, and formats. Open Core
Data&lt;br/&gt;will enable geoscience domains that utilize scientific drilling
and coring in their workflows&lt;br/&gt;to come closer to realizing the full
potential of their data, and to make their own unique&lt;br/&gt;new
contributions that benefit science and society as new research is enabled.