* 1550034
* Collaborative Research: Investigating Controls on Temporal-spatial Heterogeneous Deformation Along a Transpressive Strike-slip Fault System: The Eastern Denali Fault Corner
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2020
* Kenneth Ridgway, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Whitmeyer
* 07/31/2020
* USD 197,738.00

The 2,000 km long Denali Fault is a major active fault system in Alaska that
bounds crustal blocks, which slide past each other in a horizontal fashion. The
fault has a long and complicated history over the past 65 million years. Due to
its complex and curved geometry, there are portions of the fault where the
motion of the blocks is oblique to the fault trend resulting in the formation of
basins and fold and thrust belts. In this project, a research team from Purdue
University, Syracuse University, and the University of Alaska are studying a
portion of this fault to better understand the factors that control how these
crustal blocks deform. They are particularly interested in determining whether
the strength of the blocks on opposite sides of the fault or the geometry of the
fault controls deformation. There are many large active fault systems like the
Denali around the world and it is important to understand how these behave since
many are capable of generating significant earthquakes such as the 2002
magnitude 7.9 earthquake on the Denali Fault. Additional desired societal
outcomes of the study include full participation underrepresented minorities in
STEM through support of Native American students and researchers and outreach to
Alaskan Native American communities plus development of a globally competitive
STEM workforce through undergraduate and graduate student training.

Transitional zones between primarily strike-slip motion and oblique convergence
are a common feature along strike-slip faults. Deformation along these
transpressive faults is controlled in part by both the obliquity of the applied
stress and fault geometry (variation in strike and dip), and rheologic contrasts
across the faults on the lithospheric- and crustal-scale. These transpressive
fault regions offer insight into how strain is accommodated and also how the
broad zones defined by thrust belts and foreland basins evolve along strike-slip
fault systems as crustal blocks are translated along regions of varying
obliquity. The east-central Denali fault segment has a generally simple geometry
of unvarying strike and dip for about 120 km, lies between two large composite
terranes of contrasting strength, and has a documented history of vertical
tectonics during the Cenozoic. Thus, it serves as a natural laboratory to study
the affect of these two distinct boundary conditions on the history of
deformation along this active strike-slip fault system. This project will
examine the importance of fault geometry relative to contrasts in lithospheric
strength across faults on the heterogeneity of deformation along the eastern
corner of the Denali fault. The Denali fault in this region changes from
dominantly strike-slip to a transpressive regime. The competing hypotheses
(strength vs. geometry) on how strain is accommodated and deformation occurs
along this transpressive fault system will be tested by integrating
thermochronology, geochronology, structural, and basin analysis studies.
Detrital (modern river sediment and from strata) and bedrock thermochronology
(K-feldspar 40Ar/39Ar, apatite fission-track and apatite (U-Th)/He) north and
south of the Denali fault will track spatial and temporal patterns of exhumation
in conjunction with basin development along the fault as proxies and recorders
for deformational processes. 40Ar/39Ar and fission track tephrachronology,
palynology, and vitrinite reflectance will delineate timing of basin subsidence,
inversion, thermal history, and shortening rates. 40Ar/39Ar and U-Pb
geochronology on clasts from conglomerate and sand samples will provide insight
into paleo-drainage patterns and displacement of sediment sources from basins
along the fault. Together, these integrated data will yield important new
constraints on the relative contributions two common boundary conditions play in
heterogeneous deformation patterns along a continental strike-slip fault system.