* 1550743
* EAGER: Implantable Particle-Based Wireless Neurorecording Probes for  Minimally-Intrusive 3D Mapping of Brain Signals
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2017
* Carlos Mastrangelo, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 08/31/2017
* USD 299,998.00

Proposal No:1550743: &lt;br/&gt;EAGER: Implantable Particle-Based Wireless
Neurorecording Probes for &lt;br/&gt; Minimally-Intrusive 3D Mapping of Brain
Signals&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For the last thirty years neurorecording probe
technologies have been implemented using arrays of needle like electrodes. The
presence of needles in neural tissue causes extensive damage and inflammation
that lead to scar tissue formation and eventual probe failure. This work
proposes the use of electrodes arrays placed on the surface of sub-mm,
instrumented spherical particles. The small, shank free particles thus allow for
the healing of surrounding tissue after insertion minimizing scar tissue
formation and extending probe life. This new technology has broad applicability
in the realization of instrumentation for fundamental brain function studies,
brain to machine interfaces and neural prostheses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed work is divided into four separate tasks: (1) the development of new
microfabrication technologies for construction of hollow, spherical micro-
capsules with peripheral electrodes, (2) the development of ultracompact folded
CMOS neurorecording circuits, (3) the development of compact RF biotelemetry
circuits and (4) the testing of effectiveness, tissue damage and longevity of
particle-based probes on small animals.