* 1550097
* Cenozoic Basin Development and Environmental Change in the Peruvian Altiplano and Implications for Uplift Mechanisms
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2016,01/31/2019
* Joel Saylor, University of Houston
* Continuing Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 01/31/2019
* USD 380,268.00

Surface elevation is a first-order reflection of the geodynamic mechanisms that
create and sustain large mountain belts and plateaux. One family of models for
surface uplift predicts uplift spatially and temporally associated with crustal
thickening during mountain building processes. In these models, surface uplift
keeps pace with shortening of the crust. Another family of models predicts that
surface uplift is the result of removal of a dense subcrustal load accumulated
during crustal shortening. Uplift in these models significantly post-dates upper
crustal shortening. This project aims to test these end-member models in the
best modern analog for an oceanic-continental subduction system: the Central
Andean Plateau. Successfully discriminating between these models has
implications for the timing and pace of sedimentary basin formation in modern
and ancient settings. Because foreland basins host important hydrocarbon
reserves, determining which model best describes their formation has potential
implications for hydrocarbon exploration. Surface elevation also impacts the
global climate system and provides barriers to migration that promote the
development of new biological species. This project will promote full
participation of women and minorities in science, technology, engineering and
mathematics (STEM) fields by supporting at least one female graduate student and
at least one minority undergraduate student. The principal investigator and his
graduate students will contribute to STEM education by supporting geoscience
outreach to local middle school and homeschool students and by supporting the
TerraElm middleschool outreach program. Funds from this project will support the
education of the next generation in a globally competitive STEM workforce
through undergraduate and graduate training. Finally, it will support
international collaborations between US and Peruvian scientists.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will investigate the timing and mechanism of
surface uplift of high elevation terranes in the archetypal ocean-continent
subduction setting of the southern Peruvian Central Andean Plateau. Outstanding
questions have prevented a systematic identification of the mechanism of basin
formation and its relation to exhumation and surface uplift in the Peruvian
Central Andean Plateau. Insufficient chronological data prevents a detailed
reconstruction of the timing and tempo of sediment accumulation in the Peruvian
Central Andean Plateau. In this study, the principal investigator will develop a
detailed chronology of deposition based on multiple intercalated volcanic strata
in Neogene deposits and syndepositional volcanic zircons in Paleogene strata. A
regional reconstruction of sediment provenance, dispersal systems, and basin
geometry through time awaits application of multiple independent techniques will
also be produced. The principal investigator will use detrital geochronology
coupled with sandstone petrology, conglomerate clast composition, and
paleocurrent data to track sediment sources through time. Detrital (Uranium-
Thorium)/Helium thermochronology will be used in combination with detrital
Uranium-Lead geochronology to track the locus of exhumation through time.
Changes in depositional environments and climate are predicted to accompany
surface uplift, and this will be demonstrated by documenting changes in
depositional environment and climate using a combination of hydrogen and oxygen
stable isotopic compositions with paleotemperatures derived from carbonate
clumped isotope paleothermometry and by observations of changing sedimentary
lithofacies associations. The project will also employ a novel paleoelevation
proxy: delta-D values of the waters of hydration of volcanic glass to aid in
reconstructing the paleoelevation of the Peruvian Central Andean Plateau.