* 1550015
* EAGER: Renewables: Collaborative Research: Market Designs for Distribution Systems with High Renewable Penetration
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2018
* Konstantin Turitsyn, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Anil Pahwa
* 08/31/2018
* USD 150,000.00

The project aims to design electricity markets at the distribution system level
of the electric power grid to accommodate the trend toward increased renewable
energy based generation. The envisioned electricity markets will need to align
the interests of so-called prosumers (electric power producers who are also
electric power consumers) with overall system objectives. The long term aim of
this research is to design and analyze markets to allow prosumers to be
stakeholders and participants in achieving system objectives. In this specific
project, the team designs mechanisms and markets for strategic prosumers to
participate through an aggregator (whose role can also be performed by the
distribution company) to provide three services - energy balance in the
generator-to-home mode of operation, energy balance in the generator-to-grid
mode of operation, and frequency regulation. By focusing interest on the
intersection of the emerging power grid and market design, this project will
also foster further research in developing a full theory and practice for the
economics of the new power grid. Achievement of the project's objectives will,
therefore, generate considerable momentum at the scientific, technological and
economic levels to advance the functionality and harness the complexity of the
new power grid, boosting American competitiveness and economy. Concrete
educational and outreach plans including design of new courses and projects for
undergraduate involvement in research are also provided.

Many markets and mechanisms that guarantee useful properties such as efficiency,
revenue optimality, and truthful revelation, in spite of strategic selfish
agents are known. However, electricity markets are unlike many other commodity
markets since electricity is difficult to store and is regulated in the sense
that it has to be available on demand. The markets for large scale renewable
integration pose additional challenges including information asymmetry and
bounded rationality among participants, possible negative impact on system
stability, and operation across various time scales. These challenges require
new research both in the power grid (e.g., to identify the effect on the
stability of the grid in real time) and in economics (e.g., for mechanism design
to ensure optimal actions and not just truthful reporting). A new ecosystem
consisting of old and new entities will emerge and their interfaces will have to
be designed. This project focuses on design of markets and mechanisms for the
crucial interface between the aggregator and the prosumers. The project
explicitly considers the impact of information assymetry, limited computational
capabilities, and effect on stability of the power grid. Many insights will be
portable to other interactions, including between the ISO (independent system
operator) and multiple aggregators as well as a commercial EV (electric vehicle)
charging stations that wish to engage in arbitrage of energy using batteries of
its customers. By unifying techniques from economics, power systems, control
theory, and dynamical systems, this proposal takes aim at a high-risk high-
reward problem crucial for ensuring a future with large scale distributed
renewable integration.