* 1550914
* Engineering a Better Future: Interplay of Social Science, Engineering and Innovation
* SBE,SMA
* 02/01/2016,02/28/2019
* Eswaran Subrahmanian, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Cassidy Sugimoto
* 02/28/2019
* USD 48,131.00

The best engineering innovation anticipates user characteristics and culture,
which can be improved with active involvement by the social scientists.
Engineers often implicitly play the role of sociologist, economist, political
scientist and policy analyst in their work. The decisions engineers make often
changes the patterns of our lives, yet in ways that are not considered in the
design or application of technology. Innovations that have been socially
embedded such as the cell phone and the internet are transforming the economic,
social, cultural and physical well-being of people all over the world, often in
ways that were unanticipated. The focus on this workshop is to integrate social
science concepts, methods and research into engineering to affect the technology
developed, evaluated and the diffused. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop will
bring together scholars from a variety of social science and engineering
disciplines. The workshop is divided into four themes: literary and historical
view of engineering, engineering perspectives on social sciences, social science
perspective on engineering, and engineering education incorporating social
sciences. The primary objective of this workshop is to promote new collaborative
research incorporating the social science methods and considerations into
engineering research and design. &lt;br/&gt;