* 1550143
* Exploratory Research to Demonstrate the Feasibility of "Tactile Internet" Islands
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2017
* Gerhard Fettweis, International Computer Science Institute
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 08/31/2017
* USD 299,396.00

The vision of this exploratory project is to support the research needed to
examine the hardware-software techniques that would be needed to enable a
Tactile Internet. The Tactile Internet is a wireless based internet framework
for steering and control of remote objects and has the potential for
breakthrough technologies much in the same way the cellular telephony was
enabled by the wireless technologies during the past few decades. It could have
wide ranging applications with broad social impact in areas such as education,
traffic control, remote surgery, sports, entertainment, gaming, smart grid etc.
Thus, the broader societal impact of the project would be in the long run, but
is likely to be far reaching. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
develop novel algorithms and the hardware-software co-design methods to address
the issues of ultra-low latency and resilience that would be required of the
Tactile Internets of the future. The project will undertake building a prototype
at the International Institute of Computer Science (ICSI) at Berkeley,
California. It is expected that while the technical risks in this project are
significant, the potential gains far exceed the risks, and if successful, this
exploratory project can lead to new research more suitable for consideration by
several federal and industrial sponsors.