* 1550409
* EAGER:   Paleogenomic reconstruction and functional testing of archaic hominin olfactory receptors
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2015,08/31/2017
* Kara Hoover, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 08/31/2017
* USD 47,857.00

The human sense of smell (olfaction) is central to many human activities and
likely has a more complicated role in evolutionary pathways than previously
suspected. Some examples of the important role olfaction plays in human behavior
include detecting the fat content of food, directing food (and possibly mate)
preference, and assessing health. Human olfaction is different from our closest
living ape relatives, but it is not yet known if it is similar to or distinct
from our extinct hominin relatives. The fundamental issue addressed by this
project is whether or not genetic variation underlying odor detection receptors
in the noses of modern humans, Neandertals, and Denisovans led to differences in
how each species smelled the world. The investigators will use an innovative
bioinformatics and laboratory approach to uncover rebuild key components of
ancient noses. On a broad scale, the project promotes progress in the science of
ancient genomes and evolutionary biology by assessing gene function in extinct
populations. The data generated will contribute to human evolutionary genetics,
biology, and anthropology. Application of these methods to other ancient genes
has potential to transform our understanding of key evolutionary changes in
humans, including genes implicated in human health and disease susceptibility.
Finally, the project engages in public outreach to promote science education via
a variety of national and international events, and includes funding to support
training and professional development for under-represented individuals in STEM
disciplines. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This EAGER project will investigate whether
the olfactory repertoires of ancient hominins are distinct from or overlap with
modern humans. Specifically, the investigators will determine if novel variants
in the paleogenomes of Altai Neandertals and Denisovans resulted in distinct
olfactory repertoires, using variant calling in the paleogenomes of these two
hominins, reconstruction of 30 paleo-olfactory receptors via overlap extension
polymerase chain reaction, and experimental validation of functional responses
to odorants via a high throughput Dual-Glo Luciferase Assay System. The study
will be one of the first to validate function of paleogenes and the first to do
so on a large number of genes related to olfaction, an understudied area of
human evolution. Identifying variation in olfactory repertoires within a
comparative evolutionary framework may advance our understanding of hominin
dietary evolution and evolutionary ecology. The investigators introduce a method
that could be used by other researchers to validate function in other paleogenes
that might shed light on modern human health problems, using paleospecies as a
model (alongside others) for gene function.