* 1550740
* EAGER-NEON: Scaling up terrestrial plant phenology from individuals to Continental scale
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Andrew Richardson, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 08/31/2018
* USD 298,641.00

The timing of when plants flower, trees leaf out, and mosquitoes hatch provide
some of the most obvious signs of how organisms respond to their immediate
environments. These signs are accessible to all people, engaging the public in
observing fundamental ecological relationships. This project combines and
compares different sources of data to determine how well phenological (or
timing) data collected for individuals at a particular location represent
larger-scale patterns. Is earlier flowering of one species in a meadow in
California, for example, representative of earlier flowering at regional or
continental scales? The project will produce a series of videos about plant
phenology that will be distributed to K-12 teachers through the Northeast as
well as with citizen scientists affiliated with Project Budburst and Nature?s
Notebook. An undergraduate student will participate in the project, learning to
model diverse kinds of data. The project will engage an early-career
postdoctoral researcher who will receive training in quantitative modeling and
project leadership.

The goal of this project is to scale phenology observations of individual
organisms to the community, regional, and continental scales by building a
hierarchical modeling framework for integrating phenological and environmental
data. The framework combines emerging techniques in phenology modeling with a
Bayesian approach that accommodates a wide range of datasets and allows for
propagation of uncertainty. The project will evaluate the effects of the abiotic
environment, species identity, functional type, community composition, and
landscape heterogeneity on phenology across 13 National Ecological Observatory
Network, or NEON, sites and will investigate the extent to which phenology
measures at individual sites can be extrapolated to larger regions. Results will
be calibrated against long-term phenological data collected from the Harvard
Forest, to verify parameter estimations and model output obtained using NEON
data alone. The resulting modeling framework will be flexible and comprehensive,
facilitating the interpretation of diverse phenology data, including
standardized ground observations from NEON, near-surface canopy phenology data
from the PhenoCam network, satellite remote sensing, long-term ground
observations at single sites, and observations from citizen science networks.