* 1550795
* EAGER-NEON: Earthworm Diversity at Multiple Scales: What can Genetics Tell us about the Distribution of these Important Soil Organisms?
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2018
* Katalin Szlavecz, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 12/31/2018
* USD 286,197.00

The proposed research will develop and apply methods (DNA metabarcoding) to
examine and compare measures of earthworm diversity on a continental scale.
These comparative studies of earthworm diversity provide a unique opportunity to
evaluate several major environmental issues, such as soil ecosystem services and
the existence and consequences of biodiversity loss and species invasion. About
one fourth of all known species on Earth resides in the soil, but most of this
biodiversity is hidden due to the amount of labor needed to sample, extract and
identify soil organisms. DNA metabarcoding is a technique that targets
extracellular DNA, that is DNA from lysed or degraded cells in the soil. Thus,
it provides the opportunity to identify species that are not physically present
in the soil at the time of sampling. The continental scale coverage of NEON data
and archived soil samples provides a unique opportunity to examine patterns of
earthworm species richness at different spatial scales.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
first phase of the study will establish protocols tailored to soil samples
collected and archived by NEON. Soils and earthworms collected at the
Smithsonian Environmental Research Center (SERC) will be used for this phase.
The main goal is to establish the minimum amount of soil needed for sequencing.
The PIs will also sample soil within three different SERC habitats representing
three distinct earthworm communities. Different species are active at different
times of the year, thus they will conduct sampling both in spring and summer
2016. They plan to take composite samples mimicking the sampling that is
currently used by the NEON network. In the next stage DNA from soil samples from
the NEON archive will be extracted and sequenced. The species diversity data
will then be correlated with environmental data, also collected by NEON. The
environmental data includes: local climatic conditions, the amount and quality
of leaf litter, and soil properties, particularly pH, organic matter content and
texture. If available, data on soil microbe diversity will also be used as
metadata to evaluate and interpret species richness patterns for earthworms. The
PIs will publish papers focusing on the new methods, and on the results of the
genetic analyses of earthworm biological diversity. Species new to science
and/or significant new records will also be described in separate papers.