* 1550639
* Collaborative Research: EAGER-NEON: Is Canopy Structural Complexity a Global Predictor of Primary Production?: Using NEON to Transform Understanding of Forest Structure-function
* BIO,EF
* 12/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Brady Hardiman, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 08/31/2018
* USD 59,952.00

Forests of the United States take up and store in plant biomass an enormous
amount of carbon emitted from human activities, thereby slowing the accumulation
of atmospheric carbon dioxide, a greenhouse gas. Canopy structure, an ecosystem
feature that can be broadly characterized using remote sensing technologies, is
a well-established determinant of forest carbon storage, with the quantity of
canopy leaves a universal predictor of carbon storage that is incorporated into
models used to forecast how the Nation's dynamic and diverse forested landscape
affects climate. Recent work from a limited number of sites shows that the
arrangement of leaves within a volume of canopy may be as influential to forest
carbon storage as leaf quantity. Results from these studies suggest that leaf
quantity and arrangement provide unique, complementary information about the
underlying biological controls on forest carbon storage. Thus, coordinated
measurements of both leaf quantity and arrangement within the canopies of a
diverse array of forests may lead to substantially improved modeled estimates of
carbon storage by the Nation's forests. In support of this goal, work here uses
sites from the National Ecological Observatory Network (NEON) to evaluate
whether canopy structural complexity, or the spatial variability in leaf
arrangement within a canopy, is a global predictor of forest carbon storage
within and across sites varying in physical structure, species composition and
diversity, and climate. NEON's standardized methods, systematic sampling design,
breadth of data, wide geographic footprint, and built-in gradient of forest
physical structure provide an unprecedented opportunity to determine whether
carbon storage-canopy structural complexity relationships are broadly
generalizable. Enhanced knowledge of the role forest canopy structural
complexity plays in carbon storage could transform fundamental understanding of
how ecosystem structure affects carbon uptake, leading to more accurate climate
models for informing science-based policy. Additionally, the results of this
study have broad implications for how forests of the United States are managed
in support of greenhouse gas mitigation and will provide new information on how
management practices that modify canopy structure broadly affect land carbon
sequestration. This project will train undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral
researchers from a diverse group of academic institutions, and form the basis
for a new Biology course at Virginia Commonwealth University taught by the
project's postdoctoral associate. The researchers, including students and a
postdoctoral associate, will play key roles in an NSF-supported research network
that aims to develop broadly applicable remote sensing tools for quantifying
forest features relevant to land managers, foresters, policy makers, and
ecosystem and climate modelers.

Ecosystem structure-function relationships represent a long-standing research
area of ecosystem science; yet, whether relationships between canopy structural
complexity (CSC) and net primary production (NPP), characterized at present for
only small number of sites, are conserved across eco-climatic boundaries is
unknown. Although considerable work has focused on the global importance of leaf
area index (LAI) as a predictor or NPP, similar analysis of CSC and NPP spanning
eco-climatic domains has not been conducted. As a result, whether CSC is a
global predictor of NPP that provides additional mechanistic insight beyond LAI
is not known, though site-level analyses, including those conducted by the PIs,
suggest CSC may be as important as LAI in explaining variation in NPP. The
National Ecological Observatory Network (NEON), with standardized measurements
and sampling design, offers an unprecedented platform to transform understanding
of forest structure-function relationships on a broad spatial scale. The goals
of the project are to use 10 NEON sites containing a total of 176 plots to test
whether forest CSC predicts NPP within and across a diverse array of temperate
forest types and eco-climatic domains, and to identify underlying mechanisms
linking CSC with NPP. Several metrics of CSC will be derived for each NEON site
and individual plots within a site using data collected with a portable canopy
lidar (PCL). Structural metrics will be related to co-located measurements of
wood NPP estimated from the incremental change in woody biomass calculated using
tree allometries. An underlying mechanistic basis for global NPP-CSC linkages is
hypothesized to include improved resource-use efficiency as CSC increases, which
will be examined by correlating CSC with measures of light-use efficiency (wood
NPP/fraction of absorbed photosynthetic radiation [fPAR]) and nitrogen-use
efficiency (wood NPP/canopy nitrogen mass). Within- and among-site variation in
wood NPP as a function of CSC, leaf area index (LAI), and canopy nitrogen mass
will be examined using a multi-model inference framework. The PIs hypothesize
that model rankings will show variation in wood NPP within and among sites is
best explained by multivariate models that include CSC in addition to LAI and
canopy nitrogen mass parameters because each canopy feature represents
complementary but not redundant mechanistic information. Using NEON sites to
advance understanding of how and why CSC affects forest NPP across a broad
spatial dimension could transform mechanistic understanding of ecosystem
structure-carbon cycling relationships, and greatly improve carbon cycling
models and remote sensing applications, while providing a crucial linkage
between the two. Broader impacts stem from three separate areas: enhanced
participation in a funded NSF Research Coordination Network (RCN), postdoctoral
training and career development, and undergraduate research training. The PIs
will advise and co/author resulting project publications and presentations with
a postdoctoral and student researchers, with the postdoc serving as instructor
of record for a 1-credit graduate topics course on ecosystem structure-function
relationships at Virginia Commowealth University.