* 1550794
* EAGER: Collaborative Research: Developing a Parallel and Distributed Computing Concepts Curriculum Enhancement for the Computer Science Principles Course
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Charles Weems, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 08/31/2018
* USD 240,000.00

This project is initiating design of a Parallel and Distributed Computing (PDC)
curriculum enhancement for the Computer Science Principles (CS0) course that is
also applicable to the corresponding high school advanced placement (AP) course.
&lt;br/&gt;Modern computing systems routinely employ high levels of parallelism
(e.g., multiple cores, graphics processors) and distributed computing (e.g.,
cloud services). PDC significantly affects daily lives, and its importance in
solving meaningful societal problems can inspire students to take a deeper
interest in applying computing in STEM fields and beyond. However, most CS0
curricula are founded predominantly on older, sequential models of computing.
CS0 has multiple purposes that address many audiences, and is now seen as a
vehicle for increasing interest among students, especially from underrepresented
groups, for studying computing in depth or to major in computer science. It has
thus been the subject of an effort to create a new AP exam, with associated high
school courses. Since the AP exam is still in a pilot phase, there is a brief
window for amending the curriculum to reflect 21st century computing. The
potentially vast impact of the AP course could quickly settle into educating
students under the old sequential paradigm, acquiring an inertia that makes it
difficult to change. This collaborative effort is developing PDC curriculum
guidelines for CS0 and AP courses through gathering expert input and involving
necessary stakeholders to ensure that an appropriate curriculum is developed and
adopted. The goal is for students to gain an understanding of how modern
computing technology actually functions, rather than being taught an obsolete
operational model. &lt;br/&gt;The effort is following a process similar to the
proposers' highly successful prior effort to design a PDC guideline for
undergraduate curricula, which was incorporated into the ACM standard
curriculum. The approach begins with a thorough survey of the state of practice
in covering PDC topics in CS0. The survey is followed by a workshop attended by
experts and stakeholders to draw upon their knowledge and experience. Then a
select steering committee is formed that advises the investigators on the design
of a curriculum and helps them identify means to bring it to fruition. The
effort seeks the broadest possible dissemination of the results to have the
greatest possible impact.&lt;br/&gt;Broad impact is the core of this effort,
which seeks to expand awareness and appreciation of the important concepts at
the foundation of PDC, to students in many different disciplines and in high
school. Making these interesting and exciting topics more accessible to a wider
range of students should generate deeper interest in the study of computer
science and the application of concurrent computation in science, engineering,
and commerce. Advancing PDC education further enables advances in science and
engineering, which depend ever more on high performance computing, by providing
the next generation of practitioners and researchers with the necessary skills
and knowledge to routinely recognize how and where PDC concepts may be applied.