* 1550316
* EAGER: Intrinsic, Universal Fouling Resistance in Membranes for More Sustainable Production, Use, and Recovery of Critical Resources
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2017
* Laura Arias Chavez, Tennessee Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 07/31/2017
* USD 41,000.00

1550316&lt;br/&gt;Arias Chavez&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Membrane fouling limits
achieving energy efficiency of membrane technologies for water treatment. This
results in economic, environmental, and energetic penalties on potentially new
applications of membranes for resource reclamation. The PI has recently
determined that polyamide morphology can vary significantly across membrane
surfaces and that some regions can have a very low surface roughness. The
proposed study will improve the scientific understanding of the relationship
between thin-film composite membrane structure and
performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An in-depth, localized evaluation of the low-
roughness regions of these membranes is proposed to: (1) better understand and
quantify the polyamide layer structure in these regions, and &lt;br/&gt;(2)
demonstrate that high standards for membrane permeability and selectivity are
maintained in these local regions. Electron microscopy, atomic force microscopy
and surface titration methods will be used to obtain additional quantitative
information about the structure of the polyamide layer in low-roughness regions.
New equipment for testing active layer membrane permeability and selectivity
will be developed to allow membrane transport performance to be measured on the
same scale (&lt; 1 cm2) as roughness characterization work. This work, if
successful, will demonstrates that low-roughness polyamide regions retain
excellent permeability and selectivity, and will serve as a proof-of-concept for
the development of a new line of membranes effective against foulants of all
types rather than just one type of foulant. To increase outreach and diversity,
the PI will partner with a local high school to involve the students in thinking
about decentralized water treatment technologies. Some of these technologies
will also be used to make environmental engineering compelling and
understandable to middle-school-aged girls at the annual Engineering the Future
outreach event held at the