* 1550469
* I-Corps: Plasma-Based High Throughput Water Purification
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2016
* Selman Mujovic, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 07/31/2016
* USD 50,000.00

Current domestic water treatment systems simply filter and disinfect water and
are not specifically designed to address new and emerging contaminants that
stand as a potential public health concern. These contaminants include
pharmaceuticals, personal care products, industrial oils and dyes, pesticides
and herbicides, endocrine disruptors, bacteria, protozoa, viruses and chlorine
resistant microbes. The objective of this project is to develop and market a
water purification unit that uses plasma to rid water of organic contaminants.
The plasma?water interaction produces agents that decompose these contaminants
via a process call mineralization into carbon dioxide, water and inorganic
salts. The novel attribute of the device under development is that it is
scalable, accommodating a range of applications from single use and point of use
to in-line water finishing as an integrated module in a water treatment plant.
Of particular interest is the use of this technology in underdeveloped countries
where water treatment infrastructure is lacking. In general, the water treatment
industry is large, encompassing four major sectors ranging from wastewater
treatment to municipal drinking water. All sectors have identified the need for
advanced water treatment methods and the plasma purifier can potentially satisfy
their needs. Along with product development, this effort aims to identify the
most appropriate market for direct application and ultimately to commercialize
the product for use in the water treatment sector. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project aims to commercialize a novel, plasma-based water treatment method. The
application of such a technology encompasses nearly all aspects of water use
ranging from domestic drinking water to post treatment of industrial reject
water. The approach utilizes advanced oxidation to decompose organic toxins as
well as oxidize metal contaminants while addressing inadequacies in current
water treatment technology. Though plasma-based water treatment has been
investigated in the past, its widespread application has remained an elusive
goal. This is due largely to the difficulty in scaling up the approach since
water's dielectric properties strongly deter electrical breakdown. However, this
approach separates the input feed water into dielectric streams capable of
interstitial breakdown. This so-called packed bed discharge arrangement is the
key enabling physics for this innovation. Upon application of a voltage pulse,
one can achieve breakdown between the streams thereby producing a surface
plasma. The surface plasma reacts on the high surface area to volume ratio
streams generating radicals that subsequently treat the core water. This
approach, therefore, allows for high throughput via multiple water streams and
the possibility of once through treatment. The approach can be used as an inline
module for water finishing or post treatment applications as well as direct
treatment, point-of-use applications. The commercial potential for this
technology is high in that it addresses the needs of at least four sectors: 1)
municipal drinking water 2) waste water processing 3) industrial runoff and 4)
point of use purification for mobile units or underdeveloped regions without
water treatment infrastructure. Each of these sectors has a stake in the
implementation of advance water treatment methods, not so much as an upgrade but
as a necessity to address this emerging contamination problem. In an attempt to
satisfy real market needs, the general plan for commercializing this technology
is essentially three-fold: 1) customer discovery, 2) market evaluation and 3)
development of a strategic partner to market and sell the product. Customer
discovery is a key aspect of the I-Corps program. This stage of
commercialization is critical in that it identifies concretely the actual
customer of the technology beyond any preconceived notions regarding the market.
This discovery process also will allow us to educate the potential venders and
customers of the attributes of the technology as well as identify desirable
attributes of the technology as perceived by the community but not necessarily
obvious to us at the moment. In parallel with these efforts, we will refine the
apparatus to an advanced engineering model. This aspect is important in that it
allows one the ability to make an honest assessment of system cost,
construction, energy consumption, and overall capability.