* 1550358
* RAPID: Differential Fluvial Response of the Abiotic Atacama Desert to a Rare Rainstorm Event
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2016
* Ronald Amundson, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Richard Yuretich
* 06/30/2016
* USD 20,948.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;A non-technical description explaining the
broader significance of the project&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Extreme rainfall events
are significant shapers of landscapes in arid regions. However, the processes of
flood generation and the relative importance of various landscape components in
producing and conducting the water flow is relatively unknown. This RAPID
project provides a rare opportunity to use previously-collected data together
with new observations and remote-sensing information to examine the response of
different types of arid landscape features to sudden, heavy rainfall. Knowledge
of landscape response to these extreme events will aid in planning for
communities in these regions, since flash flooding is a common result and the
source of the water is often unpredictable. The project involves collaboration
with Chilean scientists. The results will go beyond the immediate are of the
Atacama Desert that is the site of the investigation and encompasses the semi-
arid regions of the US and other parts of the world.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A technical description of the
project&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This RAPID project will use previous research along
a transect of the Atacama Desert to test the hypothesis that as the imprint of
chronic hyper-aridity increases on the landscape due to the accumulation of salt
and dust, the landscape becomes more resistant to runoff and overland flow from
rainfall. Conversely, the nearly plant-less but relatively salt-free
environments at the desert margin may be subject to rapid runoff and the
generation of new fluvial features such as fans and mudflows. The recent
rainfall is a rare opportunity to build on earlier investigations and to develop
knowledge of the different landscape responses to a locally extraordinary event.