* 1550000
* EAGER: Renewables: Game-Theoretic Methods for Analysis and Design of Distributed Renewable-Based Energy Resources in Smart Grids
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2015,02/29/2020
* Francisco De Leon, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Anil Pahwa
* 02/29/2020
* USD 299,901.00

The project considers how to design electricity pricing for the electric grid
with high penetration of renewable energy sources. The scenario considered
includes fluctuating electricity prices and availability of energy storing
devices such as batteries to independent power producers. Using storage devices
such as locally situated batteries, renewable generation sources need not sell
their produced energy into the grid immediately, but can game the system to
maximize an expected benefit. The project begins with this observation, and
gives the fundamentals of an interesting formulation of the management of
distributed renewable electricity generation as a game. The concept is novel and
can lead to significant impact on the design of electricity markets for power
grids with high levels of renewable generation. Application of game theoretic
ideas to the pricing models for power grid with increasing presence of renewable
generation is an exciting topic that can serve as an outstanding educational and
research example for other applications as well. The framework can also enable
policy makers to predict the cross-layer system behaviors and develop associated
pricing and regulation policies for emerging paradigms in the power industry.

The investigators will study possible gaming formulations of electricity markets
for high levels of renewable generation. Mechanism design ideas from game theory
will be used to forge a pricing structure that will naturally lead to a
desirable social equilibrium. The project enables a close collaboration between
two senior investigators from different research domains to explore the
scientific foundations of pricing of electricity with distributed generation in
smart grids. The developed framework will extend the optimal power flow problems
into a distributed framework that naturally captures the distributed control and
management of geographically dispersed and heterogeneous distributed renewable
sources. The project will create knowledge beyond the existing frameworks of
power systems, and bridge the economic, control, and device layers of the power
grid. The project consists of three coherent research tasks that are summarized
as follows: (1) Establishing game-theoretic models for smart grids with high
levels of distributed generation from renewable sources, and developing
analytical tools to understand their impact on existing centralized generation.
(2) Developing a mechanism design theory to design pricing mechanisms and the
penetration levels of renewable resources to achieve an efficient and resilient
hybrid power grid that consists of both centralized and distributed generation.
(3) Building software tools and case studies using the distributed generation
networks in Manhattan to provide publicly accessible benchmarks for the
envisioned framework and validate the game-theoretic system designs.