* 1550068
* Integrative Modeling/Simulation and Experimental Validation of Therapeutic Nanodiamond Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2015,09/30/2015
* Dean Ho, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* kara peters
* 09/30/2015
* USD 12,598.00

Nanodiamonds possess several properties that enable their versatile application
towards drug delivery. For example, they can carry and release proteins, small
molecules, genetic material, etc. They can also be applied as particle-based
vehicles for pervasive delivery, or integrated within devices for localized
treatment. To optimize the therapeutic potential of the nanodiamonds, a broader
understanding of their chemical/mechanical properties will be addressed by this
research program. This information will uncover the fundamental science
underlying nanodiamond particle structure, chemical composition/distribution on
nanodiamond surfaces, and drug attachment/detachment mechanisms, etc. This
program unites complementary expertise in mechanical/biomedical engineering,
chemistry, and engineering education research towards the comprehensive analysis
of fundamental nanodiamond properties via atomistic, quantum, and continuum
modeling/simulations. Information gleaned from these studies will be integrated
with experimental validation towards the intelligent design of therapeutic
nanodiamond particles and devices.

This program will merge nanodiamond and engineering education research to train
the next generation of scientific/engineering leaders. The educational/outreach
plan will integrate educational module design, faculty guest lectures, and
custom designed experimental kits to impact a diverse student population and
increase nanotechnology interest. These modules will also be co-designed with
partner teachers. Module topics will include an introduction to nanocarbon
materials/devices, nanobiology, etc. Images derived from the modeling/simulation
project objectives will be used to accomplish the challenge of visually
illustrating nanotechnology concepts.

Module/experimental kit implementation will be coordinated by postdoctoral
researchers and graduate students, and feedback/analysis of the outreach program
efficacy will be conducted in collaboration with the Northwestern Center for
Engineering Education Research.