* 1550990
* Exploring the Role of Instructors' Social Networks in Undergraduate STEM Instructional Improvement
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2017
* Chris Rasmussen, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 08/31/2017
* USD 49,974.00

Calls for improvement of undergraduate mathematics and science education have
resulted in numerous initiatives that seek to improve student learning outcomes
by promoting changes in teaching practices at the undergraduate level. Although
many of these initiatives focus on individual instructors, contemporary
theoretical approaches consider the academic department to be a highly
productive unit for creating change because of the social nature of knowledge
construction. The tools of social network analysis (SNA) can be productively
used to determine the current state of academic departments, target participants
for involvement in change initiatives, and inform higher education reform
efforts to support quality teaching. The goal of this proposed two-workshop
series is to accelerate knowledge development about the use of SNA in studying
department-level change by bringing STEM education researchers who have been
early users of these methods together with established SNA experts. Project aims
are to: 1) develop a theoretical and practical foundation for SNA research
related to department-level instructional change, 2) identify key metrics and
measurement techniques, 3) develop a coherent research program among early users
of SNA methods in undergraduate STEM education research and 4) pool several data
sets to begin articulation of normal values for key metrics. The work will
contribute to the intent of the Improving Undergraduate STEM Education in the
Directorate for Education and Human Resources (IUSE-EHR).

The two-workshops, punctuated by virtual meetings in between, will bring
together STEM education researchers, who have been early adopters of these
methods, as well as novices in SNA use, with recognized SNA experts. Four
institutional teams (Oregon State University, San Diego State University,
University of California-San Diego, and Western Michigan University) will
comprise the core teams with a total of eight researchers. An additional eight
participants from other institutions, who are less active in regard to SNA, will
be invited to participate in order to provide for more diverse perspectives, as
well as to expand their capacity and provide momentum for additional research in
this area. These interactions will result in consensus on a theoretical framing
for SNA related to departmental change, metrics for measurement in this regard,
a research focus, and sharing of data sets. Ultimately, it is expected that a
more robust research agenda in regard to the use of social network analysis
(SNA) in studying departmental change will occur.