* 1550230
* NSF:EAGER: 2D Layered Heterostructure based Tunnel Field-Effect Transistors (TFETs) and Circuits
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2017
* Kaustav Banerjee, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Dimitris Pavlidis
* 08/31/2017
* USD 178,000.00

The global semiconductor/electronics industry is confronting a fundamental
challenge in the form of increasing power and energy consumption by the
complementary-metal-oxide-semiconductor (CMOS) switches that have been the
workhorse of the electronics industry for over four decades. Band-to-band
tunneling field-effect transistors (TFETs) are considered the most promising
post-CMOS switches, since they provide abrupt switching characteristics, and
thereby enable ultra-small supply voltage and switching energy without
compromising the ON-OFF switching current ratio, which is un-achievable in
conventional CMOS devices. However, in spite of major efforts around the world,
it has been found extremely challenging to design a working TFET using
conventional bulk materials such as silicon, germanium or III-V semiconductors,
due to a number of limitations including their inability to be thinned down
below some critical value (that is essential for increasing the energy-
efficiency of transistors designed with those materials), without loss of
essential properties, as well as due to the existence of large density of
interface traps arising from the inherent dangling bonds that exist at the
surfaces of all such covalently bonded materials. 2-dimensional (2D) layered
materials are atomically-thin and have pristine surfaces, and can therefore
overcome the limitations of bulk materials. The main goal of this project is to
explore the feasibility of using such 2D materials such as molybdenum
disulphide, to build a TFET that can meet the performance requirements of the
semiconductor industry and thereby replace the CMOS as the next-generation
ultra-low power and energy-efficient electronic switch. Such a transistor can
potentially revolutionize the worldwide electronics and information technology
(IT) industries and bring transformative changes to computing, sensing and many
other areas that affect the way we live, work and play.

Tunneling field-effect Transistors (TFETs) are considered the most promising
post-CMOS switches, since they provide abrupt switching characteristics, i.e.,
small (<60 mV/decade at room temperature) sub-threshold swing (SS), and hence
enable ultra-small supply voltage and switching energy without compromising ON-
OFF current ratio, which is un-achievable in conventional CMOS devices .
However, it has been found extremely challenging to recover the expected TFET
performance on bulk material platform, which results from 1) inefficient gate
control leading to large tunnel barrier width and low ON-current; 2) large band
gap leading to high tunnel barrier and low ON-current; 3) interface trap induced
leakage current leading to large SS. Utilizing the emerging 2D materials for
TFET application can potentially overcome these issues, because 2D materials
have 1) sizable band gap and band alignment that allow staggered- or even
broken-gap type heterojunction design and lowering of tunnel barrier height, 2)
ultra-thin body that provides excellent gate control and hence lowers tunnel
barrier width and 3) pristine surface that greatly suppresses the trap
generation. Therefore, the goal of this project is to explore (both
theoretically and via experiments) 2D materials based TFETs. More specifically,
we propose to employ a 2D heterostructure material platform to design and
fabricate the proposed TFET device, which is radically different from all
previous efforts reported in literature. This project is expected to have wide
implications for the semiconductor and IT industries. Broader impact of the
proposed research is also well recognized, particularly in the light of 3D
integration technology now being employed worldwide, where eventual integration
of ultra-low leakage and relatively temperature insensitive TFETs could be
exploited to build next-generation high-performance and ultra-low power
integrated circuits to support Big Data applications such as Internet of Things,
social media, etc. The overall program also ties research to education at all
levels.