* 1550608
* 2016 Photosensory Receptors &amp; Signal Transduction GRC: Natural and Synthetic Photoreceptor Systems: From Microbes to Man, Galveston, TX, January 23-29, 2016
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2016
* Katrina Forest, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* elsbeth walker
* 07/31/2016
* USD 14,860.00

Plants, animals and microbes all have the ability to sense light, and light has
profound effects on the lifecycle and physiology of these organisms.
Understanding how light is perceived and how perception of light can orchestrate
biological processes - from mammalian vision to plant growth to bacterial
pathogenicity- requires integration of diverse methodologies and masteries. The
2016 Photosensory Receptors &amp; Signal Transduction Gordon Research Conference
and its closely associated Gordon Research Seminar will provide a platform for
photobiologists from diverse disciplines to showcase recent advances,
participate in lively debate, and share new applications. An important goal of
both the conference and the seminar is to provide a venue for young scientists,
graduate students, postdoctoral researchers, and new faculty members to present
their work and learn about the most current work of others, while becoming
better integrated into the community of photobiology
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Photosensory Receptors &amp; Signal
Transduction Gordon Research Conference is unique, connecting a very diverse
group of researchers in a systems-oriented way around the topic of Photosensory
Receptors. Uniting topics and approaches this way has been instrumental, for
example, in developing optically-based technologies aimed at controlling the
transmission of nerve impulses and the restoration of vision at unprecedented
spatial-temporal resolution. The scientific discussions, research presentations
and informal interactions among the audiences of this GRC/GRS meeting will
advance understanding of mechanism of action and function of naturally occurring
photoreceptor systems and lead to further development of engineered photosystems
for clinical and biotechnological applications. This GRC/GRS pairing will have
an enormous training impact for graduate students, postdoctoral fellows and
beginning faculty. The participants from both meetings will be integrated in an
exciting scientific community, instilling a sense of belonging and of
responsibility to carry the field into the future. This outcome will be
facilitated by the short GRS that precedes the GRC. Junior scientists have been
chosen to lead three sessions comprising short talks. All attendees will
participate in a poster session and informal discussions. One session will
center around 5-8 mentor-led open table discussions, where GRS participants meet
established investigators in a structured but informal way, to consider career
development in academia and industry, gender equality, research funding and
future research directions. By actively participating in the GRC that follows,
junior scientists will integrate more fully into the community of scholars and
practice their growing skills and confidence in scientific discussion with
leaders of the field.