* 1550051
* EAGER: Collaborative Research: Designing Digital Rails to Foster Scientific Curiosity around Museum Collections
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2017
* Steven McGee, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Amy Baylor
* 08/31/2017
* USD 218,268.00

One of the best ways to engage people in Science, Technology, Engineering, and
Mathematics (STEM) at a young age is through informal museum experiences. Yet,
the research base on understanding how learning and engagement develops through
these experiences is still emerging. Technology opens new ways to research these
experiences to understand these processes better. In this proposal, researchers
from Northwestern University and the Chicago Field Museum will collaborate to
develop digital interactive displays to enhance the experience at various
exhibits by providing additions varying in complexity from simple menu
navigation, to 3D model manipulation, to fully interactive games. These will
replace the typical static plaques that go along with an exhibit. In addition to
enhancing the experience with the exhibits, these displays allow researchers to
collect more data on people's interaction with exhibits, particularly touch
screen information regarding how visitors interacted with the 3D models, games
and touchscreens. The proposed research will help address questions regarding
the role of games in learning, for instance, do these games provide enhanced
motivation and learning, or do they limit social interaction and create small
silos in the midst of a group experience? It will also answer questions about
how creativity is fostered in these environments by observing interactions and
combining that with the digital data collected for a fuller picture of the
development of engagement and learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Researchers from
Northwestern University and the Chicago Field Museum will develop digital rails,
interactive computer displays mounted on exhibit case railings that function as
dynamic labels and provide enhanced experience features such as the integration
of 3D modeling and games. They propose to augment the digital rails with near-
field communication (NFC) tracking devices (RFID readers) to monitor amount of
interaction and to link with user cell phones. They will collect NFC tracking
data, computer logs of touch interaction, and interaction with mobile apps and
observe visitor behavior around the interactive display cases. This early stage
research study will employ design-based research to investigate this new form of
interactive technology. Through iterating on observations and linking the
observational data with the digitally collected data, the team will develop an
understanding of the design principles for digital rails that best foster
interactivity, social interaction, creativity, and learning of the material the
exhibits focus on.