* 1550664
* Collaborative Research: RAPID: Evaluating the Cognitive and Educational Benefits of Mental Abacus Training
* EDU,EES
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2017
* David Barner, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Margret Hjalmarson
* 08/31/2017
* USD 100,000.00

Mental Abacus is a popular mathematics technique practices primarily in Asian
countries in elementary school contexts. Mental abacus students begin by
learning to make rapid arithmetic computations on a physical abacus and then
learn to imagine moving the beads without the physical device. Young children
can then rapidly add, subtract, multiply and divide large numbers. This project
will compare mental abacus teaching to two other teaching methods in order to
understand how it helps first and second grade students learn to compute and
learn conceptual understanding of place value. The ECR program emphasizes
fundamental STEM education research that generates foundational knowledge in the
field. Investments are made in critical areas that are essential, broad and
enduring: STEM learning and STEM learning environments, broadening participation
in STEM, and STEM workforce development.&lt;br/&gt;Prior work indicates the
mental abacus computations are connected to visuo-spatial working memory. The
project is a randomized experiment to compare the effectiveness of Mental
Abacus, Singapore Math Curriculum and business-as-usual curriculum in grades 1
and 2 in multiple elementary schools. Math outcomes will be measured with
standardized test scores and four assessments (an in-house arithmetic fluency
measure, the WIAT, the Woodcock-Johnson III, and a measure of conceptual
understanding of place-value). A battery of cognitive measures and a measure of
intervention fidelity will also be included. The project should result in
understanding the effectiveness of Mental Abacus as a method for teaching and
provide a foundation for larger scale work in the area.