* 1550427
* I-Corps:  Rapid Localization Platform for Self-Organized Networking Systems
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2015,01/31/2017
* Wei Cheng, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 01/31/2017
* USD 50,000.00

The Location Based Service (LBS) is one of the most popular types of
applications in networking systems. As the name suggests, the success of a LBS
application depends on two pipelined procedures: localization and information
transmission. Unlike in relatively static networks, it is crucial to accomplish
localization as early as possible in networks where users continually change
their positions. This is to ensure that the targets' positions are still valid
for LBS applications. In the environments, where GPS is not available
(interfered, blocked, or destroyed), such as in battlefields, underwater,
tunnels, and buildings, the current relative localization techniques are facing
long localization delays, and this drawback cannot be overcome because of the
nature of conventional localization requirements. Customers who have critical
time requirements on location-based applications have to densely deploy
anchor/reference nodes, which already know their locations, to reduce the
localization time. However, the deployment of anchor/reference nodes is
expensive, and it sometimes still cannot meet the critical time requirements.
The proposed innovation, therefore, will provide solutions for those customers
who have time-critical location based applications running in GPS free
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this I-Corps Teams project is to
develop a feasible plan to commercialize the rapid localization techniques and
develop a team to be capable of executing the plan. A team consisted of an
academic researcher, a minority entrepreneurial lead, and an experienced
minority and female industry mentor will closely work on business models,
marketing, and seeking funding. The project intellectual merit lies in a novel
design of the rapid localization platform. If successful, there will be a high-
reward of applying the platform to many areas to improve their location based
applications: availability, accuracy, integrity, and efficiency. The PI expects
the market to be significant with revolutionary changes from existing ones and
emerging new applications. The proposed innovation can be adopted by the
industry and the military in their future designs and protocols for enhancing
location-based services availability and integrity. The team expects the market
to grow with revolutionary changes from existing applications and emerging new
applications. The team will also keep improving/adjusting the technique while
interviewing potential customers based on their feedbacks, needs, and data
collected. The relevant products which may result from the proposed innovation
may include protocols, systems, add-ons, licensing, and services.