* 1550723
* EAGER: Spherical Porous Reactive Aggregates from Coal Bottom Ash
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Pieter Billen, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 08/31/2019
* USD 185,000.00

This Early-concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) project pursues
research to understand the fundamental physical and chemical mechanisms for
producing spherical porous reactive aggregates (SPoRA) for concrete materials
using worthless coal bottom ash. Coal power plants around the country generate
large volumes of bottom ash with no engineering value and a high environmental
cost to the society. This project aims to convert this waste material into
value-added reactive aggregates that will improve the cracking resistance of
concrete by strengthening the bonding between aggregates and hardened cement.
The research will estimate the savings in energy, greenhouse gas emissions, and
landfilled waste when using coal bottom ash for construction materials. The
project will nurture undergraduate students by incorporating co-op training into
this research. Freshman and senior design projects will germinate from this
project. Undergraduate students working on this project will serve as mentors
for the high school students who are participating in the STEM scholar program
of the institution.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Residual carbon coal bottom ash is
converted to concrete aggregate materials through a sintering process by timing
the initiation of volume expansion within the melt trajectory. In parallel to
applying thermodynamic and kinetic modeling and experimental synthesizing of
SPoRA, will be the benchmarking of its life cycle environmental impacts against
conventional lightweight aggregates. The hypothesis is that partially melting
the oxide compounds and subsequently combusting the residual carbon will create
a porous material encapsulated by a glassy layer that exhibits pozzolanic
reactivity. The highly pozzolanic reactive amorphous surface alters the
microstructure of the interfacial transition zone, enhancing the cracking
resistance of concrete. The dominantly crystalline core of the aggregates
provides the strength. The knowledge acquired from creating lightweight
aggregates by controlling the amorphous phase as a functional design requirement
is transferable to other sintered lightweight aggregates.