* 1550327
* I-Corps: Microbial Photoelectrochemical Hybrid System for Wastewater Treatment and Hydrogen Generation
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2016
* Yat Li, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 07/31/2016
* USD 50,000.00

With the drastic increase of human population, there is an ever-growing demand
for energy and clean water for the continuous economic growth and suitable
inhabitation on earth. Over the years, the federal government has applied
distinct strategies to address these two needs separately: the municipal
wastewater is collected by local wastewater plants for purification and
subsequent reuse as reclaimed water, while the energy source is mainly based on
natural gas, and crude oil. Apparently, these two strategies are decoupled.
Million tons of wastewater are produced from industrial and agricultural
operations each year, and about 25 billion US dollars are spent annually for
wastewater treatment in the United States alone. Meanwhile, the use of natural
gas/petroleum generates a lot of greenhouse gas and toxic chemicals, which pose
a serious threat to the environment, and also leads to additional cost to treat
the pollution. There is an urgent need to employ energy-efficient processes for
wastewater treatment, and simultaneously recover the "wasted energy" contained
as organic matters in wastewater. Microbial fuel cell technology represents a
novel approach to produce bioelectricity and treat wastewater simultaneously has
drawn significant attention worldwide. The key innovation of the proposed
microbial photoelectrochemical device/technology is the successful demonstration
of hydrogen generation (instead of bioelectricity) in a sustainable manner using
sunlight and municipal wastewater as the only energy sources.

The microbial photoelectrochemical cell device is a system that can remove
soluble chemical oxygen demand (SCOD) in wastewater and simultaneously recover
the "wasted energy" stored in the organic wastes for photochemical generation of
hydrogen gas, a chemical fuel with high energy density. This team has
demonstrated the feasibility of hydrogen gas production in a lab-scale microbial
photoelectrochemical device using municipal wastewater and sunlight as the sole
energy sources. It represents not only a brand new approach to address the
renewable energy needs for U.S., but also an emerging business opportunity for
U.S.. The U.S. is among the world's largest producers of activated sludge (from
wastewater). There are more than 16000 wastewater treatment facilities
nationwide, and spend billions of dollars per year to treat water. A successful
microbial photoelectrochemical system can efficiently convert wastewater into
commercially valuable chemical fuels. The device can be readily transferred to
the market place by forming partnerships or establishing collaborations with
these existing microbial technology companies such as in-state municipal
wastewater treatment facility, food and beverage industry, farms and water
industry.