* 1550320
* BD Hubs: MIDWEST: SEEDCorn: Sustainable Enabling Environment for Data Collaboration
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Sarah Nusser, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Alejandro Suarez
* 08/31/2019
* USD 2,060,514.00

Catalyzed by the NSF Big Data Hub program, the Universities of Illinois,
Indiana, Michigan, North Dakota, and Iowa State University have created a
flexible regional Midwest Big Data Hub (MBDH), with a network of diverse and
committed regional supporting partners (including colleges, universities, and
libraries; non-profit organizations; industry; city, state and federal
government organizations who bring data projects from multiple private, public,
and government sources and funding agencies). The NSF-funded SEEDCorn project
will be the foundational project to energize the activities of MBDH, leveraging
partner activities and resources, coordinating existing projects, initiating
20-30 new public-private partnerships, sharing best practices and data policies,
starting pilots, and helping to acquire funding. The result of SEEDCorn will be
a sustainable hub of Big Data activities across the region and across the nation
that enable research communities to better tackle complex science, engineering,
and societal challenges, that support competitiveness of US industry, and that
enable decision makers to make more informed decisions on topics ranging from
public policy to economic development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The MBDH is focusing
on specific strengths and themes of importance to the Midwest across three
sectors: Society (including smart cities and communities, network science,
business analytics), Natural &amp; Built World (including food, energy, water,
digital agriculture, transportation, advanced manufacturing), and Healthcare and
Biomedical Research (which spans patient care to genomics). Integrative "rings"
connect all spokes and will be organized around themes of specific MBDH
strengths, including (a) Data Science, where computational and statistical
approaches can be developed and integrated with domain knowledge and societal
considerations that support the underlying needs of "data to knowledge," (b)
services, infrastructure, and tools needed to collect, store, link, serve, and
analyze complex data collections, to support pilot projects, and ultimately
provide production-level data services across the hub, and (c) educational
activities needed to advance the knowledge base and train a new generation of
data science-enabled specialists and a more general workforce in the practice
and use of data science and services. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Further information
on the project can be found at http://midwestbigdatahub.org.