* 1550813
* EAGER-NEON: Disentangling the Roles of Ecological and Historical Processes in Community Structure: A Continental-Scale Approach
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2019
* Robert Laport, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 12/31/2019
* USD 315,737.00

The proposed research aims to improve our understanding of how communities of
species, particularly plant species, are assembled and maintained over time. The
species composition of ecosystems and habitats varies significantly by region
and habitat type, and the effects of evolutionary processes can be obscured by
contemporary ecological interactions unless confounding factors are carefully
considered. The proposed research will address this problem by providing
critical context for identifying the roles of ecological and historical
processes in community assembly. This effort will bring a unique and
unprecedented dataset to bear on central questions in community ecology while
contributing to the understanding of sensitive biomes facing increased pressure
from climate change and invasive species. The historical perspective introduced
by the proposed framework will significantly improve the understanding of plant
diversity and patterns of community structure at both local and continental
scales, and serve as a model for future studies of community
structure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will combine phylogenetic
data with NEON data on species occurrence, abundance, and traits to test the
relative roles of ecological and historical processes in governing plant
community assembly. This includes evaluation of aspects of how established
communities either accommodate or resist non-native species. Three specific
questions will be addressed, focusing on woody perennials (e.g. trees, shrubs,
cactuses, lianas): (1) How have historical processes shaped patterns of
community structure? (2) How have species functional traits shaped patterns of
community structure? (3) Are communities of closely related species more
susceptible to non-native species invasion? Analyses will be conducted using a
broad array of ecological and evolutionary comparative and analytical
computational methods. For phylogenetic analyses, the PIs will obtain sequence
data for all woody perennials recorded within each NEON-sampled plot by first
mining the GenBank database for publically available sequences, and will fill in
any missing data by generating new sequences using tissue samples obtained from
herbarium samples.