* 1550379
* RCN: SAVI: Adaptive Management and Use of Resilient Infrastructures in Smart Cities: Support for Global Collaborative Research on Real-Time Analytics of Heterogeneous Big Data
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2021
* Calton Pu, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Ralph Wachter
* 08/31/2021
* USD 407,260.00

Cities provide ready and efficient access to facilities and amenities through
shared civil infrastructures such as transportation and healthcare. Making such
critical infrastructures resilient to sudden changes, e.g., caused by large-
scale disasters, requires careful management of limited and varying resources.
The rapidly growing big data from both physical sensors and social media in
real-time suggest an unprecedented opportunity for information technology to
enable increasing efficiency and effectiveness of adaptive resource management
techniques in response to sharp changes in supply and/or demand on critical
infrastructures. Within the general areas of resilient infrastructures and big
data, this project will focus on the integration of heterogeneous Big Data and
real-time analytics that will improve the adaptive management of resources when
critical infrastructures are under stress. The integration of heterogeneous data
sources is essential because many kinds of physical sensors and social media
provide useful information on various critical infrastructures, particularly
when they are under stress.

This Research Coordination Network (RCN) will promote meetings and activities
that stimulate and enable new research on integration of heterogeneous physical
sensor data and social media for real-time big data analytics in support of
resilient critical infrastructures such as transportation and healthcare in
smart cities. As first example, the RCN will support participation from young
faculty attending the Early Career Investigators' Workshop on Cyber-Physical
Systems in Smart Cities (ECI-CPS) at CPSweek (April of each year) and young
faculty attending the Workshop on Big Data Analytics for Cyber-physical Systems
(BDACPS). As a second example, the RCN will support contributions to a Special
Track on Big Data Analytics for Resilient Infrastructures at the IEEE Big Data
Congress. As a third example, the RCN will support participation in
International meetings organized by other countries, e.g., Japan's Big Data
program by Japan Science and Technology Agency (JST). The project will also
maintain a repository of research resources. Concretely, the RCN will actively
collect and make readily available public data sets (e.g., physical and social
sensor data) and software tools (e.g., to support real-time big data analytics).
The technologies and tools that arise from RCN-enabled research will be applied
to socially and economically impactful areas such as reducing congestion and
personalized healthcare in smart cities.