* 1550397
* EAGER: Volition Based Anticipatory Control for Time-Critical Brain-Prosthetic Interaction
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2017
* Gil Weinberg, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 07/31/2017
* USD 178,761.00

This exploratory project focuses on developing algorithms that will allow the
PI's previously implemented prototype drumming prosthesis, which was developed
in an effort to help an injured teen, to anticipate human physical actions based
on an analysis of EEG signals so that it can respond mechanically in a timely
manner. The goal is to enable the enhanced prosthesis to detect volition, the
cognitive process by which an individual decides on and commits to a particular
course of action hundreds of milliseconds before the action actually takes
place, in order to foresee the drummer's actions and achieve sub-second
synchronization between artificial and biological limbs, thereby leading to
improved performance in a time-sensitive domain where asynchronous operations of
more than a few milliseconds are noticeable by listeners. Project outcomes will
include cognitive models and technical approaches that will be of great value
for improving efficiency and fluency in a wide range of human-robot and human-
prosthesis interaction scenarios, from construction tasks where humans and
robots collaborate to achieve common goals, to time-critical tasks such as in
hospital operating rooms or space stations where humans operate artificial
robotic limbs. The work will also lead to creation of a volition trials database
that will be documented and shared with the broad community of brain scholars
and brain-machine interface researches. And the project will have additional
broad impact by supporting students in the Robotic Musicianship group at Georgia
Tech as it transitions from its previous focus on robotic musicianship into the
fields of prosthetic and human augmentation.

Prior studies of volition have shown that across multiple repetitions of (real
or imagined) motor activity one can derive the Event-Related-Potential (ERP)
associated with the intent to move the hand, up to a few seconds prior to the
generation of the movement. Additionally, studies of mirror neurons have shown
that observing a motor activity can trigger sets of cells in the brain that
replicate the activity depicted when a subject is engaged in the action itself.
In this project the PI will build on such findings to develop new pattern
recognition algorithms for EEG signal analysis in an effort to identify volition
and design new anticipatory algorithms for brain-machine interfaces that reduce
latency and allow for synchronization at the millisecond level. The work will be
carried out in stages. The PI will first collect EEG data from a large number of
experimental trials where participants are engaged in a voluntary motor action.
The data will be studied to detect patterns indicative of volition activity from
electrodes monitoring both the motor and pre-motor cortices (SMA and pre-SMA),
and also to isolate the neural correlates of imagined vs. real movement. A
variety of general purpose machine learning classifiers, as well as music
focused feature extraction techniques, will be used to distinguish between
anticipatory patterns of activity preluding an action (volition) and patterns
generated when the action is indeed manifested. As part of the analysis the PI
will attempt to acquire an understanding of the delta times between volition and
action under different conditions, and he will develop a repeatability /
reliability matrix to be utilized for synchronization in the next stage of the
work, in which the PI will develop a "latency compensation engine" that
generates robotic drum hits at the exact anticipated action time, compensating
for mechanical latencies while taking into account the projected delta time
between volition and action. Multi-modal integration with data from other
sensors (EMG, microphones, proximity, etc.) will be exploited to correct errors
is detection and classification. Finally, success of the new algorithms will be
evaluated using both objective and subjective measures by having the amputee
drummer perform a series of musical tasks with the robotic arm.