* 1550566
* Theoretical Study of Auroral Radio Waves
* GEO,AGS
* 01/15/2016,12/31/2018
* Peter Yoon, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Lisa Winter
* 12/31/2018
* USD 330,000.00

The Earth's ionosphere is a plasma composed of approximately equal numbers of
ions and electrons. In addition to gravity that affects all matter, electric and
magnetic forces are important in determining the behavior of the ionospheric
plasma. The plasma behaves as a fluid even if there are few collisions between
particles because electric and magnetic forces act at a distance. Analogous to
waves in the ocean, plasma waves transmit energy through the ionosphere.
Electromagnetic, pressure and velocity fields in combination produce a wide
variety of plasma waves. This wave environment is extremely complex with a range
of generation mechanisms, wave frequencies, and source locations. However,
because of this complexity, many of these waves and their generation mechanisms
are poorly understood. The auroral region contributes significantly to the
natural radio wave environment of the Earth. This project investigates auroral
roar and its generation mechanisms, which are complex and nonlinear involving
wave-wave and wave-particle interactions. Because the types of waves generated
depend on plasma conditions and can be observed far from the source region, they
provide a means to infer the characteristics of plasmas remotely. As a result,
what is learned about waves in the auroral region can be used to interpret
conditions in astrophysical and planetary environments where these same waves
are generated. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To study the origins of auroral roar, this
project uses, and develops further, weak turbulence theory. This, in itself, is
an important outcome of the project. A main aim is to contribute to the
development of a unifying theory of plasmas and radio emission observed in the
Earth's ionosphere and magnetosphere. Non-linear studies of auroral roar are
likely to lead to a deeper understanding of the fundamental physics of wave-
particle interactions. Four problems are explored in some detail: (1) the
formation of the fine frequency structure of auroral roar emissions; (2) the
decay of intense upper hybrid waves into multiple harmonics and lower frequency
waves; (3) nonlinear coalescence generation of 4fce auroral roar; and (4) decay
instability of upper-hybrid, lower-hybrid, and Bernstein waves.