* 1550941
* EAGER: Micro and Nanoscale Thin Film Pyroelectric Materials via Strain Engineering
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,02/28/2017
* Pawel Keblinski, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Alexis Lewis
* 02/28/2017
* USD 119,999.00

As thermal energy is ubiquitous and abundant, many materials, structures, and
strategies have been studied and developed to harness heat energy. In
applications where self-powered devices are preferred (for example, bio-
implanted devices and extraterrestrial field robots), the ability to harvest the
waste thermal energy from the ambient environment by small devices is needed.
Micro and nanoscale pyroelectric materials and devices are one possible
solution, as they can convert small and irregular temperature fluctuations into
electricity. However, their extremely low power density is a major obstacle
preventing practical applications. This EArly-concept Grant for Exploratory
Research (EAGER) award supports research on designing, fabricating and achieving
technologically useful micro and nanoscale thermal-to-electrical energy
conversion materials and devices by elastic strain engineering. The research has
potentially broad impacts on the development of environmentally-friendly thermal
devices for sustainable energy harvesting. This research has potential to
benefit the US economy in the sector of clean energy. In addition, the
researchers will to reach out to K-12 students at local high schools through the
demonstration of nanodevices for energy conversion.

The objective of this research is to explore a potentially transformative micro
and nanoscale pyroelectric hybrid thin film material with giant thermoelectric
Figure of Merit. The innovative key concept is the transfer of the ultrafast
thermal phase transition of strongly correlated oxides with colossal lattice
dilation/contraction to conventional pyroelectric material. The material's
pyroelectric coefficient is expected to be two to three orders of magnitude
higher than conventional pyroelectrics. Specific aims are to demonstrate the
fabrication of high-quality pyroelectric VO2/ZnO hybrid thin film system, and
characterize the high Figure of Merit metrics in these materials and structures.
The PIs will fabricate the materials and structures by radio frequency
sputtering and optical lithography, and test the individual components'
pyroelectric properties and the hybrid material's synthetic functionalities and
performances. The PIs will explore the upper limit of the hybrid's high
materials metrics in terms of pyroelectric coefficient, Figure of Merit, and
power density. These activities will be designed and guided by computational
modeling efforts. The intellectual significance of the work includes: new
understanding on the unique design and working mechanism of pyroelectric
materials; quantitative understanding and modeling of coupled processes
including ultrafast phase transition, heat flow, strain/stress, and electrical
polarization.