* 1550842
* Workshop: Feeding the World in the 21st Century: Grand Challenges in the Nitrogen Cycle; Arlington, VA - November 9-10, 2015
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2016
* Nicolai Lehnert, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 08/31/2016
* USD 87,199.00

The Chemical Catalysis Program of the Division of Chemistry and the
Environmental Engineering Program of the Chemical, Biological, Environmental and
Transport Systems Division are sponsoring this workshop entitled "Feeding the
World in the 21st Century: Grand Challenges in the Nitrogen Cycle " to be held
on November 9-10, 2015 in Arlington, Virginia. The nitrogen cycle is one of the
most significant biogeochemical cycles on Earth, as nitrogen is an essential
nutrient for all forms of life. The largest reservoir of nitrogen is gaseous
dinitrogen in the atmosphere; however, this form of nitrogen cannot be utilized
by plants directly so access to fixed forms of nitrogen constitutes, in many
cases, the most limiting factor for plant growth and food production. The second
most important reservoir for nitrogen is nitrate, in the form of inorganic
minerals and fertilizers, and this is the form of nitrogen that is easily
assimilated by plants and microbes that live in soil and water. An important
historical factor in improving agricultural crop production has been the
invention of the Haber-Bosch process, which generates ammonia from dinitrogen
and hydrogen, and therefore, provides abundant inexpensive access to nitrogen
fertilizers for plant growth. The vast majority of total nitrogen fertilizer
used to grow food is lost to the environment, and this inefficient nitrogen use
by crop plants has resulted in the over fertilization of agricultural soils.
This agricultural run-off results in the large-scale transformation of the
nitrogen fertilizer into nitrous oxide, which is now the third most important
greenhouse gas. Based on these considerations, the nitrogen cycle is of utmost
importance for critical challenges that humanity is facing in the 21st century
with respect to food supplies and agriculture, biofuels, pollution, water, and
the environment and climate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Prof. Nicolai Lehnert
(University of Michigan) is organizing a workshop to bring together scientists
from many different areas to define the grand scientific challenges in the
nitrogen cycle and to develop cross-cutting scientific approaches that could
lead to solutions to the identified scientific challenges. A particular focus is
the contributions that (bio)chemistry can make to address these important
issues. The results of the workshop provide an intellectual roadmap of how to
move the scientific knowledge edge related to the nitrogen cycle forward,
focusing on scientific issues of global significance. The outcomes of the
workshop will be disseminated to the scientific community via a short white
paper and a full size workshop report.