* 1550484
* The Role of Calculus in the Transition from High School to College Mathematics
* EDU,DUE
* 11/01/2015,10/31/2017
* David Bressoud, Mathematical Association of America
* Standard Grant
* Karen Keene
* 10/31/2017
* USD 49,040.00

In 2014, approximately 750,000 United States high school students were enrolled
in a calculus class, three times the number of U.S. students who took their
first calculus class in college. High school calculus enrollments are still
growing at roughly 6% per year, with increasing pressure on the most advantaged
students to take calculus ever earlier. Over 100,000 now take a College Board AP
Calculus exam by the end of grade 11. High school calculus teachers find
themselves under increasing pressure from parents and administrators to admit
into their classes students they know are not adequately prepared. The study of
Characteristics of Successful Programs in College Calculus (NSF DRL 0910240)
found that a quarter million of the students who study calculus in high school
will retake mainstream Calculus I at the post-secondary level, and 40% of these
quarter million will fail to get the A or B that signals they are prepared to
continue in mathematics. There is very little known about the remaining half
million. At the same time, half of all nation's high schools do not even offer
calculus, and students from underrepresented groups, even when they are in a
high school that offers calculus, are often discouraged from enrolling in this
course. The result is that, if they aspire to a mathematically intensive major
such as engineering or a physical science, then they will find themselves in
competition against students with a much richer
preparation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This workshop project will bring together
researchers and experts in the issue of the transition from high school to
college mathematics to: (1) survey the state of knowledge related to this
situation; (2) identify the most pressing and promising questions for
exploration; and (3) lay out an agenda for future work. The project will bring
together researchers who have worked to understand different aspects of these
issues, including both those who have worked under the aegis of the College
Board and those who have worked independently of it. The project will produce a
greater understanding of how the rush to calculus affects the pathways that
students ultimately take toward fields that depend on mathematics, especially
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM)fields. It also will
help to illuminate the obstacles faced by students from disadvantaged high
schools. White papers, together with a summary of the recommendations for
further study that come out of the workshop, will be published and disseminated
by the Mathematical Association of America. The outcomes of the workshop will
provide future directions for investigation in terms of (a) general transition
across academic levels and (b) approaches that enhance the national need of
broadening participation in STEM areas.