* 1550976
* EAGER: An Integrated Multi-Sensing Platform for Real Time Hypoxia Studies
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Nitin Agrawal, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Chenzhong Li
* 08/31/2018
* USD 163,998.00

1550976 Agrawal, Nitin &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dissolved oxygen is an essential
nutrient for cells. It is sparingly soluble and thus its concentration varies in
solid tumors and tissues with consequential physiological response. This
proposal attempts to innovate a sensing platform that will measure cellular
response at various oxygen concentrations in a microfluidic arrangement. An
example application is dose-dependent cellular response can be obtained
efficiently at various levels of oxygen tension.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dissolved oxygen (DO), an essential nutrient,
is required for energy metabolism of mammalian cells. When cells grow into
tumors, dissolved oxygen gradients vary spatially. Similar situation arises in
tissues and muscles that are not well vascularized. Since DO has significant
effects on cellular physiology, there is a need for a measurement and
experimental platform that will enable detailed characterization of cellular
responses under various DO levels and DO gradients. To address this,
simultaneous sensing of hypoxic perturbation and measuring cellular response in
a single semi-automated platform is proposed. The integrated multi-sensing
platform is capable of imposing linear oxygen gradients without requiring a
continuous supply of oxygen. Monitoring real-time dissolved oxygen tension via
integrated thin-film PdO-EPK oxygen sensor, monitoring continuously cell-cycle
progression, as well as analyzing dose response effects of multiple drugs on
cell proliferation and survival will be accomplished. Two cell types MDA-MB-231
(breast) and U87MG (glioblastoma) will be used for the model experiments.
Scientifically, the proposed approach, if successful, will create a measurement
platform for conducting oxygen tension studies. The research project is
multidisciplinary and integrates bioengineering, cell biology, microfabrication,
computational design and modeling, and will expose a full-time PhD student to an
interesting learning opportunity. It is planned to incorporate multidisciplinary
training in the STEM field through George Mason University?s (GMU) ?Aspiring
Scientists Summer Internship Program? designed for promoting research and
education in high schools and undergraduate students in the Northern Virginia.
Through proposed research on sensor platform the PIs will promote
underrepresented minorities in STEM through the ?Louis Stokes Alliance for
Minority Participation? program at GMU.