* 1550818
* BRAIN EAGER: Going All Wireless to Establish Bats as The First Mammalian Model System for Vocal Learning
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2017
* Michael Yartsev, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 08/31/2017
* USD 300,000.00

The ability to learn a language is a core feature of humanity. Yet, the detailed
mammalian brain mechanisms that subserve this complex learning process are
poorly understood. The reason for this major gap of knowledge stems from a
surprising fact: The vast majority of mammals, including non-human primates and
all standard mammalian laboratory animal models, do not learn their language,
that is, their vocalizations are innate. Hence, the mammalian neural circuits
that support language learning have remained largely obscure. The goal of this
proposal is to take the most direct approach towards bridging this gap and
establish the bat as the first mammalian model system for studying the detailed
brain mechanisms subserving vocal learning. To achieve this goal, all wireless
behavioral and neural monitoring technology will be developed and implemented to
track and analyze vocal and neural signals of bats in natural settings. In
addition to the development of new neurotechnologies and establishment of a new
model system, the project supports opportunities for students from diverse
backgrounds to engage in research and for public science education.

Language learning is a social learning process that occurs under natural
conditions and its investigation requires approaches that preserve such
settings. To satisfy this requirement, the project aims to develop an all-
wireless experimental approach that alleviates many of the physical constraints
that are imposed by standard tethered systems. The proposed approach combines
novel methods for monitoring and measurement both the animal's behavior, as well
as neural activity in relevant brain circuits on a broad range of timescales
ranging from milliseconds to months. Taking this approach, the project aims to
lay the groundwork for enabling a detailed description of the underlying
neuronal dynamics that support vocal learning in the juvenile bat and thereby
establish the bat as a mammalian model for investigation of the neurobiology of
vocal learning. Considering the profound influence language has over our daily
lives, the technologies developed and discoveries made in this research program
will be of major interest to both the broad neuroscience community as well as to
the general public.