* 1550093
* EAGER:  Anthropogenic Impact Assessment in Environmental Water with Human Hyper-Variable Region Mitochondrial DNA
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2016
* David Wendell, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* William Cooper
* 08/31/2016
* USD 60,901.00

1550093&lt;br/&gt;Wendell&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current pollution source
identification methods focus on tracking bacteria associated with the human gut,
but many of these bacterial indicators also thrive in the environment and reside
in multiple other mammalian hosts. It is now widely accepted that coliform
bacteria are unreliable for source tracking due to their ability to survive for
extended periods of time in the environment, making it difficult to distinguish
the source or timing of a contamination event. This project proposes a new
approach for precise source identification through human mitochondrial
hypervariable region II DNA which is a new and potentially transformative
approach to combating fecal contamination in drinking water.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work extends the PI's recent human
mitochondrial hypervariable region II source tracking study to a particularly
unique and important ecosystem the coastal waters of Lord Howe Island
(Australia). Lord Howe Island is recorded as a UNESCO world heritage site of
global natural significance with a relatively small population (less than 1000)
and is slated to undergo renovations to an aging septic wastewater
infrastructure. The benefits of this sampling location are 3 fold: 1) a limited
population should produce a tractable number of human mitochondrial
hypervariable region II sequences, enabling a more discrete linkage between
human waste source and coastal water contamination, 2) identifying impacting
septic tanks will enable cost effective remediation for resource limited
residents of Lord Howe Island, and, 3) Lord Howe Island is an ecosystem of
global significance. The hypothesis of this proposal is that sequencing human
mitochondrial DNA from impacted environmental water can definitively source and
quantify pollution contributors. Unlike ambiguous bacterial assays, conclusive
sourcing will enable mitigation of waste related sources and health risks. That
is, human mitochondrial DNA enabled source identification can be achieved
through sequence information found in the human mitochondrial hypervariable
region II region, an approach more commonly used in criminal forensic analysis
and anthropologic phylogenetics.