* 1550582
* Workshop-NEON: Integrating NEON ANPP Data with Existing Long-term and Spatially Extensive Data Sets - Providing Context and Testing Theory; 3 Meetings; Fort Collins, Co; 2016-2017
* BIO,EF
* 11/01/2015,10/31/2018
* Melinda Smith, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 10/31/2018
* USD 95,132.00

Land-based ecosystems account for two-thirds of global plant matter production,
despite covering only a quarter of the Earth's surface. Indeed, the amount of
carbon stored in plants in these ecosystems is equal to 75% of the carbon in the
atmosphere. To understand how the Earth is functioning, we need to understand
what controls continental-scale patterns of plant production as well as its
dynamics through time. This is especially the case because we are living in an
era of rapid environmental change, and there may be extreme variation in
production that occurs from year to year, with dramatic impacts on agriculture,
forestry and biofuel production. The newly constructed National Ecological
Observatory Network (NEON) will provide an unparalleled spatial array of above
ground production estimates which can be used to describe continental scale
patterns of carbon uptake and storage in plants. During NEON's first several
years, how can a long-term trend be identified and distinguished from short-term
fluctuations? Fortunately, there are data sets on plant biomass production from
several other long-term experimental sites across the U.S that predate the new
network. A series of working meetings is being organized with the goal of using
existing long-term production plant production data, shorter-term (2-4 year)
spatially distributed production data from other, older networks, and ecosystem
models to provide critical temporal context for evaluating and interpreting
NEON's initial data. These workshops will calibrate an essential baseline for
NEON plant production data, enhance the value of this important measurement and
ultimately ensure the success of NEON. The workshops will also contribute to the
professional development of several early-career scientists. Society will
benefit from a greater understanding of the patterns and dynamics of plant
biomass production across the US continent.

The overarching goal of these NEON aboveground net primary production (ANPP)
workshops will be to assess and evaluate NEON's emerging spatial ANPP dataset in
the context of existing complementary long-term and spatially distributed ANPP
data, and as represented by the current generation of ecosystem and global land
models. Workshop activities will include (1) an in-depth analyses of this key
NEON product, (2) rigorously testing theory about spatial vs. temporal climatic,
biotic, and biogeochemical controls on ANPP at a continental scale and (3)
utilizing state-of-the-art data-model fusion approaches to integrate NEON data
with ecosystem and global carbon models. The latter will reduce the uncertainty
between modeled and empirical ANPP data. The data set that results from the
merging of the temporal depth of existing long-term ANPP data with the spatial
breadth provided by NEON will be an invaluable resource for continental scaling,
model benchmarking and testing long-standing theory regarding spatial patterns
and temporal controls of ANPP in terrestrial ecosystems. The workshops will also
support further training for a postdoctoral researcher, and will broaden
participation in ecosystem science.