* 1550291
* BD Hubs: Collaborative Proposal: SOUTH: A Big Data Innovation Hub for the South Region
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2015,03/31/2020
* Lea Shanley, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Martin Halbert
* 03/31/2020
* USD 1,043,007.00

Big Data (BD) is a prominent, rapidly emerging discipline with far-reaching
scientific and economic potential. While significant fundamental research has
already taken place, there is a gap in the translation of BD research findings
into economic growth and end-user impact. In addition, big data often arises in
the practice of industry and government, and in broad geographic settings,
making multi-stakeholder partnerships vital to exploiting its full potential. To
successfully address these challenges, academic institutions from 16 states in
the South region and the District of Columbia, in partnership with collaborators
from industry, government, and non-profit organizations, will establish the
South Big Data Regional Innovation Hub (South BD Hub) with lead institutions,
Georgia Institute of Technology (GT) and the University of North Carolina at
Chapel Hill (UNC-CH). The South BD Hub will serve as the primary vehicle for
interdisciplinary, multi-stakeholder partnerships designed to pursue BD projects
of interest to the South region and the nation as a whole. It will collectively
nurture a BD innovation ecosystem, promote collaboration, provide essential
workforce training, and serve as a national asset.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed Hub will establish a community-driven governance plan for long-term
sustainability, guided by a Steering Council composed of stakeholders that
reflect the breadth, involvement, organizational nature, geography, and
diversity of BD Hub interests. An Executive Committee and several Standing
Committees also will be established. Birds of a Feather groups and more formal
Working Groups may be established in targeted areas over the award period as
needed. The Hub will have dual locations in Atlanta and Chapel Hill, with co-
Executive Directors broadly accountable to the South BD Hub partners. GT and
UNC-CH will act as host institutions providing logistics, operational, and other
support for creation and long-term sustenance of the hub. Many partner
organizations in the South region are committed to make diverse contributions to
the Hub, including BD science "spoke" projects chosen by South region
stakeholders. Initial spoke areas include: 1) Healthcare; 2) Coastal Hazards; 3)
Industrial Big Data; 4) Materials and Manufacturing; and 5) Habitat Planning. To
support these and other activities, the Hub also will launch cross-cutting spoke
projects in BD Sharing and Infrastructure and BD Economics, Privacy, and Policy
Issues. The national need for data scientists will also be addressed, through
training programs, workshops, online resources, and other workforce development
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For further information see the project web
site: southbdhub.org