* 1550757
* EAGER: The Exploration of Geometric and Non-Geometric Structure in Data
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2015,02/28/2017
* Yusu Wang, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Weng-keen Wong
* 02/28/2017
* USD 150,000.00

The goal of machine learning is to extract useful information from data. While
the amount of data available to researchers for analysis is ever increasing,
much of the data are unlabeled, meaning that the data come without labels
indicating their associations with specific learning tasks. Thus understanding
unsupervised inference is one of the key problems in machine learning. In
addition, data annotated for a certain task may be difficult to use even for
tasks only slightly different. This is known as the problem of transfer learning
in the literature. To make the most of the available information, machine
learning algorithms need to to obtain, analyze and use realistic structural
assumptions about the data based on rigorous mathematical models. The proposed
work offers students working on this project an opportunity to be exposed to a
broad spectrum of topics including machine learning, statistics, geometry and
applied mathematics. Students will learn a combination of theory and algorithm
development skills in machine learning and data analysis. The results of this
work will be disseminated to the broad scientific community through publications
in journals, conferences, presentations in various venues, including tutorials
and course notes. The material related to this project will be incorporated in
PI?s and co-PI's courses. The PIs will also create summer research and practice
opportunities for interested undergraduate students in research related to the
project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this EAGER project an exploration of two types
of structural assumptions on the data will be started. Geometric structures in
data will be explored, such as hierarchical structure of clusters and density.
The use of partial orders for non-geometric data will be explored, based on
probabilistic models for partial rankings an orders for problems such as zero-
shot learning and transfer learning. By approaching the problem of inference
from data within these frameworks, output of this project will be a stepping
stone to the challenges of machine learning and to developing efficient
algorithms to advance the state-of-the-art both in theory and practice. It is
argued argue that these models and the proposed mathematical/algorithmic
machinery are amenable to theoretical analysis and will provide insight into
properties of real data. Results from the proposed work will broaden the scope
of machine learning methods to analyze more complex data in a theoretically
well-founded manner.