* 1550732
* Collaborative Research: Reproducible research and educational software for geoscience data analysis in spherical and planar geometry
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2016,04/30/2020
* Alain Plattner, California State University-Fresno Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 04/30/2020
* USD 110,449.00

This project will develop, formalize, and improve documentation and
functionality for a set of codes&lt;br/&gt;used for research and education in
geophysics but of potential application in other fields. The
project&lt;br/&gt;will continue algorithmic development and documentation of
software for geophysical analysis using&lt;br/&gt;wavelets, vector spherical
harmonics and Slepian functions. Examples are: in geodynamics, the description
of deformation in and of the Earth; in geomagnetics, the lithospheric magnetic
field; in geodesy, models of terrestrial and planetary gravity; and any
directional spherical processes that are vectorial in nature in other fields of
science and engineering. The codes support (or will support) decomposition of
fields, harmonic analysis, power spectral estimation, inversion
parameterization, vector&lt;br/&gt;field analysis, and satellite data. The
project will also develop software for analysis of Ground
Penetrating&lt;br/&gt;Radar data. The work will involve students and course work
between two very different institutions in&lt;br/&gt;continual use, testing, and
input to the development of the codes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Analyses in vector-
spherical harmonics are well established, but only legacy code, mostly in
Fortran, exists to date. Matlab or Octave software archives are much needed,
especially in the light of modern-day mathematical methods which consist in
forming optimized linear combinations of vector harmonics into bandlimited,
geographically localized functions: the so-called Slepian basis. Designing
algorithms, and programming them well, in a robust and reproducible manner, is
demanding but not often considered a scientific objective per se. The society at
large, and the scientific community, are best served when all research-grade and
educational code is fully documented and available, ready to run by novice or
expert alike. Matlab and Octave are portable, low-threshold scripting languages
that blend low-level flexibility, intermediate complexity and high-performance.