* 1550731
* EAGER-NEON: 20 Year Dynamics of North American Ant Communities: Evaluating the Role of Climate and Biogeochemistry on Ecological Change
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2020
* Michael Kaspari, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 04/30/2020
* USD 299,799.00

Ants are one of the most abundant insects on Earth. Ants churn the soil,
scavenge the dead, suppress (and sometimes propagate) pests, and are themselves
some of our most pernicious pests. Ants are ectotherms (i.e., cold-blooded),
which means that the health and activity of an ant colony depends in part on the
weather. Climate, in turn, is weather observed over time, and abundance evidence
shows that climate is changing. This research addresses a key task in ecology by
exploring how changing climate across the U.S. will impact the health and
activity of ants and, by extension, how shifts in ant species may impact the
many species that ants influence. The research tackles a widespread problem:
that to document ecological change one must first have detailed historical
records of the way ecosystems once were. Such records are rare. This research
fills that knowledge gap by revisiting 34 ant communities from across the United
States that were first sampled approximately 20 years ago. At the time, those
ant studies represented the best global snapshot of the abundance and diversity
of this important insect group. This second, high-resolution snapshot will
generate an unprecedented 34, 20-year trajectories of ant communities. When
matched to the latest climate trends and ecological theory, the work will paint
one of the first pictures of how ecological communities are changing nation-
wide. These data will allow ecologists to refine the predictions of how animals
respond to climate change, and will jump-start such efforts by the nascent
National Ecological Observatory Network. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
resamples 34 ant transects of 30 m2 plots from across North America that were
originally sampled in 1994-95. The sites include or are matched to those of the
nascent NEON network. The resulting 20-year trajectories of ant abundance and
diversity will be used to tests three theories: Thermal Adaptation (the dominant
model of thermal ecology which posits that thermal tolerance tracks climate
means and variability); Biogeochemical Competence (a new hypothesis that links
biogeochemistry to tissue concentrations of phosphorus (P), with P-rich tissue
enhancing thermal tolerance); and Species Energy Theory (a dominant model of
macroecology that builds mechanistic links between climate, abundance, and
diversity). It tests these hypotheses at the population scale (i.e., do
populations of species vary predictably in their thermal tolerance and
dynamics?), across species (how does the mean species performance vary?), and
summed across whole communities (what is the net change in the activity and
abundance of ants in an ecosystem?). These samples will be calibrated with NEON
by-catch of ground beetle pitfall traps to couple historical with future
community trajectories.