* 1550916
* Workshops-NEON: Training in Scientific Discoveries with NEON's AOP; Boise State University; Spring, 2016 - Early - 2017
* BIO,DEB
* 12/01/2015,11/30/2019
* Nancy Glenn, Boise State University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Blood
* 11/30/2019
* USD 100,000.00

A series of three hands-on workshops will be organized to foster and coordinate
research that blends data from the Airborne Observing Platform (AOP) of the new
NSF National Ecological Observatory Network (NEON) and associated ground data
from local field sites. The workshops will focus on remote sensing principles,
development of remote sensing data products, and field data integration and
validation to address specific research questions in the biophysical sciences
with NEON data. Experts in the focus areas and in conducting hands-on training
will lead the workshops. NEON data will be used for the workshops and tutorials
will be made available to NEON to post online. The workshops are designed to
reach approximately 75 in-person participants each, along with hundreds of
scientists via dissemination of the training materials online. Organizers will
encourage attendance of underrepresented minorities, women, and persons with
disabilities and early career participants. This training will assist with
future collaborations and coordination among researchers and prepare scientists
with the skills to help describe changes in U.S. ecosystems across a wide range
of space and time. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Three themes will guide the three
workshops: LiDAR processing and analysis, hyper spectral processing and
analysis, and the use of remotely sensed data products for ecosystem modeling.
The workshops will bring together biophysical scientists and experts in remote
sensing and ecosystem modeling that will encourage development of a range of
scaled data products to enable NEON-based research questions and for use by the
broader scientific community.