* 1550172
* SI2-SSI: Collaborative Research: Jet Energy-Loss Tomography with a Statistically and Computationally Advanced Program Envelope (JETSCAPE)
* CSE,OAC
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2021
* Gunther Roland, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 06/30/2021
* USD 189,500.00

Microseconds after the Big Bang, the universe was filled with an extremely hot
fluid called the Quark-Gluon Plasma. As the universe expanded, this plasma
cooled and condensed into the building blocks of ordinary matter around us:
protons, neutrons, and atomic nuclei. Droplets of this fluid, which exists only
at temperatures above 2 trillion Kelvin, are generated and studied in the
laboratory today using collisions of high-energy heavy ions at Brookhaven
National Laboratory and CERN. A key method to study the Quark-Gluon Plasma is
the generation of high-energy quarks and gluons in the collision, which interact
with the hot plasma and emerge as "jets" of particles that are measured by
experiments. These jets provide powerful tools to study the internal structure
of the plasma, analogous to tomography in medical imaging. However,
interpretation of jet measurements requires sophisticated numerical modeling and
simulation, and comparison of theory calculations with experimental data demands
advanced statistical tools. The JETSCAPE Collaboration, an interdisciplinary
team of physicists, computer scientists, and statisticians, will develop a
comprehensive software framework that will provide a systematic, rigorous
approach to meet this challenge. Training programs, workshops, summer schools
and MOOCs, will disseminate the expertise needed to modify and maintain this
framework.

The JETSCAPE Collaboration will develop a scalable and portable open source
software package to replace a variety of existing codes. The modular integrated
software framework will consist of interacting generators to simulate (i) wave
functions of the incoming nuclei, (ii) viscous fluid dynamical evolution of the
hot plasma, and (iii) transport and modification of jets in the plasma.
Integrated advanced statistical analysis tools will provide non-expert users
with quantitative methods to validate novel theoretical descriptions of jet
modification, by comparison with the complete set of current experimental data.
To improve the efficiency of this computationally intensive task, the
collaboration will develop trainable emulators that can accurately predict
experimental observables by interpolation between full model runs, and employ
accelerators such as Graphics Processing Units (GPUs) for both the fluid
dynamical simulations and the modification of jets. The collaboration will
create this framework with a user-friendly envelope that allows for continuous
modifications, updates and improvements of each of its components. The effort
will serve as a template for other fields that involve complex dynamical
modeling and comparison with large data sets. It will open a new era for high-
precision extraction of the internal structure of the Quark-Gluon Plasma with
quantifiable uncertainties.

This project advances the objectives of the National Strategic Computing
Initiative (NSCI), an effort aimed at sustaining and enhancing the U.S.
scientific, technological, and economic leadership position in High-Performance
Computing (HPC) research, development, and deployment.

This project is supported by the Division of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure in the
Directorate for Computer & Information Science & Engineering and the Physics
Division and the Division of Mathematical Sciences in the Directorate of
Mathematical and Physical Sciences.