* 1550902
* EAGER: Cyberlearning: Towards Virtual Worlds that Afford Knowledge Integration Across Project Challenges and Disciplines
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2017
* Janet Kolodner, Concord Consortium
* Standard Grant
* Sushil K Prasad
* 09/30/2017
* USD 299,615.00

The Cyberlearning and Future Learning Technologies Program funds efforts that
will help envision the next generation of learning technologies and advance what
we know about how people learn in technology-rich environments. Many efforts
have been made to use virtual worlds to teach science concepts that are either
inaccessible or impractical in the classroom. This project examines an important
question: if a student learns different science topics in the same virtual world
over time, will their longer-term, deeper engagement in that virtual world help
them build a more integrated understanding of the different subjects? If so,
this would help people build more effective virtual worlds for learning, and
would also help provide insight into how learners develop either integrated or
fragmented understanding of science.

The research will include integration of the EcoMUVE ecology learning virtual
world with chemistry curriculum derived from the Project-Based Inquiry Science
project Living Together. A qualitative exploratory study using middle school
classrooms will examine processes related to transfer, grounded in the theory of
figured worlds and encoding specificity in case-based reasoning. The qualitative
study will focus on conditions that generate intense and sustained emotional
engagement in the virtual world, the memories generated by this engagement after
the fact, and ways that these memories are triggered in related but different
curricular activities. Observation of learners, directly and with lightweight
cameras; interviews and challenges designed to be memory probes; and design-
based research strategies will be used to work towards design principles for the
types of cognitive processes that underly transfer and knowledge integration.
The broader impact of the project will be to inform educators and technologists
how to better design for long-term, problem-based engagement in science topics
and to support transfer and integrated understanding.