* 1550666
* Risk and Resiliency of the Electric Power Grid: Mathematical and Statistical Challenges
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2017
* Barry Lee, Southern Methodist University
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 06/30/2017
* USD 13,860.00

The electric power grid is dramatically changing as new technologies and
policies are being implemented. These changes will affect the quality of
delivered electric power to the consumer, and will pose new risks and alter the
resiliency of the power grid system. To understand and mitigate these risks and
to strengthen the resiliency, mathematical and statistical techniques will be
invaluable. The goal of this workshop, held July 14, 2015 in Arlington,
Virginia, is to bring together the representatives from the power grid
engineering, mathematics, and statistics communities to discuss some of the
challenges in the power grid.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop involves
participants from the academic-based mathematical and statistical sciences and
the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE). Power grid experts from DOE will share
their knowledge, experience, and visions of the current and future power grid,
particularly for large-scale, real power grid networks. This will ensure that
realistic power grid challenges are addressed by the mathematics and statistics
communities. The workshop will include several talks from power grid experts and
mathematicians who have investigated topics related to the power grid. Topics to
be included are stability analysis, uncertainty quantification, model reduction,
graph networks, and algorithmic development for the grid. Floor discussions will
be encouraged, both for elucidating the problems to math/stats researchers new
to this field and for discussing math/stats directions in power grid research.
At the end of the workshop, the organizers will produce a report for the
agencies and participants, summarizing the talks, discussions, and possible
research directions.