* 1550931
* Student Travel Support: International Workshop on Big Data in Life Sciences, Atlanta, GA, September 9, 2015
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2016
* Anantharaman Kalyanaraman, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 07/31/2016
* USD 10,000.00

Big Data problems and challenges have become a reality in modern day
computational biology and bioinformatics. The objective of this proposal is to
request funds that will be used to support students and postdoctoral researchers
from U.S. institutions to travel to the Association for Computing Machinery
(ACM) International Workshop on Big Data in Life Sciences (BigLS), to be held on
September 9, 2015 in Atlanta, GA, in conjunction with the 2015 ACM Conference on
Bioinformatics, Computational Biology and Health Informatics (ACM-BCB). This
travel award will help orient students and postdoctoral researchers in the
emerging area of Big Data analytics in life sciences. It will create a unique
opportunity for supported students to present their on-going work, network with
experts and peers in the field, receive mentoring, while contributing to the
workshop's technical program. It will help to prepare the future generation
scientific workforce to meet the challenges of this critical area of life
sciences.

Funds will be used to support up to 10 students and postdoctoral researchers,
working in areas at the intersection of Big Data and life sciences. Recipients
of the support will be selected via a widely advertised competitive process
involving the submission of a travel grant application, and review by the
workshop's organizational committee. Preference will be given to women and
underrepresented minority groups, first-generation college students, and
undergraduate researchers. The workshop will feature peer-reviewed papers and
invited talks on five key research themes that underline Big Data research in
life sciences: i) scalable algorithms and techniques for Big Data analytics in
molecular biology, ii) statistical and integrative approaches to Big Data
biology and informatics, iii) high performance computing methods and software
for Big Data biology, iv) scientific workflows and platforms for Big Data in
life sciences, v) software and hardware solutions for managing Big Data in
biomedical informatics. This year's special emphasis theme is on scientific
workflows for Big Data analytics, including workflows design, optimization,
management and execution in HPC and cloud environments.