* 1550378
* I-Corps: Entrepreneurial Development of a Metal-binding Technology Platform
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2017
* Blaine Pfeifer, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 07/31/2017
* USD 50,000.00

Water metal contamination is a ubiquitous problem due to the many industrialized
processes that drive our economy. Examples include mining drainage, metal
plating, semiconductor fabrication, and solar cell production. These examples
straddle well-established and emerging industries but each poses significant
environmental impact due to metal contamination potential. Furthermore, the loss
of the associated metals carries an economic consequence as unrecovered material
represents a significant missed opportunity in raw material utilization. The
purpose of this project is to solve the aforementioned environmental and
economic problems that arise from loss of metals through industrialized
processes. By doing so, the technology directly aligns with the vision of a
?bio-based economy? (since the proposed approach leverages biotechnology to
produce a metal-binding compound) and "green manufacturing." The latter term
particularly resonates with the history of the Buffalo, Western New York, and
Great Lakes region, and this team will leverage its geographic location and the
strong recent developments in New York State start-up opportunities to implement
a business plan based upon wastewater metal recovery and re-use.

This I-Corps team has designed a heterologous production system for producing a
small molecule natural product capable of binding metal compounds with high
affinity. Furthermore, the team has recently devised a way to adsorb this
compound and associated analogs to a solid matrix which enables a heterogeneous
means of removing metal content from contaminated water samples. This proposal
seeks to build a laboratory-scale prototype system that incorporates the
proposed activated resin within a flow column such that the team can demonstrate
a continuous metal removal process using actual wastewater from a near-by metal
plating manufacturing company. Due in part to the commercial interest exhibited
by this and other potential partners, the team initiated an I-Corps application
to enable generation of this prototype and use the associated results and
knowledge gained to formally establish a start-up company based upon this
technology. Hence, the I-Corps program provides an ideal setting for the two
goals to be developed over the award period: 1) metal removal and re-use
prototype system development (technical) and 2) customer base establishment,
company formation, and business plan development (commercial).