* 1550043
* Southeastern Regional Robert Noyce Connections: Convening a Community of Learners Focused on STEM Pre-Service Teacher Education
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Andre Green, University of South Alabama
* Standard Grant
* Sandra Richardson
* 08/31/2020
* USD 989,977.00

This project will conduct research about teacher preparation in the context of
hosting two annual convenings (2016 and 2017): Southeastern Regional Robert
Noyce Connections: Convening a Community of Learners Focused on STEM Pre-Service
Teacher Education. The Southeastern region includes 9 target states (Alabama,
Florida, Georgia, Louisiana, Mississippi, North Carolina, South Carolina,
Virginia, and Tennessee). Each convening will involve 200 participants,
including presenters and discussion leaders. The emphasis of this project is to
strengthen connections among the Noyce projects and others interested and
engaged in teacher preparation, in order to expand the impact from the local
areas influenced by the individual projects to the larger region. To continue to
strengthen the connections beyond the convenings, the project team will use a
well-established electronic system to create the Southeast Regional Noyce
Network (SRN^2), which will allow for discussion forums and a place to post
articles, learning and teaching ideas, and other
resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research agenda will investigate cultural,
racial, and educational variables in the community of Noyce investigators and
pre-service and in-service teachers. Research questions include: (1) How do
Noyce Programs address cultural competence? (2) What racial, cultural, and
educational attitudes and experiences predict desire to teach STEM in a high-
need school? (3) How do Noyce Scholars perceive students? STEM abilities from
majority and non-majority groups? (4) Which factors are related to job
satisfaction and wellbeing for Noyce Scholars? In addition, the convenings will
provide opportunities for researchers and other investigators interested in the
Noyce Program, as well as Noyce scholarship and fellowship recipients, to build
and strengthen collaborations toward moving teaching and research about teacher
education forward as fields.