* 1550029
* EAGER: Renewables: Supply Rate Control and Grid Stability with Renewable Power Generation and Co-located Storage
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2018
* Joe Chow, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Anil Pahwa
* 08/31/2018
* USD 300,000.00

Renewable power generators face the problem of variability of their power
output, which makes it difficult for them to compete with conventional
generators. Investing in energy storage devices and systems can alleviate the
problems associated with variable generation rates to a good extent. Co-located
storage (storage located at the site of renewable generation) also helps them to
fill the transmission pipeline, and thereby maximize the utility of the existing
transmission systems. Under high wind conditions, for example, the power that
cannot be transmitted on the sub-transmission system can be used to charge
batteries, which can be used to supply energy during peak hours, when the wind
is typically low. Therefore, there is a strong case for the use of co-located
storage with renewable power generation. The project aims at investigating some
key theoretical modeling, analysis, optimization and control challenges that
relate to making efficient use of such storage-equipped renewable power
generation. The technical challenges will be explored both from the perspective
of an individual renewable power generator, and from that of the overall grid in
attempting to integrate a number of renewable energy sources in a decentralized
manner. Education and outreach aspects of the project include integration of
research insights into graduate courses in power engineering and control systems
at RPI. Communication with power companies will be used to maximize the
industrial outreach of the project, to make the project well grounded and
practically impactful.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project seeks to investigate -
from a theoretical modeling and analysis perspective - some fundamental
questions that the smart grid faces in integrating the variable-rate renewable
energy supplies into the grid in an economically efficient manner, while
ensuring the stability of the grid. The questions are also fundamentally related
to the value of using storage resources - both from the viewpoint of the
renewable power generators themselves, as well as the grid as a whole. The first
of these involves optimizing the day-ahead planning as well as real-time
operations of the renewable power generators (equipped with co-located storage):
given the day-ahead (real-time) electricity prices and power generation rate
forecasts, how should a renewable power generator with limited storage optimize
in advance (dynamically control, resp.) its power supply contracts (rates,
resp.) under transmission constraints to maximize its profitability. The second
of the two issues we investigate in this project involves the study of
decentralized dynamic control mechanisms that can be used for frequency
regulation using large numbers of storage-equipped renewable power generators.
This involves novel exploration of stability issues of randomized frequency
regulation schemes, and tuning them to ensure convergence as well as good
transient behavior. From a theoretical perspective, addressing these issues
requires exploring novel challenging questions in stochastic optimization,
queuing theory, decentralized control and stochastic stability, and their
applications to power networks.