* 1550463
* SI2-SSI: Advancing and Mobilizing Citizen Science Data through an Integrated Sustainable Cyber-Infrastructure
* CSE,OAC
* 11/01/2016,10/31/2021
* Melinda Laituri, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Seung-Jong Park
* 10/31/2021
* USD 1,098,743.00

Citizen science engages members of the public in science. It advances the
progress of science by involving more people and embracing new ideas. Recent
projects use software and apps to do science more efficiently. However, existing
citizen science software and databases are ad hoc, non-interoperable, non-
standardized, and isolated, resulting in data and software siloes that hamper
scientific advancement. This project will develop new software and integrate
existing software, apps, and data for citizen science - allowing expanded
discovery, appraisal, exploration, visualization, analysis, and reuse of
software and data. Over the three phases, the software of two platforms,
CitSci.org and CyberTracker, will be integrated and new software will be built
to integrate and share additional software and data. The project will: (1)
broaden the inclusivity, accessibility, and reach of citizen science; (2)
elevate the value and rigor of citizen science data; (3) improve
interoperability, usability, scalability and sustainability of citizen science
software and data; and (4) mobilize data to allow cross-disciplinary research
and meta-analyses. These outcomes benefit society by making citizen science
projects such as those that monitor disease outbreaks, collect biodiversity
data, monitor street potholes, track climate change, and any number of other
possible topics more possible, efficient, and impactful through shared software.

The project will develop a cyber-enabled Framework for Advancing Buildable and
Reusable Infrastructures for Citizen Science (Cyber-FABRICS) to elevate the
reach and complexity of citizen science while adding value by mobilizing well-
documented data to advance scientific research, meta-analyses, and decision
support. Over the three phases of the project, the software of two platforms,
CitSci.org and CyberTracker, will be integrated by developing APIs and reusable
software libraries for these and other platforms to use to integrate and share
data and software. Using participatory design and agile methods over four years,
the project will: (1) broaden the inclusivity, accessibility, and reach of
citizen science; (2) elevate the value and rigor of citizen science software and
data; (3) improve interoperability, usability, scalability and sustainability of
citizen science software and data; and (4) mobilize data to allow cross-
disciplinary research and meta-analyses. These outcomes benefit society by
making citizen science projects and any number of other possible topics more
possible, efficient, and impactful through shared software and data. Adoption of
Cyber-FABRICS infrastructure, software, and services will allow anyone with an
Internet or cellular connection, including those in remote, underserved, and
international communities, to contribute to research and monitoring, either
independently or as a team. This project is also being supported by the
Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program, which seeks to advance new
approaches to, and evidence-based understanding of, the design and development
of STEM learning in informal environments.