* 1550875
* Workshop-NEON: Synergies Between NEON and LTER; Estes Park, CO; August 31 -Sept. 2, 2015; and Millbrook, NY -Remainder of 2015 and Early - 2016
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2018
* Peter Groffman, Cary Institute of Ecosystem Studies, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 07/31/2018
* USD 99,421.00

Long-term data provide some of the most trust-worthy answers to important
ecological questions. The immediate responses that organisms, including humans,
make to an environmental change are often short-lived and do not provide
accurate pictures of more permanent shifts. This project will conduct a series
of workshops to examine how well long-term data collected through different
projects, and at different locations, can be integrated to determine how
organisms respond, over longer periods, to environmental change. Many of these
responses are of societal importance; examples include responses to long-term
nutrient additions, disruptions caused by invasive species, and the appearance
of new diseases or disease vectors. The workshops will engage early-career
researchers, providing them training in the analysis and interpretation of long-
term data.

A working group composed of leading researchers in ecology and ecosystem science
will explore synergies between the National Ecological Observatory Network
(NEON), a new NSF-investment, and the Long Term Ecological Research (LTER)
Network, a program that has been in place for over 30 years. NEON is a
continental-scale observation facility for documenting ecological change over
time while the LTER program consists of long-term question-driven research
projects aimed at understanding ecological processes in a wide range of
ecosystems. An outstanding question is the extent to which data from these two
investments will be complementary. Four topics will be addressed in a sequence
of two workshops: 1) how can LTER data and insights provide landscape and
regional scale ecological context for NEON sites; 2) can data collected by NEON
inform the five core research areas implemented by all LTER projects; 3) can the
conceptual models that underlie LTER research inform data collection at NEON
sites and 4) does combined analysis of LTER and NEON data improve predictions of
future ecological trajectories over those obtained from either data source
alone? Two workshops held at the Cary Institute will each engage two groups;
some overlap and interchange will occur between these groups. This structure
allows efficient exploration of all four themes. Products from these workshops
will include a series of papers as well as protocols, conceptual models and
prediction platforms that will facilitate productive interactions between these
two, major long-term research platforms over the coming decades.