* 1550637
* Overcoming Challenges to Infusing Ethics into the Development of Engineers
* ENG,EEC
* 10/01/2015,06/30/2019
* Simil Raghavan, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Edward Berger
* 06/30/2019
* USD 299,772.00

Many students are drawn to engineering because they see it as a career in which
they can make a difference in society, but for engineers to change the world and
serve the needs of society they must be attuned to the impacts of their work on
society. They therefore need to understand their ethical responsibilities and
the social and ethical aspects of complex engineering problems. The objective of
this project is to hold a workshop that supports and encourages educators and
colleges to create socially and globally aware engineers who are thus better
prepared to practice safe, ethical, and socially responsible engineering. The
project convenes faculty members in ethics and engineering to (1) share their
work, experiences, and lessons learned in teaching engineering ethics; (2)
discuss strategies for overcoming institutional and cultural challenges; and (3)
develop plans and collaborations for advancing efforts to incorporate ethics in
the education of engineering students. Recent research shows that during
engineering students' education they become less concerned with public welfare
issues, which is a problem because engineering codes of conduct state that
engineers must "hold paramount the safety, health, and welfare of the public."
Increasingly, research is identifying cultural and institutional factors that
contribute to a decline in social concern, such as the tendency of faculty
members to unconsciously categorize ethics considerations as nonengineering
work. By bringing faculty members who are working to improve the ethical
development of engineers together with expert speakers that can mentor them,
this interactive and collaborative workshop is creating a cohort of faculty and
administrators at institutions across the US who will support one another in
creating institutional change that will better prepare engineers to be attuned
to ethical and social impacts of their work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aim of
this project is to convene a workshop for faculty members in ethics and
engineering who are working to improve the ethical development of engineering
students. The workshop is designed to create a cohort of US faculty and
administrators who can serve as agents of change and support one another in
creating institutional transformations to better prepare engineers for the
ethically and socially complex work that they face. Faculty and administrators
attending the workshop (1) share their work, experiences, and lessons learned;
(2) discuss strategies for overcoming institutional and cultural challenges; and
(3) develop plans and collaborations for advancing efforts to incorporate ethics
into the education of engineering students. To increase attendees' potential
impact on their institution, they apply and attend as institutional teams that
include faculty and deans and must obtain partial financial support from their
university. Attendees have both informal and guided opportunities at the
workshop to strategize and develop plans for incorporating ethics in engineering
curriculum. Speakers knowledgeable in engineering ethics, ways to overcome
institutional and cultural bias, and ethics education serve as mentors for the
attendees; and knowledge sharing, mentoring, and active engagement approaches
are used to enhance opportunities for professional collaboration and mutual
support. Discussion focuses on how to overcome the institutional and cultural
challenges that make education in this area difficult. Video recordings of
workshop sessions and a summary report on the event are being created and
broadly disseminated to enable faculty beyond those in attendance to learn from
the presentations and discussions. The project is designed to foster a culture
attentive to ethics in engineering development, encourage the inclusion of
ethical and social considerations in engineering programs across the country,
and shine a spotlight on institutions that are successfully preparing engineers
for the ethical aspects of their work.