* 1550393
* I/UCRC:  Workshops Promoting International USA-Mexico Collaborations in Sensors and Signal Processing
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2015,12/31/2017
* Andreas Spanias, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Dmitri Perkins
* 12/31/2017
* USD 49,000.00

Arizona State University (ASU) and Tecnologico de Monterrey (ITESM) have
recently signed a memorandum of understanding (MOU) and held two administrative
meetings at ASU to explore collaborative research and education endeavors. This
NSF award provides support to organize two workshops whose themes will be on
Sensor Signal and Information Processing Systems. This program will positively
impact US-Mexico research and education initiatives and will engage a number of
qualified students and faculty from two large institutions in the area of
sensors and signal processing. The program will engage underrepresented groups
within STEM disciplines such as electrical engineering, with broader impacts on
improving the engineering workforce base, with commensurate economic benefits to
the two countries. The program will disseminate successful academy-industry
collaborative models such as the I/UCRC in Mexico. Several application aspects
of sensors will be addressed in industrial areas including localization,
mobility with extensions to manufacturing, health, and other systems of common
interest.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshops which will engage USA and Mexico
researchers, faculty and students and are titled:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;-Workshop
1: Sensors and Signal Processing for Localization and Security
Applications;&lt;br/&gt;-Workshop 2: Academy-Industry Collaborations in Sensors
and Signal Processing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The two workshops will be organized
by the PI who will lead an organizing committee of faculty and industry
partners. The first workshop will be in Tempe, Arizona (December 2015) and the
second one in will be held in Monterrey, Mexico (May 2016). The objectives of
the workshops are to: a) initiate collaborative structures between faculty and
industry researchers in the US and Mexico through research and panel sessions,
b) develop STEM foundations in the areas of sensor systems through organized
tutorials for students and researchers that will support future workforce
development efforts, and c) initiate industry-university relations&lt;br/&gt;in
Mexico using US industry academia-research models such as the I/UCRC.