* 1550404
* SI2-SSI: Collaborative Research: A Robust High-Throughput Ab Initio Computation and Analysis Software Framework for Interface Materials Science
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Kesong Yang, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 08/31/2020
* USD 600,000.00

A set of techniques scientists call "ab initio" methods, which are derived from
the fundamental laws of physics with minimal assumptions and approximations, has
become a critical tool in the study and design of materials. With computing
advances and software innovations, the automation of high-throughput ab initio
calculations has, in particular, heralded an explosion of computed data for a
large variety of materials. However, these high-throughput efforts are limited
to specific properties. In contrast, materials interfaces, one of the fastest
growing research areas in materials science and engineering, are showing an
increasing relevance in many areas of materials applications such as catalysis
and electronics. This project will develop a software framework that enables
novel high-throughput interface materials investigations and design. The
developed software platform will expand the genome of materials by including the
computed interfacial properties of interface materials. This community-based
software can potentially become a critical component of the Materials Genome
Initiative and serve not just the large and diverse materials research
community, but also the physics and chemistry communities. Besides featuring
heavily in existing and planned courses taught by the Principal Investigators in
their home institutions, the proposed framework will facilitate the training of
undergraduates and graduates in the ab initio methodologies in other
institutions as well. This project will also conduct public outreach activities
to increase awareness of the importance of sustainable software development for
data-driven interface materials science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
develop necessary workflow management, error correction schemes, and systematic
analysis tools to support ab initio studies of thermodynamics, kinetics,
diffusion, and electronic property of interface materials including hetero-
structures and grain boundary. It targets developmental efforts on three key
focus areas of great interest to interface materials science: (i) ab initio
thermodynamics of surfaces and interfaces; ii) advanced methods for materials
kinetics and diffusion at materials interfaces; and iii) automated algorithms
for structural construction of grain boundary and post data-processing and
analysis. In doing so, this project will greatly expand the suite of interfacial
materials properties that are amenable to a high-throughput ab initio treatment,
paving the way for materials investigations and design in a broad spectrum of
technological applications, including energy generation and storage, catalysis
and electronics. In addition, by interfacing with classical-mechanics simulation
codes, this framework will bridge the gap between the ab initio and classical
force-field approach, which is expected to significantly advance the high-
throughput simulations of materials interfaces. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
by the Advanced Cyberinfrastructure Division is jointly supported by the NSF
Directorate for Mathematical and Physical Sciences (Division of Materials
Research and Office of Multidisciplinary Activities).