* 1550477
* CAP: AccessCyberlearning
* CSE,IIS
* 11/01/2015,10/31/2018
* Sheryl Burgstahler, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 10/31/2018
* USD 99,964.00

The Cyberlearning and Future Learning Technologies Program funds efforts that
will help envision the next generation of learning technologies and advance what
we know about how people learn in technology-rich environments. Capacity-
building (CAP) projects increase the ability of researchers to understand how
such technology should be designed and used in the future and supports new
capacity in allowing researchers to answer questions about how people learn, how
to foster or assess learning, and/or how to design for learning. One challenge
in designing and studying technology-based learning environments is
incorporating state of the art knowledge about how technology can support (or
hinder) those with disabilities. This project will help researchers in the
cyberlearning community do research that takes into account what is known about
technology and disability by conducting training for cyberlearning researchers
both face to face and online.

The AccessCyberlearning project will increase the capacity of current and future
Cyberlearning and similar projects to inform their research with what is known
about student differences/disabilities; to design innovative learning
technologies and teaching strategies that are welcoming to, accessible to, and
usable by everyone, including people with disabilities; and ensure that project
materials (e.g., project websites, videos) and activities (training, meetings)
are welcoming to, accessible to, and usable by all participants. The
intellectual merit of the project lies in bringing together the expertise of the
DO-IT (Disabilities, Opportunities, Internetworking, and Technology) Center at
the University of Washington together with Cyberlearning researchers to help
shape future research agendas in the field and to inform those researchers with
limited experience in the area to the research literature on, and design best-
practices for, equal access. This will take place through a set of face-to-face
institutes coordinated with the CIRCL (Center for Innovative Research in
CyberLearning) and through development of web-based training materials for use
by the field more broadly.