* 1550581
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award: Relationships Between Consumer Behavior And Regional Identity
* SBE,BCS
* 11/15/2015,09/30/2018
* Patricia Crown, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 09/30/2018
* USD 10,034.00

Under the supervision of Dr. Patricia Crown, Erin Hegberg of the University of
New Mexico will conduct doctoral research in historical archaeology to study the
expansion of modern capitalism into frontier merchant economies and the
attendant changes in identity and social ideas about race. By examining daily
lives of those who were not necessarily rich or powerful, archaeology is ideally
suited to consider issues of colonialism, the spread of capitalism, and social
identity. These are important historical research themes for understanding
modern racial and ethnic relations in the United States. The proposed research
contributes to anthropology by examining the effects of emerging markets and
mass-consumption on social networks and identity in the past. It also uses
analysis methods that are suitable for other historic colonial and early
capitalist contexts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hegberg's research will examine how
people create and maintain community and regional identities through consumer
relationships developed to acquire and use material goods. It investigates
consumer practices and social relationships of men and women living in Hispanic
communities in New Mexico, AD 1821-1912. This period encompasses the Mexican and
the American Territorial Periods as New Mexicans were drawn into the larger
American racialized capitalist system. In the 19th century frontier, consumer
relationships were charged with more than just economic convenience and
reflected important networks that were essential to the survival of historic
Hispanic settlements. Using detailed analysis of locally produced pottery,
imported manufactured goods, and historic documents and advertisements, this
project examines and compares consumer patterns at four Hispanic residential
sites throughout New Mexico to understand which scale of social network - local
or national - was most important to site residents. The results of the research
will be the foundation of a doctoral dissertation and a series of articles,
public talks, and journal publications, as well as local media outlets such as
magazines, radio and genealogical groups. The research team will also partner
with local cultural heritage institutions to develop a bi-lingual (English,
Spanish) web exhibit based on the results of this research. The emphasis of the
website will be to disseminate the research results in plain language, and to
encourage user-participation in archaeological and historical interpretation
through digital interactive media such as blogs, social networking, forums, or
other user-generated content. This project will encourage the public to engage
with ideas of race and the historic contexts for racialization in the American
Southwest. Historical understandings of Hispanic identity is a particularly
poignant topic in New Mexico where 47% of the population identified as Hispanic
or Latino in 2013.