* 1550895
* EAGER: Exploiting the Role of Defects for Enhanced Thermoelectric Material Performance
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2016
* Elif Ertekin, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Tom Kuech
* 08/31/2016
* USD 119,999.00

Thermoelectric materials, materials which can convert temperature changes to
electric power, offer a potentially green, compact and elegant solution for
challenges ranging from energy harvesting to precise temperature control. The
wide-scale adoption of thermoelectric technologies, however, has been hindered
by low overall conversion efficiencies and high costs. Improvement of
thermoelectric material performance relies on the optimization of several
fundamental, interconnected material properties, but strategic materials
processing techniques have the potential to promote unprecedented levels of
performance through selective, tailored modification of these quantities. Toward
this end, this EArly-concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) award
supports fundamental research that will provide the foundation for computer-
based design of materials that exhibit targeted properties for the optimization
of thermoelectric material performance. The knowledge gained from these efforts
will enable realistic material processing techniques that provide a path for
low-cost, high-performance bulk thermoelectric materials. The potential impact
of these technologies is immense, and could provide an economically accessible
energy solution across the globe. These research efforts resonate with the
vision to educate the next generation of engineers by emphasizing innovation and
societal impact: this work will foster the mentality to find smart, natural ways
to exploit wasteful features of engineering systems and turn them into something
useful. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A predictive computational framework to quantify
and exploit the synergistic response of thermoelectric material properties to
selective vacancy defect configurations will be implemented. Detailed molecular
dynamics calculations will establish the relationship between lattice defect
configurations and the resulting thermal conductivity and phonon distributions
present in the material. These results will be coupled with additional ab initio
electronic structure calculations to predict electron/phonon scattering rates
modified by lattice defects. The scattering rates in turn will be employed to
compute the electrical transport coefficients (electrical conductivity and
Seebeck coefficient) in realistic systems using semi-classical Boltzmann theory.
The combined determination of thermal and electronic properties will fully
quantify the material figure of merit in response to the material defect
profiles, and will be employed to guide the optimization of the thermoelectric
material performance parameters. Defect/property relationships established from
this combined computational approach will be used to inform realistic material
design processes. These initial EAGER efforts will thus enable computer-based
design strategies for material processing and strategic designs that lead to
optimal thermoelectric material performance for bulk materials.