* 1550905
* ComputEL: A workshop to explore the use of computational methods in the study of endangered language
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2020
* Lane Schwartz, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* D.  Langendoen
* 07/31/2020
* USD 24,587.00

In June 2014, with support from NSF, the first ComputEL workshop was held in
conjunction with the 52nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics (ACL) in Baltimore, Maryland. The goal of that workshop was to serve
as an initial meeting point between computer scientists and computational
linguists active in ACL and documentary linguists engaged in work on endangered
languages. This proposal seeks to build on lessons learned in the first ComputEL
workshop, and to encourage new collaborations between the two research
communities. Contemporary efforts to document the world's endangered languages
are dependent on the widespread availability of modern recording technologies,
in particular digital audio and video recording devices and software to annotate
the recordings that such devices produce. However, despite well over a decade of
funding programs dedicated to the documentation of endangered languages, the
technological landscape that supports the activities of those involved in this
work remains fragmented, and the promises of new technology remain largely
unfulfilled. Moreover, the efforts of computer scientists, on the whole, are
mostly disconnected from the day-to-day work of documentary linguists, making it
difficult for the knowledge of each group to inform the other.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The second ComputEL workshop will address this state of
affairs by bringing together field linguists and computer scientists to explore
how computational techniques and tools can be created to better aid in the
analysis of endangered languages. A particular focus will be on how to
facilitate the process through which research results in this domain can be
developed into software that is well-supported for use by those documenting
endangered languages in the field. The workshop will be co-located with the
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP) in
Austin, Texas, in October 2016. This will allow it to reach a wider audience
than would otherwise be possible, while taking advantage of its location to
involve participants from nearby areas. On the first day, participants will take
part in discussions as part of a closed meeting that will be designed to lay out
a near-term agenda for the improved application of computational methods to the
study of endangered languages. The second day will consist of research
presentations scheduled jointly with the main EMNLP conference. The papers from
the workshop will be published in the Association for Computational Linguistics
conference proceedings, and an additional report will be produced summarizing
the conclusions of the closed meeting. Smaller speaker communities worldwide
will benefit from the results which will support better documentation and
preservation of endangered languages.&lt;br/&gt;