* 1550260
* Partial Support for the Eleventh Conference on Hunting and Gathering Societies
* GEO,OPP
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2017
* Peter Schweitzer, University of Northern Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Anna M. Kerttula
* 07/31/2017
* USD 49,955.00

The study of hunter-gatherer societies around the world, and in the Arctic and
Alaska in particular, became a major field within the social and human sciences
five decades ago. The goal of the Eleventh Conference on Hunting and Gathering
Societies (CHAGS XI) is to continue the development of a unified field of
hunter-gatherer studies. The general question of CHAGS XI therefore is how the
results of the last 50 years and new research agendas can be utilized for the
present and future. While many hunter-gatherers are forced to give up their ways
of life and subsistence practices, they figure prominently in public discourses
on ecological and ideological alternatives to industrial society. CHAGS XI will
attract a variety of stakeholders in these debates, including indigenous
representatives, NGOs, scholars, etc., from the U.S. and other countries. Based
on fieldwork and research from the full spectrum of hunter-gatherer ways of life
and from all perspectives scientific disciplines have to offer, the purpose of
CHAGS XI is to bring hunter-gatherer studies back to the center of the human and
social sciences. The conference will encourage discussions that will provide the
social sciences and other research areas with in-depth understanding of hunter-
gatherer societies in the United States, Arctic and globally. Through
publication of the keynote addresses, results will be widely disseminated to
local, national and international groups concerned with hunter-gatherer
societies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Since 1966 CHAGS has brought together scholars
from all over the world to share ideas about social science research. The goal
of the Eleventh Conference on Hunting and Gathering Societies (CHAGS XI) is to
continue the development of a unified field of hunter-gatherer studies. CHAGS XI
will offer a venue for U.S. and international scholars to analyze the progress
made in the social sciences and hunter-gatherer studies around the world, and in
the Arctic in particular. This includes special project sessions, discussion
panels, plenary presentations, invited talks by the leading hunter-gatherer
scientists and representatives of the indigenous peoples. Special efforts will
be made to ensure presence of as many project collaborators from U.S. hunter-
gatherer communities, as possible. Moreover, its main theme will encourage
discussions that will provide the social and natural sciences and other research
areas with in-depth understanding of hunter-gatherer societies in global
dialogue. Through publication of the keynote addresses, results will be widely
disseminated to local, national and international groups concerned with hunter-
gatherer societies. The conference will promote interdisciplinary collaboration
and include activities for early career scholars. By incorporating indigenous
and other stakeholder perspectives of the theme as an integral part, CHAGS XI
will encourage these groups of people and scholars to learn from each other now
and in the future.