* 1550207
* Teaching Undergraduate Oceanography Courses with OOI Data: A Pilot Workshop
* GEO,OCE
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2016
* Janice McDonnell, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 07/31/2016
* USD 49,910.00

The Ocean Observing Initiative (OOI) Education and Public Engagement (EPE)
Implementing Organization was established and tasked with bringing
professionally collected, real and near real time data, images, and video of our
Earth's oceans into both formal and informal learning environments and providing
a new layer of cyber-interactivity for educators. In order to correctly focus
development of educational tools, the PIs ran two front-end evaluation studies
on the practices and teaching needs of the oceanographic community. While 73% of
undergraduate professors said they use data in their classroom, only a small
subset use real-time data with their students. Most importantly, it was
determined that there is a need for further exploration into how to effectively
integrate data into teaching and how to create data visualization tools that
help undergraduate professors meet the demands of teaching 21st century science
skills and practices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs propose to lead a workshop
that will engage diverse institutions, including community colleges, Primarily
Undergraduate Institutions (PUIs), Minority-Serving Institutions (MSIs),
research laboratories, and larger research universities in an pilot intensive
hands-on effort focused on developing effective teaching with data practices
using OOI data assets and data visualizations tools. Participants will continue
engagement virtually after the workshop as the workshop report and materials
related to OOI are developed. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Workshop
Objectives:&lt;br/&gt;1) Crosswalk OOI Science themes presented in popular
introductory textbooks used in oceanography courses. Partcipants will compare
themes and concepts in the OOI scientific themes document and popular published
textbooks to triangulate where OOI data investigations/activities can be woven
into existing courses.&lt;br/&gt;2) Develop learning objectives and activity
outlines of 5 data investigations (one per team) that could be developed when
OOI data is available and accessible. &lt;br/&gt;3) Brainstorm with the teams
how best to build a community of practice with long-term working relationships
and collaborations on data investigation development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
results of this workshop will make OOI data more accessible and useful for
undergraduate education activities.