* 1550784
* EAGER: Remote Sensing Curriculum Enhancement using Cloud Computing
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2015,02/28/2018
* Judy Fox, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Sushil K Prasad
* 02/28/2018
* USD 189,780.00

The overarching goal of this EAGER proposal is to investigate the concept that
Computational Science curricula and research using Cloud Computing can be well
suited for Minority Serving institutions (MSI's). Many aspects of Cloud are
compelling for MSI's. This project will employ enhancements to a graduate level
course on Remote Sensing at a HBCU campus and follow up with two additional
courses to investigate its goals. The project is a collaboration between
Elizabeth City State University (ECSU), an HBCU, and Indiana University (IU).
Remote sensing applications collect high volumes of data that exceed the
capabilities of conventional computing systems. This motivates the use of Cloud
services and high performance computing (HPC) to support the associated storage
and computation. Classes developed at ECSU and IU will be delivered by cloud-
based online technologies to ECSU. This is a high-risk exploratory work both in
its goals and methods, and if successful will provide a scalable template for
MSI and non-MSI institutions for their conduct of teaching and research over
Cloud platforms. This pilot project will attempt to introduce curricula and
research for a very multidisciplinary set of topics using the Remote Sensing
course with shared modules at a HBCU with multiple constraints including multi-
institutional collaborative curriculum development and teaching, and employment
of emerging curricular platforms. An important goal is to identify needed
improvements and resources to scale their ideas for following up on a broader
adoption of their model in MSI graduate and undergraduate curricula and
research.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Cloud Computing potentially has the capability
to host both parallel and distributed computation (e.g., using Hadoop) and
learning resources (e.g., for massive open online courses or MOOC's), making
them an attractive focus for universities without a major research history
looking to participate with research intensive universities. The project
activities will include course development and delivery using MOOC's for an ECSU
Remote Sensing class taught by ECSU and IU faculty with a mix of virtual and
residential modes. A key goal is to train the instructors at the MSI's to enable
them to effectively teach the advanced course. For this, a MOOC teach-the-
teacher workshop for MSI computer science faculty members and a MOOC
opportunities workshop for MSI students are planned during the 2016 annual
conference of Association of Computer and Information Science/Engineering
Departments at Minority Institutions (ADMI). The scalability and robustness of
the project infrastructure and techniques will be tested with two additional
courses. The courses' outcomes will be evaluated to understand the best
practices of such shared curriculum across multiple disciplines and
institutions. The framework can then be utilized as a template to systematically
introduce multiple courses, curricula, teacher training, research support and
electronic resources across the ADMI's MSI network. The project will be
evaluated based on the extent to which the curriculum develops and provides the
necessary training on remote sensing using Cloud Computing and MOOC
technologies, how the instructors are able to adopt in their courses, and how
the ADMI colleges are able to institutionalize Cloud computing in their course
offerings.