* 1550642
* US-EGYPT Workshop: Toward Resilient and Sustainable Infrastructure Development at the new Suez Canal region in Egypt; Cairo, Egypt; December 18-20, 2015
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2015,03/31/2016
* Mahmoud Reda Taha, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Yick Hsuan
* 03/31/2016
* USD 39,430.00

This workshop, to be held at The German University in Cairo (GUC), will be co-
organized by the University of New Mexico (UNM) and the GUC to discuss a roadmap
to ensure resilient infrastructure development with favorable social and
environmental impacts of the anticipated mega-scale projects to take place at
the new Suez Canal in Egypt. The Suez Canal region is a multi-hazard region with
considerable seismic activity, an arid environment and offshore durability
challenges. The workshop will be held in December 18-20, 2015, a few months
after the opening the new Suez Canal in Egypt (anticipated in August 2015). The
two and half-day workshop will include an organized visit by all workshop
attendees to the new Suez Canal followed by workshop activities to take place at
the GUC. The workshop selection committee, led by the PI, will select 15
distinguished members from US academia and industry to participate with Egyptian
counterparts to deliver presentations and engage in discussion panels. The PIs
will emphasize participation of experts from underrepresented groups in science
and engineering specifically women, minorities,and people with disabilities.

The planned mega-scale infrastructure development of the new Suez Canal region
represents a unique opportunity for the scientific community to participate
positively in economic development and global economic growth. This workshop
represents an unique opportunity for US researchers to test and validate
research concepts and methods on realistic field conditions for a case study
with significant challenge. The challenge is manifested by the multi-hazards
necessary to consider in design including significant seismic activity, poor
soil conditions, offshore construction durability and potentially rising water
in the Canal due to climate change. In addition, successful development is
challenged by the need to carefully mitigate potential negative environmental
impacts. Finally, careful planning is necessary to cultivate positive socio-
economic impacts. Discussing these challenges and developing a roadmap for
successful development of such strategic international facility will be of
immense value to Egypt and the international community. Involvement of US
academia and industrial experts in such challenging development through
discussions, observations and potential involvement in collaborative research
opportunities, offers a unique opportunity for synthesis of lessons learned from
the Suez Canal region development for future projects in similar areas in the US
and internationally.