* 1550326
* Workshop on the Science of Safety for High Consequence Materials
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2015,11/30/2019
* Richard Voyles, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Lyons
* 11/30/2019
* USD 39,750.00

High consequence materials are materials that if released into the environment
in an uncontrolled manner, might cause damage or harm to people, animals and the
Earth, itself. Examples of such materials include nuclear waste, biological
contagions for which there is no cure (like the Ebola virus), and even return
samples from outer space that may harbor unknown compounds or life forms. The
chance of contamination of the general public by any of these materials is
extremely small, however, there are professionals that are exposed to these
types of dangers on a regular basis. Since these professionals must handle these
materials, it is paramount not only for their safety, but for the safety of the
general public, to take extreme measures to ensure that any and all possible
mistakes are minimized and contained. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This workshop
explores current practices and difficulties of handling these types of materials
with the goal of learning common methods and practices that cut across all such
materials. This is referred to as the "science of safety" and it promises to
benefit national priorities by making dangerous materials safer and more
productive, by protecting citizens, healthcare workers, emergency responders,
and researchers from accidental exposure, and by promoting business by
streamlining procedures and improving work environments. The workshop will bring
together 20 experts in US and 10 experts from Japan, France, Korea, Sweden, UK,
Spain, and Italy. International collaboration will be expanded through this
project via lessons learned from our international partners. International
participation is particularly important because the unique nature and infrequent
occurrence of exposure events make it desirable to gather the most pertinent
experiences from around the world. Japan, Korea, France and the United Kingdom
are particularly sought for their complementary strengths in both nuclear and
biological fields.