* 1550800
* CAP:  Building Partnerships for Education and Speech Research
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2017
* Cynthia D'Angelo, Concord Consortium
* Standard Grant
* John Cherniavsky
* 08/31/2017
* USD 49,996.00

A new age of technology is dawning on the field of speech recognition and
analysis. This has begun to become publicly visible through the increasing
availability of impressive tools such as Siri and Google Translate, but these
consumer-ready tools only scratch the surface of the potential that research-
quality speech engineering applications unlock. However, these capabilities
remain practically unrecognized by the education research community. This one-
year Capacity-Building Project (CAP) will build partnerships among top
researchers and develop expertise from both education and speech engineering
backgrounds through a series of workshops to bring together four leading spoken
language technology and education research groups. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will unite the extensive education research and educational technology
backgrounds at the Concord Consortium and SRI International's Center for
Technology in Learning and bring them together with two of the strongest groups
in spoken language technology research, the Speech Technology and Research
Laboratory at SRI International and the Center for Robust Speech Systems at the
University of Texas at Dallas. This will provide the foundations for educational
research areas as diverse as collaboration, argumentation, discourse analysis,
teacher questioning, emotion, and engagement. Spoken language technologies will
provide efficiencies, insight, and entire new methodologies for approaching
these research areas, and they will do so while students and teachers assume
more natural modes - those of the naturalistic language-based interactions that
have formed the basis of educational interchange for millennia. This project
will gather and summarize applicable knowledge about the current state of these
fields and generate central papers and momentum suitable for bringing together
and helping launch a new interdisciplinary field of study, spoken language
technology for education. The work of this CAP proposal will generate the
initial necessary connections and create the first definitions required to move
toward proposals, actions, and research.