* 1550628
* Collaborative Research: EAGER-NEON: NEON Sites as a Platform for Transformative Wildlife Research
* BIO,EF
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2018
* Larry Conner, Ichauway, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Elekonich
* 09/30/2018
* USD 167,148.00

Knowing where animals choose to spend their time and why they may have chosen
those areas is fundamental to conserving our nation's wildlife. For decades,
ecologists have been studying animal movement behaviors using radio-telemetry
and more recently global positioning systems (GPS). GPS technology has recently
advanced such that many smaller animals can now be accurately and intensively
tracked. Additionally, the National Ecological Observatory Network (NEON) has
begun collecting detailed environmental data at sites throughout North America.
The NEON platform and new GPS technologies offer an unprecedented opportunity to
merge highly accurate animal movement data with equally accurate environmental
data to better understand how animals interact with their environment and
predict how they may do so into the future. In this project, researchers propose
to use the southeastern fox squirrel (Sciurus niger) as a model for
demonstrating how linking NEON and animal movement data can transform wildlife
research by allowing scientists to obtain a detailed look into how animals are
influenced by, and interact with their environment. Researchers hope to use
lessons learned from this project to provide guidance for broader implementation
of these technologies across NEON sites, ultimately increasing the capacity of
scientists to better understand how organisms interact with their environment.
Additionally, the researchers plan to share information and develop educational
tools (e.g., web sites showing southeastern fox squirrel movements, videos of
simulated animal movement paths, classroom presentations of tools and
techniques, etc.) for use in public school systems via local science education
initiatives.

Investigators will affix small GPS receivers to southeastern fox squirrels to
monitor fine-scaled spatiotemporal movements at NEON sites in southwestern
Georgia and central Florida. Environmental data will be obtained from NEON for
each of these sites. Fox squirrel locations and movements will be modeled as
functions of predictor variables obtained from NEON. These efforts will provide
an example of linking highly accurate spatial data to address how animals move
and interact with their environment at fine scales and across broad areas. The
goals of the project are to provide: (1) proof of concept, (2) assessment of the
current NEON data collection schedule relative to animal movements, and (3)
suggestions for implementation of high-resolution animal movement studies across
NEON domains. Researchers will archive data associated with this project at the
University of Florida where it will be available for public access and use.