* 1550814
* Workshop-NEON: Integrated Carbon and Water for Ecological and Biogeochemical Synthesis (ICWEBS); Wind River Experimen. Forest, WA; Sept. 2016; Boulder, CO; March, 2017; AGU-2017
* BIO,EF
* 12/01/2015,11/30/2017
* David Noone, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 11/30/2017
* USD 99,958.00

A synthesis team (Integrated Carbon and Water for Ecological and Biogeochemical
Synthesis, ICWEBS) will be established to evaluate and coordinate approaches for
making best use of atmospheric data collected by the National Ecological
Observatory Network (NEON). This will be facilitated by organizing a symposium
that will bring together 80-120 experts in the field, followed by workshops. The
symposium will result in a series of recommendations for calibration and
processing of data that is collected by NEON, as well as examples of how the
NEON data can be integrated with other data sets. Several tangible outcomes will
emerge form the proposed work: 1) video tutorials that will be open to students
and early career scientists and made available via the internet, 2) articles
that will be published in widely read scientific journals or an edited book.
Through these communications, ideas on how to make best use of atmospheric data
collected by NEON will be made available to a wide variety of institutions
throughout the United States. The workshops will provide learning opportunities
for early career scientists and graduate students.

The National Ecological Observatory Network (NEON) will provide the scientific
community data on isotopes of water and carbon dioxide at unprecedented temporal
and spatial scales. This data along with appropriate theoretical frameworks will
enable the community to make significant advances in understanding carbon and
water exchange between the biosphere and the atmosphere. A synthesis team
(Integrated Carbon and Water for Ecological and Biogeochemical Synthesis,
ICWEBS) will be established to evaluate and coordinate approaches for making
best use of isotopic data collected by NEON. The synthesis team will organize a
symposium involving 80-120 participants to be held late September 2016 near a
NEON core site. This symposium will be followed up with workshops with ca 20
people involved in each. By providing: 1) specific recommendations for
calibration and processing approaches for the NEON isotopic data streams, 2)
examples of the integration of NEON into models of varying levels of complexity,
and by 3) broadening of the awareness and utilization of the isotopic data, the
proposed workshops will provide the scientific community with the best
approaches and most effective ways of using the isotopic data collected by NEON.
Peer reviewed articles resulting from the workshops will be disseminated widely
in journals and/or an edited book.