* 1550155
* Collaborative Research: Thrust Belt Response to Rapid Surface Uplift of the Altiplano: A Field Test of Cordilleran Cyclicity in Southern Bolivia
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2015,06/30/2016
* Sean Long, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 06/30/2016
* USD 21,328.00

The Cordilleran cyclicity model predicts that detachment of dense continental
lithosphere should be accompanied by rapid uplift of an orogenic plateau and
resulting rapid advance of deformation in the frontal fold-thrust belt. In the
central Andean plateau, recent isotopic studies argue for rapid surface uplift
of the southern Altiplano in Bolivia between 16 and 13 million years ago, which
has been attributed to removal of dense material at depth. The Cordilleran
cyclicity model predicts that the Andean fold-thrust belt should have responded
to this rapid uplift event through rapid eastward propagation of the deformation
front. However, accurate records of the timing and magnitude of deformation in
the thrust belt in southern Bolivia are not available, which leaves this key
prediction untested. In this project, we are performing a field-based study
aimed at documenting the response (or lack thereof) of the Andean fold-thrust
belt to the rapid rise of the hinterland plateau. The project involves geologic
mapping along an east-west transect through the thrust belt in southern Bolivia,
which will support construction of a balanced cross-section. By sequentially
restoring deformation in the cross-section, we are generating a record of
shortening over the last ~20-30 million years. This record will be integrated
with deformation timing constraints from analysis of field relationships of
sedimentary rocks deposited during crustal shortening, and timing estimates for
erosion of multiple thrust sheets obtained from low-temperature cooling
histories. The final goal of the project will be to generate a timing record of
forward propagation rates of the thrust front and of contemporaneous
depositional centers. Together, these records will allow us to evaluate the
orogenic response to rapid hinterland surface uplift, and therefore to test a
key prediction of the Cordilleran cyclicity model. This project is training
graduate and undergraduate students (including a Bolivian graduate student
studying in the U.S.) in a STEM field, and is contributing to the broadening of
representation of underrepresented groups in the earth sciences; it is
facilitating a new collaboration between U.S. investigators at two institutions
(University of Nevada Reno and the University of Texas at Austin); and it is
fostering a valuable international collaboration between U.S. and Bolivian
scientists. This award is being co-funded by NSF's Office of International
Science and Engineering.