* 1550433
* EAGER/Cybermanufacturing Systems: Fleet-Sourced Cyber Manufacturing Applications for Improved Transparency and Resilience of Manufacturing Assets and Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 12/01/2015,11/30/2017
* Jay Lee, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Steve Schmid
* 11/30/2017
* USD 99,999.00

Internet-enabled services (such as cloud-based and mobile applications) have
been influential through almost all economic sectors, such as retail, music,
transportation, and healthcare, which have proven the benefit of performing
analytics on historical data from a networked system. However, compared to
existing Internet-enabled industries, manufacturing assets are less connected
and less accessible in real-time. As a result, current manufacturing enterprises
make decisions following a top-down approach: from overall equipment
effectiveness to assignment of production requirements, without considering the
condition of machines. This EArly-concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER)
award supports fundamental research to develop the concepts and theory for next-
generation advanced cybermanufacturing systems that are networked and
interoperable through analytics on the fleet-sourced data. Cybermanufacturing
systems will enable a bottom-up real-time decision support manufacturing
strategy by taking into account asset health conditions predicted based on
historical asset data. Eventually, mobile applications will be developed for
portable access of the actionable information. Since such analytics can be
performed on data collected from existing asset condition monitoring systems
with moderate levels of add-on sensor installment, manufacturing industries in
almost every sector will benefit from the results of this research.
Consequently, this research will inject speed into the development of U.S.
economy and benefit the society by increasing the efficiency and productivity of
manufacturing enterprises. This research requires knowledge and expertise from a
variety of disciplines including manufacturing, mechanical engineering, computer
science, and control theory. The interdisciplinary methodology will facilitate
the creativity and healthy growth of the involved areas and draw interest from
younger generation to impact science, technology, engineering and mathematics
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The new cybermanufacturing methodology will
deepen the research on fleet-sourced prognostics, which overcomes several
drawbacks of conventional prognostics and health management approaches,
including lack of generality and reconfigurability, lack of robustness against
changing regimes, and sometimes insufficient accuracy. A fleet is referred to as
a group of assets similar in working conditions (make and model, ambient
conditions, and health status). Research gaps in conducting fleet-sourced
prognostics exist in the quantification of asset similarity, clustering fleets,
validation of such fleets, and dynamically changing the clustering scheme when
regimes change. The research team will leverage existing fleet-level peer-to-
peer prognostics approaches to develop a reconfigurable platform with
capabilities to reduce the dimensionality from fleet-sourced data, devise a risk
assessment methodology to provide real-time predictive actionable information,
and eventually incorporate such functions into the developed mobile
applications.