* 1550091
* Global Eustasy or Tectonic Subsidence? Investigating Controls on Basin Evolution During Cenozoic Plate Reorganization, Magallanes Basin, Patagonia
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2016,08/31/2016
* Julie Fosdick, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 08/31/2016
* USD 231,613.00

Tectonic activity and climate interact to control the growth of mountains,
erosion of steepened topography, and fluctuations between marine and terrestrial
conditions along low-lying continental margins. Continents located in complex
tectonic plate settings undergoing continental separation are especially
sensitive to changes in tectonic deformation and sea level, which together
modulate biogeographic pathways between major landmasses and global
ocean/atmosphere circulation between ocean basins. This project uses
stratigraphy, geochronology, basin modeling, structural geology, and
paleobiology in the Cenozoic Magallanes-Austral region of South America (Chile
and Argentina) to investigate how tectonic deformation, sea level, and climate
affect coastal depositional patterns and paleogeography during an important time
interval for global climate. The project advances the role of science in our
society by 1) engaging the general public and college students enrolled in
general education courses by developing a field-based learning module on plate
tectonics, global climate, and paleogeography, 2) promoting increased
participation of women in science and technology, 3) supporting international
research and training opportunities for graduate and undergraduate students, and
4) stimulating new international collaborations between U.S. and Chilean
academic institutions and regional parkland organizations. The NSF Office of
International Science and Engineering is providing support for international
activities associated with this project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary
research objective of this project is to evaluate the controlling factors on
marine transgressions and continental sediment dispersal patterns in the
Magallanes-Austral region of South America during an important time interval for
global climate. This work aims to test the hypothesis that the middle Cenozoic
Atlantic transgressions in Patagonia were caused by tectonic loading and
deepening of sedimentary environments during Andean deformation and opening of
the Drake Passage. This project also investigates how the intercalated coarse-
grained progradational deposits are linked to thrusting history and
physiographic changes in upland sediment source areas. Stratigraphy, basin
modeling, structural mapping, and sedimentary provenance tools (detrital zircon
geochronology, sandstone petrography, and mudstone geochemistry) will be
combined to evaluate how tectonic and climatic changes in upland source areas
affect sedimentation style, grain size, accumulation rate, and basin
paleogeography during Eocene through middle Miocene time. Erosion rates derived
from detrital apatite thermochronology will further resolve potential influences
from thrust-belt deformation and climatic events. This project promotes
scientific progress on understanding the deformation of the continental
lithosphere by: 1) evaluating along-strike differences in retroarc foreland
basin evolution during a major phase of Andean orogenesis, 2) contributing an
improved chronostratigraphic framework for the diverse middle Cenozoic
Patagonian fossil assemblages, 3) investigating relationships between orogenic
paleogeography, transgressions, sediment pulses, and biotic events, and 4)
integrating new datasets for improved numerical models of lithospheric
deformation and climatic processes in orogenic systems.