* 1550986
* EAGER: Controllable Synthesis of Gradient-Microstructured Materials, from the Nanoscale to Macroscale
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2015,10/31/2016
* Sandeep Kumar, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Alexis Lewis
* 10/31/2016
* USD 125,000.00

Gradient-structured materials are materials which have nanometer sized structure
at the surface, and coarser structure at the core. Such materials have
demonstrated impressive mechanical performance advantages over materials with
homogeneous coarse-grained or nanocrystalline structures. So far, however, the
ability to manufacture gradient structured materials for commercial use has not
yet been realized. This award supports research to develop deeper scientific
understanding of processing parameters that control the microstructures in both
thin film and bulk materials, and in particular this EArly-concept Grant for
Exploratory Research (EAGER) award will support demonstration of the fabrication
and synthesis of these novel gradient structures. The ability to fabricate these
structures will allow for scientific investigation of their behavior, and the
new knowledge gained from this research will enable the design of engineered
materials with improved resistance to wear and corrosion, and also drastically
improved yield strength and toughness. The benefits of this work will manifest
in improved performance and product lifetimes for components subjected to
extreme engineering environments in automotive, aerospace and machine tools
industries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research objective of this early-stage work
is to explore novel processing approaches for obtaining materials with
controllable grain size gradients. To realize the goal of controllable grain
size gradients in both thin-film and bulk samples, a systematic investigation of
two processing approaches will be carried out, with the specific goal of
understanding how processing parameters can be correlated with gradient
microstructural evolution. These tasks include sputtering fabrication of
gradient titanium thin-films with tailored layer thicknesses, grain size
gradients, and graded-interfaces, and surface mechanical attrition treatment of
titanium informed by numerical models of microstructural refinement. The
scientific insights stemming from this research will provide a clearer picture
on the effect of processing conditions on the microstructural evolution of
gradient microstructure materials, and facilitate a better understanding of the
property space available for gradient nanostructured materials, which may
accelerate insertion into future structural and coating applications.