* 1550024
* I-Corps: Injectable Cellulosic Hydrogels for Intervertebral Disc Repair
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2015,12/31/2015
* Steven Nicoll, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* Rathindra DasGupta
* 12/31/2015
* USD 50,000.00

Intervertebral disc (IVD) degeneration is the most common diagnosis for lower
back pain, a debilitating condition that affects 15-30% of the United States
population, with associated annual costs of $100 billion. Degeneration of the
IVD often causes disc herniation, a condition in which tissue is extruded from
the disc space and impinges on nearby nerves. Lumbar discectomy is the most
frequent surgical treatment for herniated discs, during which portions of the
disc tissue are resected to decompress affected nerve roots. However, this
treatment has a high recurrence rate (5-15%), and often requires secondary
intervention. For heavily degenerated discs, spinal fusion is typically
employed. However, this procedure limits mobility and produces damage to
adjacent discs over time. Several products are under development for disc tissue
replacement including Newcleus (Zimmer) and NucleoFix (Replication Medical),
with none approved for use in the United States. Clinical application of these
devices has been limited due to migration out of the disc space, wear debris
formation, and fatigue or fracture failure of the surrounding tissues. Thus,
current surgical treatment options are inadequate for long-term disease
management, and existing commercial implants do not sufficiently restore disc
structure and function. Replacing the disc tissue with an injectable disc-like
material may help restore IVD mechanical functionality and limit disease
progression. This project is centered on the utilization of injectable plant-
based gels that form in the intradiscal space to replace resected IVD tissue.
The technology represents an important contribution to translational
biomaterials research, and has the potential to significantly impact patient
health and quality of life.

This I-Corps team has developed a technology based on the use of injectable,
crosslinked carboxymethylcellulose (CMC) hydrogels for engineering
intervertebral disc (IVD) tissue. CMC is a plant-derived, negatively-charged
polysaccharide similar to those found in the native disc, which provides an
environment more conducive to swelling, nutrient transport and extracellular
matrix organization in comparison to inert polymers, such as poly(ethylene
oxide). As a derivative of cellulose, the most abundant naturally occurring
organic compound on the planet, CMC is inherently renewable and a "green"
alternative to synthetic polymers and animal-derived proteins and
polysaccharides used for the repair of cartilaginous tissues. Further, CMC is
more cost-effective than other polysaccharides (i.e., chondroitin sulfate and
hyaluronic acid) currently used for similar applications, and obviates risks
associated with animal or bacterial by-products. In addition, the covalently
crosslinked CMC gels are stable and not susceptible to enzymatic degradation by
mucopolysaccharidases in humans (i.e., hyaluronidase), as the polysaccharide can
only be cleaved by cellulase, an enzyme absent in humans. Evaluation of these in
situ-forming hydrogels has demonstrated restoration of the mechanical function
of injured discs in an animal explant model, and the mechanical properties
(i.e., equilibrium Young's modulus) have been found to match those of native
human disc tissue. Thus, these injectable cellulosic implants have the potential
to significantly impact a sizable patient population suffering from pathological
conditions associated with IVD injury and degeneration. The hydrogels have also
been shown to exhibit tunable material properties and cytocompatibility,
extending the possible applications beyond disc replacement, for uses such as
soft tissue fillers or as cell carriers for regenerative therapies.