* 1550678
* Auditory Navigation
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2017
* Mayank Mehta, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Soo-Siang Lim
* 08/31/2017
* USD 300,000.00

All animals must navigate and find their way in space, in order to find food and
shelter and avoid harm. Humans overwhelmingly rely on visual landscape to learn
spatial maps and navigate. Unfortunately, millions of blind people cannot do
that. They can avoid obstacles using a walking stick but this does not provide
information about the spatial layout on a larger scale, defined by visual
landmarks such as pillars, buildings, mountains etc. Without this information
about the visual landscape blind subjects cannot develop a sense of spatial map
of the surrounding world and navigate within it. This inability to learn spatial
maps is profoundly debilitating and has serious consequences for other forms of
learning as well. The proposed project will test a novel and multidisciplinary
solution that can be implemented using recently developed techniques developed
by the Principal Investigator?s (PI's) laboratory. The researchers hypothesize
that subjects could form navigational maps through an artificially created
auditory landscape. To test this, the investigators will create a landscape
defined only by auditory cues and ask subjects to navigate. This requires
techniques to eliminate nonspecific cues such as light and smells that can
accidentally provide spatial information. Using these recently developed
techniques to eliminate such confounds and ensure that subjects are navigating
only with auditory cues, the researchers will also develop data analysis methods
to determine how well and how quickly the subjects are learning the auditory
landscape. The results would provide valuable insights about whether mammals,
even with the ones with good visual abilities in terms of their genetic heritage
(e.g. humans), can learn to rely on the auditory cues alone to learn spatial
maps. In the long run this information would be quite useful in helping blind
people learn to navigate using auditory cues.