* 1550994
* BRAIN: EAGER:  Memory Reactivation in Neural Circuits Over Long, Continuous Timescales
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2018
* Caleb Kemere, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 07/31/2018
* USD 300,000.00

Memories of facts and experiences take time to be stored robustly in the brain.
Understanding of the underlying mechanisms would not only yield insight into a
fundamental ability found in all animals, but also allow for the optimization of
learning and memory in healthy individuals as well as interventions in humans
with compromised memory. Many current hypotheses of memory posit the importance
of "replay" within ensembles of neurons in the brain. The idea is that in
periods of quiescence or sleep, neurons in the hippocampus, a key brain
structure for memory, re-excite the patterns of activity that occurred during
the original learning/experience. This neural replay of the original activity
patterns enables distributed cortical regions to form robust, lasting
interconnections and thereby support memory. In rats learning to navigate mazes,
the signals of dozens of individual hippocampal neurons can be accessed
simultaneously. In this project, neural recording, computational, and
statistical tools are developed and tested to observe neuronal activity in the
hippocampus of rats over long periods of time-- periods that include repeated
active learning and quiescence/sleep episodes-- and address fundamental
questions about replay and how individual neurons participate in replay/learning
over time. The algorithms developed in this project are shared widely through
on-line media. The data collected contribute to instructional material used in
interdisciplinary graduate training programs and courses focused on neural
signal processing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, new neural recording
technology and novel and computational analysis techniques are used to acquire
and interpret week-long continuous recordings of hippocampal activity while an
animal learns a novel task. The result is the first ever qualitative and
quantitative assessment of replay over a period of this length. The resulting
data have the potential to yield great insight into how changes in patterns of
neural activity at the scales of milliseconds (replay) interact with changes at
the scales of hours (circadian) and days (learning). The algorithms developed,
which are shared through a public on-line site, may be foundational to a new
experimental paradigm where neurons are recorded continuously over time. A
particularly valuable outcome of the project are novel algorithms for
automatically isolating the signals of individual neurons from each other, and
tracking slow changes to their signatures over time. Additionally, a new latent-
variable model technique for quantifying how individual replay events compare
with the patterns exhibited during learning enables the statistics of replay
variability to be assessed. The impacts of this work have the potential to be
broad, from techniques that revolutionize systems neuroscience to data that
underpins new models of learning and memory.