* 1550593
* Collaborative Research: SI2-SSI: Integrating Data with Complex Predictive Models under Uncertainty: An Extensible Software Framework for Large-Scale Bayesian Inversion
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Umberto Villa, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Seung-Jong Park
* 08/31/2020
* USD 350,885.00

Scientists often use mathematical models to predict the behavior of natural and
engineered systems. These models are therefore fundamental to scientific and
engineering progress and hence relevant to NSF's science mission. Most models of
realistic physical systems use complex formulae (such as, partial differential
equations) involving many variables. When using such a model for predicting the
future behavior of a system, a scientist has to provide initial values for all
the variables. This can be difficult because input values may not be directly
measureable. Thus, scientists often must use "inverse" computations to calculate
the initial input values of the variables of a system model based on external
observations of the real world. In other words, scientists seek to infer inputs
to a computer model of a physical process from real observational data of the
outputs. There are many examples of inverse computations, ranging from computing
the important dimensions of an organ from its CAT scan, reconstructing the
source of a sound by measuring its volume and frequency at various places,
calculating the density of the Earth from measurements of its gravity field, or
calculating the initial condition of the atmosphere (temperature, pressure,
etc.) from satellite and weather station observations over a time interval.
Inverse problems are ubiquitous across all of science and engineering (and
beyond). Many solutions exist for inverse problems, i.e. solutions that fit the
data to the observations. However, there are variations in the solutions
identified. That is, the solutions of an inverse problem are subject to
uncertainty. Bayesian inferencing provides a systematic mathematical framework
for characterizing this uncertainty. However, the Bayesian solution of inverse
problems for large-scale complex models require enormous computational power.
Only recently have algorithms begun to emerge that are computationally
tractable. However, these algorithms have remained out of the reach of the
mainstream of scientists who solve inverse problems, due to their complexity and
the need for deeper information from the forward model. This project aims to
develop, distribute, and support open-source software that encodes state-of-the-
art algorithms for the solution of large-scale complex Bayesian inverse problems
and is robust, scalable, flexible, modular, widely accessible, and easy to
use.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project builds heavily on two complementary open-
source software libraries the team has been developing: MUQ at MIT, and hIPPYlib
at UT-Austin/UC-Merced. MUQ provides a spectrum of powerful Bayesian inversion
models and algorithms, but expects forward models to come equipped with
gradients/Hessians to permit large-scale solution. hIPPYlib implements powerful
large-scale gradient/Hessian-based inverse solvers in an environment that can
automatically generate needed derivatives, but it lacks full Bayesian
capabilities. By integrating these two complementary libraries, the project will
result in a robust, scalable, and efficient software framework that realizes the
benefits of each to tackle complex large-scale Bayesian inverse problems across
a broad spectrum of scientific and engineering disciplines. The resulting
software, that will be distributed under an open-source license, will provide an
environment for rapid development of inverse models equipped with
gradient/Hessian information; benchmark problems for evaluation and comparison
of algorithms; and tutorial problems for training and testing purposes.