* 1550512
* Mini-Symposium: Multiphysics Coupling in Energy Storage, Houston, TX, November 11 - 19, 2015
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2016
* George Nelson, University of Alabama in Huntsville
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 08/31/2016
* USD 5,046.00

Principal Investigator: George J Nelson&lt;br/&gt;Proposal No:
1550512&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Energy storage is emerging as a major challenge for
enabling renewable energy production from intermittent grid sources such as wind
and solar, and for enabling the next generation of electric vehicles. This award
will provide partial support to host a mini-symposium on Multiphysics Coupling
in Energy Storage at the 2015 International Mechanical Engineering Congress and
Exposition (IMECE). The IMECE is the premier conference for the American Society
of Mechanical Engineers (ASME) that typically attracts around 4000 attendees
from more than 75 countries. The 2015 IMECE will be held at the Hilton Americas
and the George R. Brown Convention Center in Houston, Texas from November 13,
2015 to November 19, 2015. The proposed mini-symposium will assemble a diverse
group of engineers and scientists with the objective of identifying recent
advances and critical needs for comprehensive models that find ways to improve
the performance of devices for storage of renewable energy, including batteries.
The speakers will come from academia, industry, national laboratories, and
science and engineering research centers. Special efforts will be made to
recruit speakers from under-represented minorities and women in engineering.
This environment will foster interdisciplinary collaboration between mechanical
engineers, materials scientists, computational scientists, and
electrochemists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Improving electrochemical energy storage
devices for vehicle electrification, renewable energy integration and grid
storage depends on understanding complex reaction and transport processes
spanning multiple length and time scales. The mini-symposium on Multiphysics
Coupling in Energy Storage at the 2015 IMECE will build interdisciplinary
collaborations to around this theme will advance development of a more
sustainable energy infrastructure. The mini-symposium will consist of 19 invited
presentations organized in 4 technical sessions. The invited presentations will
address key issues related to multiphysics behavior of energy storage devices.
These issues include, but are not limited to: (1) Opportunities and challenges
in Li-ion chemistry and other battery chemistries; (2) Coupled electrochemical,
thermal, and mechanical physics; (3) Modeling and characterization of physical
processes across length scales; (4) Mesoscale physics of microstructure-
transport-chemistry interactions; (5) Degradation processes controlling safety
and lifetime; (6) Origin and evolution of safety events such as thermal runaway.