* 1550640
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: EAGER-NEON: How do Microscale Biophysical Processes Mediate Ecosystem Shifts during Climate Change-driven Drought?
* BIO,EF
* 10/01/2015,10/31/2017
* Janet Franklin, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 10/31/2017
* USD 215,604.00

Forested landscapes are transformed by changing climate, fire regimes and land
use as well as feedbacks among them. The unprecedented drought affecting
California provides a timely natural experiment for advancing our knowledge of
forest change under the effects of prolonged drought. The investigators will
leverage National Ecological Observatory Network (NEON) data in synergy with
their microclimate measurements, experimental data on tree species
establishment, and ecosystem models to understand how forest response to drought
may lead to landscape change in the drought-stricken West. It is critical to
understand how regional forest dynamics, driven by global change, are moderated
by the effects of local topography on climate in mountainous landscapes. For
example, tree seedlings may find refuge from drought conditions on cooler,
moister north-facing slopes. The current drought foreshadows the expanding
drought conditions anticipated under 21st century warming and offers an
excellent opportunity to answer key questions about ecosystem resilience in
water-limited forests of western North America. Predictive capability is
critical for anticipating and planning for global change effects on forest
ecosystem services that include watershed protection. Results form this research
will support adaptive management of forests by land managers and policy makers
and help bridge local efforts to maintain forest biodiversity and ecosystem
services to regional and global mitigation plans.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
investigators will test the hypothesis that microenvironments exert a strong
influence on macroecological patterns of forest dynamics. Specifically, the
research questions are: 1) How do microclimates (solar insolation, surface
temperature, and soil moisture regime) vary at fine spatial and temporal scales
across the southern Sierra Nevada foothills and mountains of the Pacific
Southwest NEON Domain? 2) How does the relationship between local microclimate
and vegetation canopy cover change across the foothills to subalpine climate
gradient that occur within this region? 3) How does drought-induced tree
mortality affect microenvironmental conditions, and how do patterns of mortality
and canopy gap formation affect subsequent forest dynamics? Imagery acquired by
the NEON Airborne Observation Platform (AOP) offers an unparalleled data source
to support cross-scale observation of vegetation composition, condition, and
structure that, coupled with appropriate ground data, will allow the
investigators to model the connections between microclimate, vegetation, plant
communities and ecosystem dynamics. NEON airborne image data will be used to
develop a fine-grained map of forest composition and structure based on fusion
of imaging spectroscopy and airborne laser scanning data. Mapped vegetation
structure will be used as a predictor, along with climate, in seedling
establishment models. Mapped forest composition will set the initial conditions
for a forest community simulation model of landscape disturbance and succession,
and seedling establishment probabilities under global change scenarios will be
used in the simulations. The proposed research will deepen our understanding of
how knowledge of local scale biophysical variation can be incorporated into
models of large-scale ecosystem dynamics. This project addresses the EAGER-NEON
objective of leveraging NEON data in combination with other data to extend the
spatial and temporal dimensions of potentially transformative research.