* 1550528
* Collaborative Research: SI2-SSI: Swift/E: Integrating Parallel Scripted Workflow into the Scientific Software Ecosystem
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2020
* Joseph Baker, The College of New Jersey
* Standard Grant
* Amy Walton
* 09/30/2020
* USD 68,009.00

Science and engineering research increasingly relies on repeated execution of a
complex series of steps (i.e., workflows) to form hypotheses; conduct
experiments; analyze results; and refine theory. Computation is often essential
throughout the workflow and in this case, software can improve productivity by
managing the computational and data workflow. Swift is one such open-source
workflow system that has been developed and widely used in diverse areas ranging
from materials simulations and climate modeling to neuroscience and genomics.
This project extends the capabilities of Swift by integrating it with other
software systems that enable collaboration, usability, maintainability, and
productivity. The new ecosystem, Swift/E, will enable scientists and engineers
to more productively create and run computational workflow campaigns of larger
scale, and debug, execute, adapt, and disseminate them faster and easier than
has been possible to date. These workflows embody and communicate the
computational methods specific to each domain of scientific inquiry. Swift/E
achieves community engagement and extensive productivity benefits for a large
user community through an integrated program of research, education, and
software dissemination. The project engages and serves science and engineering
communities by creating patterns of practice for building and sharing reusable
workflow libraries, and by training students, educators, and researchers in
their use. To advance the education of the next generation of computationally
trained scientists, Swift/E powers a network of NSF-supported "e-Labs" that
teach the concepts of collaborative parallel computational science at high
school and undergraduate levels, reaching over a thousand students
annually.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The open-source Swift/E "ecosystem" integrates
Swift with several scientific software elements that play a major role in the
national and global cyberinfrastructure of today. These elements are: Swift for
the parallel scripting of scientific workflow; Globus for data cataloging,
management, and high-speed wide-area transport; the Web-based Galaxy workflow
portal for workflow composition, execution, and collaborative sharing; Jupyter
for the interactive development, testing, debugging, and assembly of high level
programming and workflow languages; Python and R for productively expressing
high-level computational logic; and "git" and related tools and Web portals for
revision control, code dissemination and sharing, and for the collaborative
engagement of developers. Swift's implicitly parallel programming language is
minimal and compact. Swift provides a facility for embedding other scripting
languages (currently Python, R, Julia and Tcl) into its runtime environment.
This project merges newer extreme-scale "Swift/T" capabilities with the flexible
and portable original "Swift/K" version to make the core Swift/E software
element more powerful and flexible while lowering it?s ongoing support cost.
Swift/E enhances usability by extending Swift's troubleshooting and inter-
language integration facilities. And with enhanced and innovative workflow
sharing archives, new training materials, and a sustained program for user
support and self-sustaining and expanding community engagement, the Swift/E
project engages, supports, and sustains a large global science and engineering
user base.