* 1550935
* Collaborative Research: Testing the Existence of Magma Mush Zones and Potential Processes of Magma Differentiation in the Mid-crust with In situ Mineral Geochemistry
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2016,02/29/2020
* Valbone Memeti, CSU Fullerton Auxiliary Services Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Dennis Geist
* 02/29/2020
* USD 186,606.00

Detailed knowledge of magma plumbing systems beneath continent-margin volcanoes
is crucial for understanding the evolution and growth of continental crust and
the associated effects on crustal deformation and ore deposit formation.
Understanding the time and length scales of processes in the magma plumbing
system sheds light on the spatial distribution, type and frequency of volcanic
eruptions and associated hazards. Although our understanding of continent-margin
magmatism at depth is vastly improving, debate continues as to the dimensions,
and even existence, of large magma volumes in sub-volcanic magma reservoirs, the
interconnectivity between magma bodies through the thickness of the continental
crust, and the importance and extent of processes that modify the chemistry of
such magmas. The aim of this study is to investigate these missing, but critical
pieces of the puzzle through study of plutons - ancient magmatic rocks formed at
depth - as exposed in Yosemite National Park, California. Traditional bulk-rock
element and isotope analyses have left too many fundamental questions about the
architecture of crustal magmatic systems, resolution of which is a goal of this
study through a new approach of utilizing micro-scale geochemical analysis of
individual crystals in plutons. This research will also provide better data for
numerical modeling efforts and has great potential to guide future studies of
plutonic rocks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will use texturally-constrained,
element and isotope geochemical analysis of compositionally heterogeneous rock-
forming and accessory minerals from strategically selected sites of the Tuolumne
Intrusive Complex ? which was once a composite, mid-crustal arc magma reservoir
- to test the following hypotheses. (1) Mineral zoning and inclusion
relationships in plutonic rocks record distinct, decipherable magmatic
histories. (2) Interconnected magma mush zones exist in mid-crustal reservoirs.
(3) Mixing of crystal-rich magmas occurs between magmas injected from deeper
levels and coexisting mush zones. (4) Crystal-liquid separation is an important
process in the middle crust; consequently, many plutonic rocks are cumulate and
do not represent liquid compositions. Testing these hypotheses will allow
assessment of two models for mid-crustal arc plutons. A dike model predicts that
magmas attain their chemical signatures in deep-crustal ?hot zones? and rise
rapidly to sub-volcanic reservoirs without producing large magma bodies. A magma
mush column model predicts that magmas form vertically-extensive reservoirs and
undergo compositional modification at many crustal levels. Mineral analysis will
allow identification of distinct mineral populations, interpretation of
prevalent magmatic processes, assessment of the presence or absence of coeval
magmas and their dimensions, and the ability of such magmas to chemically
?communicate?.