* 1550154
* Collaborative Research: Unraveling Protracted Tectonic Reactivation in Cordilleran Metamorphic Core Complexes: Funeral Mountains, California
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2016,09/30/2021
* Thomas Hoisch, Northern Arizona University
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 09/30/2021
* USD 249,622.00

The propensity for fault zones to become long-lived zones of weakness that can
be reactivated during geologic history plays a significant role in the migration
of fluids in Earth?s crust and formation of hydrocarbon, economic mineral and
ground water resources, seismic hazards, and the evolution of mountain belts.
From 160 to 50 million years ago, the western U.S. was tectonically similar to
modern day western South America, which is characterized by high elevation
mountains (the Andes) that formed in the continental crust above an actively
subducting oceanic plate. When subduction ceased along western North America, a
new regime of widespread crustal extension began, resulting in localized
exposures at the surface of deep levels of the ancient mountain belt. This
project will examine the Funeral Mountains in Death Valley National Park, which
the principal investigators hypothesize records the cycle of mountain building
followed by extension. In particular, they hypothesize that the same fault (a
thrust fault) initially responsible for substantial burial and thickening of the
crust was reactivated twice during the exhumation of the rocks to the surface.
They further argue that the reactivation of thrust faults may be a common
phenomenon in the western U.S., explaining many similar occurrences in other
mountain ranges. Rocks in the Funeral Mountains are ideal for testing this
hypothesis due to excellent exposures and abundant rocks suitable for study.
This project will accomplish many benefits to society as identified by NSF: (1)
helping the U.S. maintain competitiveness and leadership in the global Science
Technology Engineering and Mathematics (STEM) workforce; students who
participate in the project (three graduate students and five undergraduates)
will develop high-level expertise and teamwork experience in a STEM discipline;
(2) increased public scientific literacy by dissemination of findings to the
academic community through presentations at professional conferences and
publications, and to the general public and Death Valley enthusiasts by
presenting at meetings of the Death Valley Natural History Association, the Las
Vegas Natural History Museum, and the Nevada Geological Society; (3) development
of research partnerships between two universities as part of collaborative
research efforts, and the development of research infrastructure at each
institution; and; (4) the investigators seek to engage the full participation of
women and underrepresented students in STEM education through targeted
recruiting efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Reactivation and tectonic inheritance
are long-recognized phenomena, important to our understanding of how the
continental lithosphere deforms. The thesis of this proposal is that many
Tertiary detachment faults and shear zones in the western US reactivate faults
or sub-planar zones of earlier deformation. The Funeral Mountains metamorphic
core complex of the Death Valley region represents an ideal locality in the
Sevier-Laramide hinterland to evaluate the role of tectonic reactivation in the
development of metamorphic core complexes, as well as to resolve important
details regarding the tectonic history that predates Tertiary extension. We
hypothesize that the Boundary Canyon detachment fault, which underwent greater
than 40 kilometers of top-the northwest slip in the Miocene, formed as the last
reactivation of a major Jurassic thrust of opposite slip that was responsible
for deep burial and regional metamorphism of the footwall. We propose a multi-
faceted approach to evaluate the hypothesis of protracted tectonic reactivation
through detailed studies along the metamorphic and strain gradient that
includes: (1) field mapping and structural analysis, (2) petrographic,
microstructural, and kinematic analyses aided by Electron Backscatter
Diffraction analysis of quartz-rich rocks, (3) applying petrochronology (Laser
Ablation Split Stream Inductively Coupled Plasma Mass Spectrometry) to date
accessory minerals (metamorphic titanite, monazite, xenotime, and zircon
overgrowths) and Lutetium-Hafnium dating of garnet in garnet amphibolites, and
(4) determining the metamorphic conditions and prograde pressure-temperature
paths to evaluate the prograde burial history, possible grade discordances
across major shear zones, and the regional thrust-induced paleodip. Recognition
of tectonic reactivation has important implications for understanding the older
Jurassic and Cretaceous history of the Sevier-Laramide orogen, the magnitude and
distribution of contraction and extension that occurred during orogenesis, and
the episodic nature of post-orogenic extension.