* 1550995
* 6th Annual International Conference in Computational Surgery and Dual Training; Boreaux, France; Spring/Early Summer, 2016
* O/D,OISE
* 02/01/2016,10/31/2016
* Marc Garbey, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Anne Emig
* 10/31/2016
* USD 17,600.00

Part 1:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;COSINE (COmputational Surgery International
NEtwork, computationalsurgery.org) was founded in 2008 to engage young student
scientists and clinical fellows collaboratively in healthcare innovation.
Computational surgery is the application of principles from mathematics,
engineering and computer science to solve specific challenges encountered in
surgical settings. Dr. Marc Garbey, together with an organizing committee,
arranges an annual conference to offer the opportunity to exchange ideas in this
field. COSINE fosters strong collaborations across the Atlantic involving
researchers, clinicians and trainees in the U.S. and
abroad.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The committee members and participants are located
across the US and Europe and therefore the conference location alternates
between the US and Europe. The 6th Annual International Conference in
Computational Surgery and Dual Training is to be held in Bordeaux, France in
late spring or early summer of 2016. Invited speakers include David Eckmann,
M.D., Ph.D. (US), Dimitris Metaxas, Ph.D. (US), Michael I. Miga, Ph.D. (US), and
Oktar Asoglu, M.D. (Turkey). The travel grants for the graduate students and
surgical residents will be awarded to deserving members of Dr. Garbey?s NSF
I/UCRC center group. About 40% of this highly diverse research group consists of
female researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This conference is vital to promote the
concept of dual training between computational scientists and medical residents.
In the short term the conference will deepen participants' understanding of
computational surgery and spark new collaborations. In addition to networking
opportunities with a diverse group, student scientists and medical fellows will
develop a shared understanding of how surgery and computational science can
synergize to solve challenges encountered in patient care. Trainees will also
present and gather feedback on their recent work, participate in discussions and
visit local laboratories and clinical facilities. The conference will also help
continue to attract new bright students to the field of computational surgery.
Furthermore, it will have a strong impact on the solidification of the center's
new NSF I/UCRC international node in France and foster collaboration between the
US and European partners for the ultimate aim of improved healthcare, which is a
priority of the U.S.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part 2:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;COSINE
(COmputational Surgery International NEtwork, computationalsurgery.org) was
founded in 2008 to nurture a new breed of engineers and scientists working
across clinical and research silos to innovate and invigorate medical practice
with computational tools. Dr. Marc Garbey, together with an organizing
committee, arranges an annual conference to maintain momentum, enhance
collaboration and offer the opportunity to interested clinicians and researcher
to expand their knowledge in the field of computational surgery. The organizing
committee consists of a diverse group in both gender and ethnicity from the US
and Europe working to ensure diversity among participants of the conference. The
COSINE fosters strong collaborations across the Atlantic involving researchers,
clinicians and trainees in the US and abroad. Therefore, the committee
alternates the location of the conference between the US and Europe. The 6th
Annual International Conference in Computational Surgery and Dual Training is
scheduled to be held in Bordeaux, France in late spring or early summer of 2016.
Invited speakers include David Eckmann, M.D., Ph.D. (US), Dimitris Metaxas,
Ph.D. (US), Michael I. Miga, Ph.D. (US), and Oktar Asoglu, M.D.
(Turkey).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The travel grants for speakers will be awarded to
two internationally acclaimed researchers based in the United States. The travel
grants for graduated students and surgical residents will be awarded to
deserving members of Dr. Garbey's NSF I/UCRC center group. This highly diverse
research group is about 40% female and comprised of citizens from the US,
France, Italy, Vietnam, and Germany with backgrounds in computer science,
engineering, surgery and mathematical modeling, among
others.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Computational surgery is the application of
principles from mathematics, engineering and computer science to solve specific
clinical challenges. Computer science has revolutionized the operating room
through digitization of many commonly used tools. The scientifically-recorded
activity of surgery and its everyday use on patients produce enormous volumes of
digital data, demanding enhanced methods for data representation and medical
informatics processing with the goal of improving the surgical process.
Computational surgery is therefore also involves techniques to improve the
surgical process by systematic analysis of a large volume of digital
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This conference is vital to promote the concept of
dual training between computational scientists and medical residents. In the
short term the conference will deepen participants' understanding of
computational surgery and spark new collaborations. In addition to networking
opportunities with a diverse group, trainees will develop a shared understanding
of how surgery and computational science can synergize to solve challenges
encountered globally in patient care. In addition to talks by invited speakers,
the conference will offer the opportunity to trainees to present and gather
feedback on their recent work, participate in plenary discussions and visit
local laboratories and clinical facilities. The conference is also vital to keep
momentum in COSINE and continue to attract new bright students to the field of
computational surgery. Furthermore, it is expected that this conference will
have a strong impact on the solidification of the center's new I/UCRC
international node in France and foster collaboration between the US and
European partners in this priority area of the nation.