* 1550439
* Diversifying the Geosciences: Travel awards for students to attend SACNAS and GSA 2015 Annual Meetings
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2015,02/29/2016
* Dena Smith, The Geological Society of America, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Lina Patino
* 02/29/2016
* USD 51,854.00

The Geological Society of America (GSA) in partnership with the American
Geosciences Institute (AGI), Incorporated Research Institute for Seismology
(IRIS), the Society for the Advancement of Chicanos and Native Americans in
Science (SACNAS), the Society for Sedimentary Geology (SEPM), and the STEPPE
Coordinating Office will support the travel of 25 undergraduate and/or graduate
students to attend the SACNAS and GSA national conferences that are occurring
consecutively in the Washington/Baltimore region, 29-31 October (SACNAS) and 1-4
November (GSA). These meetings will offer students exposure to new geoscience
discoveries and encourage students to build personal networks within the
scientific and professional community that may lead to internships, careers,
postdoc, employment, or other educational/research opportunities. It is
anticipated that through intensive participation in both meetings, students will
be encouraged to consider the geosciences as a viable career option. At the
conclusion of the project, students will be asked to collaborate together to
compose an article that will highlight the value of attending the meetings.
Project collaborators also will synthesize evaluative survey responses from this
project and disseminate both these results and the student article via relevant
publications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The SACNAS meeting is distinctive because it
is the largest minority scientific meeting in the nation, welcoming over 3,800
attendees a year. Sessions include career focused roundtable discussions,
keynote speakers, oral poster presentations, and a variety of professional
development sessions targeted at a student's specific educational level. The GSA
meeting is attended by over 6,000 professionals and consists of 4,000+ speakers
and 200+ technical sessions, 20 short courses, and 30+ geoscientific field
trips. As a result of attending both meetings, it is anticipated that students
will better understand the diversity and complexity of the field of geoscience
and its related career pathways.