* 1550683
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Variation In Pastoral Herding Strategies
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2018
* Natalie Munro, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 12/31/2018
* USD 17,060.00

Under the supervision of Dr. Natalie Munro, Siavash Samei will investigate
variability in pastoral practices by developing models of pastoral organization
and applying them to the pastoral archaeological record. The organization of
pastoral societies informs and shapes the role pastoralists play in regional
cultural and political processes. Throughout history, pastoralists have been
instrumental in shaping larger processes such as the emergence and evolution of
the earliest cities and states, the institutionalization of social inequality,
and long distance exchange networks. Archaeological research affords a deep-time
perspective on how pastoralists affect larger regional processes through their
modes of economic organization and herd management. Because of their relatively
light archaeological footprint, however, pastoralists are vastly
underrepresented in the prehistoric record. Scholars must depend on a number of
indirect measures to detect pastoral activities: proxies that tend to lump
pastoralists into broad categories that mask their organizational diversity.
This project contributes to an increasing body of recent archaeological
scholarship centering on the role of pastoralists as significant agents of
social and political change in general. The criteria developed for identifying
variability in pastoral practices are thus applicable to an array of
archaeological sites in different times and places. Because of its geographic
setting in Armenia and Iran, this project also contributes to the resurgence of
collaboration between American and Armenian scholars since the 1990s and
provides a small but significant intellectual and academic contribution to the
thawing relationship between the United States and Iran.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mr. Samei uses economic theory to understand the
organizational variability of pastoralists by focusing on economic
specialization and population mobility. These two variables define four models
of pastoral organization, each with a unique set of expectations for faunal
remains and stable isotopes. A battery of analytical methods, such as herd
animal demographics, is used to study economic specialization. Specialization
should manifest itself in the species composition of herds, age-sex structures,
and the types of animal products exploited. Stable oxygen and carbon isotope
values from tooth enamel carbonate and bone collagen track animal provisioning
as well as mobility along topographic and seasonal gradients. These methods will
be applied to investigate the fit between the models and the faunal remains from
two sites in the South Caucasus, where pastoralism played a central but
ambiguous role in shaping broader mechanisms of cultural change and migration;
mechanisms that made the Kura-Araxes cultural tradition of the Caucasus (mid
4th-late 3rd millennium BC) the most extensive cultural horizon in southwest
Asia prior to the 6th century BC. The fortified settlement of Köhne Shahar in
Iran (ca. 3300-3200 BC) and the Areni-1 cave complex in Armenia (ca. 4300-3400
BC) are ideal sites as they are characterized by exceptional bone preservation.
By combining economic theory with zooarchaeology and stable isotopic methods,
the proposed approach has much greater analytical power and methodological
versatility to detect and assess diversity in past pastoral practices through
time and across space.