* 1550597
* SI2-SSI: Lidar Radar Open Software Environment (LROSE)
* CSE,OAC
* 08/01/2016,12/31/2016
* Gary Barnes, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 12/31/2016
* USD 2,499,996.00

Modern radars and lidars are a diverse class of instruments, capable of
detecting molecules, aerosols, birds, bats and insects, winds, moisture, clouds,
and precipitation. Scientists and engineers use them to perform research into
air quality and pollution, dangerous biological plumes, cloud physics, cloud
extent, climate models, numerical weather prediction, road weather, aviation
safety, severe convective storms, tornadoes, hurricanes, floods, and movement
patterns of birds, bats and insects. Radars and lidars are critical for
protecting society from high impact weather and understanding the atmosphere and
biosphere, but they are complex instruments that produce copious quantities of
data that pose many challenges for researchers, students, and instrument
developers. This project will develop a new set of tools called the Lidar Radar
Open Software Environment (LROSE) to meet these challenges and help address the
'big data' problem faced by users in the research and education communities.
This project will open new avenues of scientific investigation, including data
assimilation to improve weather forecasts, and help to maximize returns on NSF
investments in weather and climate research by providing better software tools
to researchers, students, and educators. Improving the effectiveness of NSF
research will provide significant scientific and societal benefits through an
improved understanding of many diverse scientific topics that are relevant to
public safety, national defense, and the global
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The LROSE project will develop a 'Virtual Toolbox'
with a set of software tools needed for a diverse set of scientific
applications. LROSE will be packaged so that it can be run on a virtual machine
(VM), either locally or in the cloud, and stocked with core algorithm modules
for those typical processing steps that are well understood and documented in
the peer-reviewed literature. LROSE will enable the user community to use the
core toolset to develop new research modules that address the specific needs of
the latest scientific research. Through the VM Toolbox and a core software
framework, other developers of open-source radar software can then provide their
own compatible software tools to the set. By combining the open source approach
with recent developments in virtual machines and cloud computing, we will
develop a system that is both highly capable and easy to run on virtually any
hardware, without the complexity of a compilation environment. The LROSE project
will build on existing prototypes and available software elements, while
facilitating community development of new techniques and algorithms to
distribute a suite of documented software modules for performing radar and lidar
analysis. These modules will each implement accredited scientific methods
referencing published papers. The infrastructure and modules will allow
researchers to run standard procedures, thereby improving the efficiency and
reproducibility of the analyses, and encourage researchers to jointly develop
new scientific approaches for data analysis. The use of collaborative open
source methods will lead to a suite of available algorithmic modules that will
allow scientists to explore radar and lidar data in new, innovative ways.
Researchers will benefit from the improved toolset for advancing understanding
of weather and climate, leading to a positive outcome in the advancement of
scientific knowledge and societal benefits.