* 1550717
* Collaborative Research: Neotoma Paleoecology Database, Community-led Cyberinfrastructure for Global Change Research
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2016,03/31/2023
* Allan Ashworth, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Continuing Grant
* Raleigh Martin
* 03/31/2023
* USD 69,832.00

This Division of Earth Sciences Geoinformatics collaborative award supports
continued development of Neotoma, a web-accessible centralized data
clearinghouse for paleoecological data for which initial development support was
provided by the EAR Geoinformatics Program (EAR- 0948652). This effort will
enhance the current Neotoma platform by: 1) maximizing rates of data ingest
through on-going data mobilization campaigns, recruitment and training of new
data stewards, and development of facilitation software; 2) expanding the
Neotoma data model to facilitate new proxy acquisition and secondary data
including organic biomarkers, isotopic data from faunal specimens, and faunal
taphonomic information; 3) developing new tools for data visualization and
scientific exploration; 4) fostering engagement and growth of the Neotoma
research community through support for a series of workshops intended to train
data users, data stewards, and teachers, and by development of an on-line
blog.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Neotoma geoinformatics platform will promote
integrative studies of the biotic impacts of climate change over the past five
million years by allowing greater access to previously collected geoscience data
sets of relevance and the tools to support analysis at marginal cost. The
project will promote community engagement, support ease of data set ingestion,
address PI team succession and promote educational module development. This
award directly addresses OMB Memo M-13-13 ?Open Data Policy-Managing Information
as an Asset.?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;***