* 1550942
* Workshop Proposal: Quality Legal Representation:  Definition, Measurement, Theory and Practice
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2016
* Andrew Davies, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* scott barclay
* 07/31/2016
* USD 49,844.00

There is general agreement that the poor lack access to quality legal services
and that the systems providing those services are in a state of crisis.
Scientific investigation into the nature, causes or consequences of the
provision of quality legal representation is limited, however. Despite the
existence of several sets of standards at the state and national levels that
attempt to describe what quality services look like, the empirical basis for
understanding how and when quality representation occurs, or what difference it
makes for those who receive it, is scant. This project will host a workshop to
advance scientific knowledge on legal representation and inform the policy and
management choices made by organizations providing that representation. That
workshop will bring together social scientists, lawyers and other stakeholders
involved in the provision of legal services to spur research into the subject of
quality legal representation.

Science has barely begun to look at the question of what quality legal
representation means, still less to examine its causes or consequences. At this
meeting, we will bring together specialists in a wide range of fields to examine
what legal representation looks like, and how courts can produce it. We'll also
be thinking about what difference it makes for individuals and the justice
system alike to have high quality representation in place. Scholars who have
made careers investigating how courts work will be placed in conversation with
practicing defense lawyers, their clients, and researchers from other fields
such as medicine, education and organizational sociology to talk about how
research on quality legal representation can be advanced. We will post several
of the lectures from the meeting online for future reference, and will produce a
summary of the discussions at the meeting for wider publication.