* 1550486
* Collaborative Research:  SI2-SSI: Sustaining Innovation in the Linear Algebra Software Stack for Computational Chemistry and Other Sciences
* CSE,OAC
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2019
* Tze Meng Low, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Amy Walton
* 06/30/2019
* USD 265,000.00

Scientific discovery now often involves computer simulation in addition to, or
instead of, laboratory experimentation. This can accelerate, improve, and/or
expand scientific insight, often at a great reduction in cost. Many such
computer simulations spend much or most of their time solving linear algebra
(matrix) problems. For these simulations, linear algebra problems constitute the
most basic building blocks of the computation. As a result, software libraries
(bundles of specialized code) that efficiently solve linear algebra problems
fundamentally support sustained innovation in science. The project aims to
create a next generation of software libraries for this domain and will make
these libraries available to the scientific community as open source software
that can be easily ported to current and future computer architectures. This
will directly and indirectly impact discovery in academia, at the national labs,
and in industry. The project will also impact affordable education through open
course ware that is expected to reach a broad audience. The involvement of
undergraduate and graduate students will strengthen the pool of qualified
individuals trained to support scientific computing. The project involves
research staff and students who are members of traditionally underrepresented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The BLAS (Basic Linear Algebra
Subprograms) are well-known routines that provide standard building blocks for
performing basic vector and matrix operations. The Level 1 BLAS perform scalar,
vector and vector-vector operations, the Level 2 BLAS perform matrix-vector
operations, and the Level 3 BLAS perform matrix-matrix operations. Because the
BLAS are efficient, portable, and widely available, they are commonly used in
the development of high quality linear algebra software, such as the well-known
Linear Algebra PACKage (LAPACK), as an example. However, the BLAS libraries that
exist today have not evolved to new computing architectures, and hence do not
perform as well as they could. The technical goal and scope of this project,
therefore, is to develop a new high-performance dense linear algebra library
with broad functionality that can be easily ported to current and future multi-
core and many-core processors. The project builds on the BLAS-like Library
Instantiation Software (BLIS) effort that has exposed low-level primitives that
facilitate the high-performance implementation of BLAS. By implementing the
higher-level dense linear algebra functionality in terms of these low-level
primitives, portable high performance will be achieved for higher-level
functionality needed by many scientific computing applications. Contributions
will include the to-be developed techniques for implementing such software, the
resulting open source software, and pedagogical artifacts that will include open
course ware.