* 1550745
* Collaborative Research: EAGER-NEON: Using Intraspecific Trait Variation to Understand Processes Structuring Continental-scale Biodiversity Patterns
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2018
* Benjamin Baiser, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Betsy Von Holle
* 12/31/2018
* USD 19,897.00

Understanding variation in the internal and external drivers of community
composition across taxa and systems informs both ecological theory and
conservation, particularly regarding the resilience and composition of
ecological communities in the face of rapid global change. The proposed research
will use National Ecological Observatory Network (NEON) data to determine how
assembly processes internal to the community (e.g., biotic interactions,
microenvironmental heterogeneity) and large-scale assembly processes external to
the community (e.g., climate, land use) combine to affect intraspecific trait
variation and community structure at a continental scale. Whether internal or
external processes filter how communities respond to their environment will
advance the ability to forecast effects of climate change on communities. The
proposed work will also contribute to the public through a general science
festival; to broad undergraduate education through modules contributed to the
Ecological Society of America; and to specific education through the involvement
of undergraduates and a postdoc in the research.

The proposed research will address the importance of intraspecific variation of
functional morphological traits of plants, ground beetles, and small mammals.
Bayesian regression analyses and Bayesian structural equation modeling will be
used to uncover the relative importance of intraspecific trait variation in
structuring continental-scale biodiversity patterns. Data will be derived from
NEON specimens, phylogenies for these taxonomic groups, and NEON environmental
and climatic data. The analyses will separate the direct and indirect effect of
species richness, phylogenetic relationships, and abiotic variables on the
relative influences of internal and external filters that structure communities.
Species and environmental data from NEON will provide an unprecedented
opportunity to use standardized data to examine continental-scale intraspecific
variation on multiple traits across several taxonomic groups. The analyses will
contribute new public data for other scientists, and outreach will be developed
through existing platforms for science dissemination.