* 1550059
* Establishing LINK2SUCCESS at Texas Southmost College
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2017
* Leslie Jones, The University of Texas Rio Grande Valley
* Standard Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 08/31/2017
* USD 299,733.00

This project was submitted in response to the Dear Colleague Letter for Hispanic
Serving Institutions "Stimulating Research on Effective Strategies in
Undergraduate STEM Education at Two-Year Hispanic Serving Institutions,"
NSF15-078. It will provide course enrichment and mentoring support to students
at the Texas Southernmost College (TSC), a Hispanic Serving community college
located in the vicinity of the University of Texas at Brownsville and the
University of Texas Pan American. (These two universities have recently been
merged into a single institution -- University of Texas Rio Grande Valley.) STEM
graduates from TSC who decide to work on a bachelor's degree typically choose to
attend UT Rio Grande Valley campuses and UT Grande Valley is committed to
student success at TSC. The project is adopting an approach used successfully at
UT Brownsville, called "Link2Success" (L2S). The L2S approach provides STEM
instructors with highly trained and certified student course assistants, drawing
them from the ranks of advanced STEM students at UT Brownsville. These
assistants are assigned to work with course instructors by leading small
mandatory discussion sections. The project is transforming 10 introductory
gatekeeper courses in mathematics, biology, chemistry, and physics. The L2S
assistants not only lead discussion groups, they also assist the students for
whom they are responsible to successfully transition to college life by being
peer and academic role models. The L2S model provides first-year students taking
STEM courses with regular contact with individuals like themselves, an approach
that is known in general to be effective. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
measure the impact on student success in completing gatekeeper courses and
continuing to take additional STEM courses. Credible measurement methods will be
used to isolate the net impact of the L2S course assistants.