* 1550074
* EAGER: Scaling-up Cooperation across Cultural Groups
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Caitlin Stern, Santa Fe Institute
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 08/31/2018
* USD 34,800.00

Coordinated inter-group cooperation is essential for resolving many major social
and environmental issues. From managing fisheries to controlling disease
epidemics, solving big problems requires collective action. However, promoting
large-scale cooperation among distinct groups such as nations can be difficult.
One reason may lie in our basic nature as human beings. If, as some evolutionary
theorists believe, we evolved to cooperate with members of our own small groups
and compete against members of other groups, then cooperation across national
and cultural group boundaries is uniquely challenging. Past research has focused
on within-group cooperative interactions. Now the question is whether the
mechanisms known to promote within-group cooperation can also promote
cooperation among groups with different cultural backgrounds and traditions.
Answering this question is complicated by the fact that scaling up from one
level of organization to another generally produces new and unpredictable
properties. Therefore, it is necessary to conduct research that specifically
addresses inter-group cooperation. In the research supported by this award,
post-doctoral scholars Dr. Caitlin A. Stern (Santa Fe Institute) and Dr. Jessica
L. Barker (University of Arizona) will do exactly that. They will investigate
experimentally whether mechanisms, such as reputation and the potential for
punishment, that are known to promote within-group cooperation can also promote
cooperation between groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will be carried
out among the Tlingit tribes of Southeast Alaska. The Tlingit operate fisheries
both independently and inter-dependently with other tribes, representing a
microcosm of the interactions among distinct cultural groups that must be
understood in order to solve trans-boundary collective action issues. In
collaboration with Native Alaskan organizations, the researchers will conduct
empirical studies (experimental "games" within and between groups, as well as
cultural surveys) in Juneau and Haines, Alaska. The researchers will also
construct mathematical models of how different factors might affect cooperative
behavior, which can be tested against the empirical data. Together, the
empirical and theoretical components of this study will illuminate how cultural
heterogeneities influence the maintenance of cooperation, and will advance our
understanding of the global cooperation necessary to solve large-scale, multi-
group collective action issues.