* 1550686
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: EAGER-NEON: Prototyping Assessment of Ecoclimate Teleconnections Affecting NEON Domains
* BIO,DEB
* 12/01/2015,11/30/2020
* Scott Stark, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 11/30/2020
* USD 72,168.00

Tree mortality is becoming increasingly widespread throughout the U.S. as a
function of increasing temperature and drought. Large-scale tree die-off can
feedback to affect climate through changes in water balance and surface
reflectance (albedo). This project will use the Airborne Observation Platform
(AOP) of the National Ecological Observatory Network (NEON) to study the effects
of tree mortality on local climate, and link this information to earth system
models to study "teleconnections" in which ecological changes in one area
influence climate and associated ecological responses in another. The project
will develop the first large-scale assessment of forest vulnerability to
drought-induced tree mortality based on species-specific temperature response
functions determined in previous experiments. These results will be combined
with analysis of vegetation structure from NEON AOP data and modeling of
climatic feedbacks. This activity will provide a prototype for a new approach to
continental-scale science capable of quantifying ecoclimate teleconnections and
risks of tree die-off across NEON Domains and which can be broadly applied to
other major types of land transformation.

The project will synthesize pre-existing climate and remotely sensed (LiDAR and
hyperspectral) observations relating surface properties to fluxes (albedo,
latent heat fluxes) to estimate how the changes in vegetation force the
atmosphere. This information will be used to evaluate how this forcing impacts
other NEON Domains through ecoclimate teleconnections. The approach initially
focuses on forest die-off as a rapid ecological change with direct linkages to
climate signals. It will develop the first large-scale assessment of drought-
induced tree mortality based on experimentally determined temperature
sensitivities, and will improve constraints on ecoclimate teleconnection
predictions through incorporation of NEON AOP data. Deliverables include 1) a
current assessment of the likelihood and magnitude of die-off by Domain; 2)
quantification of impacts of tree die-off in one Domain on others via ecoclimate
teleconnections using model experiments; and 3) estimation of associated Domain
by Domain risks of die-off impacts from a given Domain. The project also
provides professional development for post-docs and early career scientist and
has a broad outreach component through an art-science collaboration and seminars
at the Biosphere 2 that reach >100,000 visitors/year.