* 1550535
* I-Corps:  A web-based simulator of an emergency operations center
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2017
* Gregory Madey, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Shearman
* 07/31/2017
* USD 50,000.00

An Emergency Operations Center (EOC) is a secure location in which upper level
emergency managers gather together to prepare for, manage, and coordinate
preparation and recovery activities in response to an emergency situation (e.g.
hurricane, earthquake, epidemic or outbreak, tsunami). While in-person exercises
are the gold standard for training, because of time and cost the frequency of
such in-person training events is limited. The I-Corps team has developed a
simulator that will enable emergency managers to train more effectively and more
frequently in a virtual, distributed environment. The proposed technology will
enable better training of emergency managers, potentially resulting in lives
saved and reduction of property loss. Through advanced technological training,
emergency managers, can train more often, for less
cost.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;When a disaster occurs, emergency personnel set up a
management structure called an Incident Command System (ICS) to manage the
incident. The personnel in the ICS have to gather information and coordinate
among various organizations and across jurisdictions with local, state, and
federal agencies. These are complex tasks that require training to ensure that
all participants and their organizations are familiar with current plans,
policies, agreements and procedures. Such training is typically performed by a
range of in-person approaches, including discussion-based tabletop exercises and
full-scale operations-based exercises simulating a specific incident with full
participation of all responsible organizations. The proposed simulator,SimEOC,
can simulate the emergency incident and the distributed web-based participation
of all the participating organizations. A centralized web-server will support
over 100 trainees in such a training exercise. At the end of the I-Corps
immersion curriculum the existing research prototype (alpha version) could be
used for a "live-code" proof-of-concept demonstration; optimistically the re-
engineered enterprise quality version under current development (beta version)
may be ready to preview as well.