* 1550880
* EAGER-NEON: Image-Based Ecological Information System (IBEIS) for Animal Sighting Data for NEON
* BIO,EF
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2017
* Charles Stewart, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Elekonich
* 08/31/2017
* USD 105,999.00

The National Ecological Observatory Network (NEON) is coming online and will
provide atmospheric and ecological data locally, regionally and continent wide.
At the same time, images are rapidly becoming the most abundant, widely
available, and cheapest source of information about the natural world,
especially about animals. This project will extend NEON's data, scientific, and
citizen science capacity with image-based animal sighting data to scalably
collect, manage, and analyze data for individually identifiable wildlife using
the Image-Based Ecological Information System (IBEIS) prototype recently
developed under another NSF award. Combined with other ecological data, the
image data offer the promise of addressing big questions about animal ecology,
behavior, and conservation - who? where? when? what? and why? - at high
resolution and at fine-grained scale, across landscapes and ecosystems, from an
individual animal to regional and global systems. As part of this project,
undergraduate and graduate students from ecology and computer science at four
institutions will produce and test the application interface, and will develop a
suite of companion applications and training tools to allow greater involvement
of citizen scientists.

These tools will allow NEON to connect its database to data derived from large
volumes of animal photographic images. Although this is primarily a proof of
concept proposal focused on connecting whale shark images to NEONs atmospheric
data, it will provide the means to be able to apply IBEIS algorithms and
databases on images of distinctly marked North American species such as
tortoises, monarch butterflies, salamanders, spotted skunk, bobcat, lynx, and
humpback whales, thereby connecting these to NEON?s other data streams related
to organisms, land use, hydrology and biogeochemistry. The proposed suite of
tools includes: 1. an infrastructure and a mechanism for collecting images from
scientists, automated remote cameras, citizen scientists and other sources; 2. a
data management system for storing, accessing and manipulating images and
derived data; 3. computer vision techniques for extracting information from the
images about the identity of species and individual animals, as well as
techniques for combining that information with other relevant data to derive
information about ecological units such as animals, populations, species, and
habitats; 4. a software application-program interface integrating the image and
derived data with and within NEON; 5. a framework for engaging citizen
scientists in data collection, derived science, and interaction with nature.
Previous funding from NSF allowed building and testing of an IBEIS prototype.
This project will focus on the detection and identification methods for the
identifiable US species, on integrating the system with NEON, and on scaling the
system to many thousands of daily images from a variety of sources.