* 1550110
* Collaborative Research: Origin of Long-lived Crustal Shear Zones as Transforms or Subduction Zones?
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Sean Mulcahy, Western Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 06/30/2020
* USD 134,093.00

Large-scale faults (>1000 kilometer) are first-order features observed at
Earth's active and ancient plate boundaries. Active faults, such as the San
Andreas, accommodate relative motion between tectonic plates. Ancient plate
boundary faults now within plates, such as the New Madrid fault in Missouri, can
also continue to be active, as demonstrated by major earthquakes on them. Why
some plate boundary faults remain the locus of crustal deformation and uplift
100s of millions of years after they form has remained a topic of debate. This
study will provide ideas on how and why some major faults that form at plate
boundaries persist as zones of weakness in the crust, prone to reactivation. The
results will ultimately inform a broad group of scientists on deep crustal
processes that control the location of seismicity, high heat flow, and
hydrothermal systems that may have implications for the understanding of
geologic hazards and resources. In addition to the scientific goals of the
project, important societal relevant outcomes of the project will include the
training of graduate and undergraduate students in an important STEM (Science,
Technology, Engineering and Mathematics) discipline. The project will facilitate
collaborative research between three U.S. research institutions, thus
contributing to support of scientific infrastructure. It will provide research
funding for two early career gescientists. The project will contribute to the
broadening of participation of underrepresented groups in STEM. Importantly, the
project will foster international collaboration and exchange between U.S. and
Argentine scientists. Results of the research will be broadly disseminated
through presentations at professional society meetings and in peer-reviewed
scientific publications.

The presence of major fault zones within continental crust which show evidence
for reactivation over 100s of millions of years defies models for continuum
deformation of the continents, wherein faults are viewed as passive features
responding to mantle flow. Large-scale faults occur on every continent and many
long-lived intracontinental fault systems record complex histories of
reactivation, in particular localizing convergent and strike-slip deformation.
This research will test competing models for the origin of persistent large-
scale faults by studying the tectonic history of exhumed middle and lower crust
sections of an ancient fault zone. End member models predict that such fault
zones originate either as: 1) convergent-collisional boundaries between blocks
of different strength, 2) transform boundaries along pre-existing zones of
weakness, or 3) strike-slip boundaries within the arc-forearc region of oblique
subduction settings. The Valle Fertil fault zone of western Argentina is an
approximately 1200-kilometer-long major crustal lineament that records at least
400 million years of intermittent deformation and is an ideal location to test
the above models because of excellent geophysical constraints on crustal
strength contrasts, variable depths of exposure along strike, a well constrained
tectonic evolution, and ideal mineral assemblages for dating the history of
deformation within the fault. The results from the Valle Fertil fault can be
applied to other intracontinental faults to address what factors determine the
origin of major structures within complex orogens and the processes by which
they ultimately become large-scale faults with complex histories of continued
reactivation.