* 1550395
* Support for a Workshop and Conference on Critical Zone Science, Sustainability, and Services in a Changing World
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2016
* Timothy Filley, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 07/31/2016
* USD 7,500.00

Funds will partially support a conference "Critical Zone Science,
Sustainability, and Services in a Changing World" that will bring together
communities from the U.S. Critical Zone Observatory (CZO) network and the
Chinese EcoPartnerships program for meaningful dialogue on the topic of Critical
Zone science related to organic matter dynamics. The Critical Zone (CZ)is the
Earth's surface layer extending from the top of the vegetation canopy to the
base of ground water. The conference will occur in conjunction with the annual
meeting of US-China Ecopartnership for Environmental Sustainability (USCEES)
program, which will be jointly convened by Purdue University and the Chinese
Academy of Sciences at Purdue University during Oct. 21-24, 2015. The U.S.-China
Ecopartnership program is a network supported by the US Department of State and
China National Development and Reform Commission to focus on the sustainable use
of natural resources in a changing climate. In addition to the scientific
exchange of ideas, the conference is an opportunity for enhanced student
training and U.S.-China cultural exposure. Also, the Chinese Academy of Sciences
and Chinese university scientific leadership within the USCEES will bring an
important perspective of ecosystem network science in China and the possibility
of standardization of metrics and methods to help assure transferable and
directly comparable Critical Zone science outcomes for future US-China linked
research.

Four specific activities will take place as part of the conference: 1) an
instrument training short course on "The Role of Runoff and Erosion on Soil
Carbon Stocks: From Soilscapes to Landscapes"; 2) scientific sessions on
critical zone function related to organic matter dynamics and budget; 3) Cross-
CZO Working Group workshop on flux, stabilization, and reactivity of organic
matter in the Critical Zone with the goal of discussing scientific findings,
common measurements, common methods, common laboratories, common experiments,
and common questions to support cross- U.S. CZO and international CZ science;
and 4) a field trip to the CZO site in the Upper Sangamon watershed in Illinois.