* 1550328
* BD Hubs: Collaborative Proposal: WEST: A Big Data Innovation Hub for the Western United States
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Michael Norman, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Martin Halbert
* 08/31/2020
* USD 526,450.00

The Big Data Innovation Hub for the Western United States will join stakeholders
from academia, industry, non-profit institutions and the community who share
common challenges and innovative approaches related to the acquisition, storage,
analysis and integration of large or "messy" data, commonly referred to as Big
Data. The West's Innovation Hub (Hub) will serve 13 states with Montana,
Colorado and New Mexico marking the eastern boundary. This project will develop
the organizational and governance structures for the Hub, and initiate efforts
toward defining spoke activities for subsequent phases of the data innovation
hubs program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The initial themes include Big Data
technology, data-enabled scientific discovery and learning, managing natural
resources and hazards, metro data science, and precision medicine. Partnerships
fostered through the Hub will enable the use of Big Data to assess risks related
to regional and long-term decisions. The Hub's structure will enable impact in
later phases of the Hubs program that may include data-driven models for
managing natural resources to tools for integrating self-collected patient data
for more precise care options. Through coordination activities that inspire the
action of its members, the Hub has the potential to facilitate the improved flow
of commercial technologies in ways that maximize competitiveness for member
organizations, such as universities, and vice versa: the Hub has the potential
to expand the impact of its members' technologies through greater adoption or
via start-ups. The Hub will be impactful by facilitating cross-discipline
approaches to Big Data innovation and problem solving, influencing the next
generation of thought leaders and data scientists. The partnerships enabled by
the Hub will lead to professional certificate programs and student internships,
creating a pipeline of graduates from partner institutions to impact
corporations, public and governmental agencies, national labs, resource-planning
agencies, and regulatory commissions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project URL:
BDHub.SDSC.edu