* 1550932
* EAGER-NEON: Detecting Disturbance and Ecosystem Response in Continental Observatory Networks
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2018
* Ashley Ballantyne, University of Montana
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 12/31/2018
* USD 299,773.00

One of the most vital ecosystem services currently provided to society by
terrestrial plants and microorganisms is the removal of approximately one-
quarter of the human-generated carbon dioixide (CO2) emitted to the atmosphere.
However, the future of this so-called "carbon sink" pattern at the global and
national level remains uncertain. Some evidence suggests that recent disturbance
possibly due to drought in the Western US has caused terrestrial ecosystems to
suddenly become sources of carbon to the atmosphere, rather than carbon sinks.
As we enter an era of carbon accountability it is imperative that we are able to
more accurately account for ecosystem carbon production and consumption across
North America. For this study, computer simulation in conjunction with newly
acquired data from NSF's NEON observing network will be synthesized, for the
first time, to evaluate the NEON data, and better understand how such large-
scale environmental disturbance affects the carbon balance of the continent. The
project will also involve training at the postdoctoral and graduate student
levels, as well as development of active learning experiences that will broaden
the participation of undergraduates from underrepresented groups in
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ultimate goal of this project is to identify
possible disturbance mechanisms that have caused a continental scale shift in
ecosystems across the US from being a net carbon sink to a net carbon source. In
this project we will use satellite data to identify spatial and temporal
fingerprints associated with different ecosystem disturbance mechanisms (e.g.
insect infestation, drought, fire) and use these fingerprints to simulate the
random and mechanistic processes associated with different disturbance
mechanisms in land vegetation models. Newly acquired NEON observation data will
be used to benchmark these land vegetation simulations and simulations will be
used to optimize the observation network for disturbance detections. This
project will advance ecosystem science in two ways. First, new algorithms for
the optimization of hierarchical observation networks from global to continental
to regional scales will be developed. Second, disturbance dynamics in land
surface models will be refined, and disturbance over larger spatial scales will
be simulated.