* 1550456
* Collaborative Research: SI2-SSI: Software Framework for Electronic Structure of Molecules and Solids
* CSE,OAC
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2021
* Edward Valeev, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Varun Chandola
* 07/31/2021
* USD 600,000.00

Many traditionally experimental disciplines such as chemistry and materials
science are rapidly changing due to our increasing ability to predict properties
of molecules and materials purely by simulation. This is particularly true when
molecules meet solid surfaces - due to the particular challenges of experiments
in such a setting. Yet the molecule-on-surface frontier encompasses a vast class
of problems of tremendous practical importance: industrial applications
facilitated by surface processes are estimated to produce globally more than
than 15 trillion USD worth of goods and products. This research will improve our
ability to simulate the physics and chemistry of molecules on surfaces by
extending the advanced simulation methodologies that were originally developed
by for modeling electrons in molecules. This project will not only advance our
fundamental understanding of the surface science but also open a road to
technological applications relevant to producing and storing clean energy and in
designing improved catalysts. The research may result in a new computer software
framework for simulating electrons in molecules and materials. This software
will be a unique contribution to the U.S. cyberinfrastructure and spur further
innovation by other researchers in the US and worldwide, who will be able to
access its source code for free. The software framework will also serve as an
education platform for training computational chemists and materials
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A frontier simulation challenge lies at the
intersection of the two domains of chemistry and materials science - namely to
determine, with predictive accuracy, the properties and chemistry of molecules
on solid surfaces. The molecule-on-surface frontier encompasses a vast class of
problems of tremendous practical importance: heterogeneous catalysis,
photovoltaics, and emerging electronic materials. Yet, from a simulation
perspective, it is not currently possible to efficiently combine the recent
advances in highly accurate many-body molecular and periodic condensed phase
methodologies in these problems, due to a significant gap between how the
electronic structure theories of molecules and materials are formulated, as
reflected in distinct algorithms and disjoint codebases. The goal of this
project is to reduce and/or completely eliminate the gap between molecular and
solid-state electronic structure methodologies, in theory, algorithms, and in
usable community software implementations. This will be achieved by building an
ambitious Electronic structure for Molecules and Solids (EMOS) software
framework that will permit accurate computation of the first-principles
electronic structure of both molecules and solids on an equivalent footing - and
with the high efficiency necessary for high-throughput screening or ab initio
molecular dynamics. These efforts build on the leading track-record of the
principal investigators in developing open-source quantum chemistry software as
well as automated computer implementation and high-performance parallel
libraries. The project will allow the advances from molecular electronic
structure - embedding, reduced-scaling many-body methodology, accurate excited-
state electronic structure, and others - to be applied routinely to molecules,
materials, and combinations of the two as relevant to surface chemistry. This
has great potential to advance the state-of-the-art in treatment of electronic
structure and open new lines of theoretical inquiry. The resulting open-source
production-quality toolkit will be validated against experimental data for a
host of surface phenomena, from exciton dynamics to surface spectroscopy and
catalysis. An open-source US-based advanced materials code is a long-standing
omission in U.S. cyberinfrastructure. As a high-performance framework for
simulation of electronic structure of molecules, solids, and their interfaces
with unprecedented accuracy, EMOS will be a significant contribution to this
effort. Further, the modular component based structure will be able to be
integrated with other major electronic structure packages through the reuse of
the modules. This project will provide invaluable training opportunities to the
students and postdocs who will develop the software framework under the direct
supervision of principal investigators. In addition, each project site will
contribute to the development of a stakeholder network for EMOS by hosting, each
summer, visiting students and faculty representing the broader theoretical
community, to train them on the use of EMOS in research and education. The
project team will also use EMOS in teaching classes and summer schools, building
on already established efforts in this area; these efforts will also be extended
to an online setting.