* 1550349
* RAPID:  Field Investigation on the Socio-Technical Features of Post-Disaster Re-sponse Logistics in the Aftermath of the Nepal Earthquake
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2015,06/30/2017
* Jose Holguin-Veras, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Robin L. Dillon-Merrill
* 06/30/2017
* USD 49,495.00

Disasters can generate devastating human, social, and economic losses. The
extreme and frequently sudden nature of these events poses significant
challenges for the organizations involved in the delivery of critical relief
supplies. Ensuring an efficient and timely flow of critical supplies to a
disaster is, without any doubt, a challenging endeavor with huge economic and
social impacts. Improving the state of the art and practice of post-disaster
humanitarian logistics (PD-HL) is extremely important. As part of the fieldwork
funded by this Rapid Response Research (RAPID) grant, the team will study how
the local social networks - an integral part of the local community - interact
with the technical tasks that are part of the relief effort. This is important
because research has highlighted that the nature of the interactions between the
social and the technical aspects in PD-HL operations influence disaster response
effectiveness. These "socio-technical interactions" reflect the way in which the
technical tasks are structured, and the way in which the social networks are
integrated (or not) and perform the technical tasks. In post-disaster
environments - where the entire social system is under stress, the social
aspects of PD-HL acquire tremendous importance - playing a huge role in
determining the effectiveness of the effort. Learning from actual disaster
responses is an important to help minimize the negative impacts of disasters on
our citizens and the economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The team will study the
mechanisms through which social networks identify, gather, deliver, and
distribute relief supplies. Specifically, the team will collect perishable data
on organizational involvement, activity, roles, collaboration, and location.
These data will be used to test assumptions derived from pre-vious events taking
advantage of the insight gained on how the socio-technical interactions
influence the response. Data collection will include short and informal and in-
depth interviews with the individuals involved in the PD-HL efforts, at all
levels of action (e.g., international, national, regional, local, and community
levels), from all groups (e.g., established, emergent, extending), and at all
levels of power (e.g., decision-makers, operational personnel). Furthermore,
information will be gathered on critical and non-critical supply flow estimates,
challenges to the relief effort, solutions developed to contend with challenges,
and estimates of unmet demands of critical supplies. The work is very important
because an enhanced understanding of the socio-technical interactions will
facilitate the implementation of procedures that foster disaster response
effectiveness and limit the negative impacts of problematic practices and
behaviors. Doing so would reduce the overall impacts of disasters in the United
States and abroad.