* 1550460
* I-Corps:  Manufacturing Visualization and Analysis
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2015,02/28/2017
* Christopher Branton, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* lydia mcclure
* 02/28/2017
* USD 50,000.00

Markets for 3D printers and related materials are expanding rapidly, with the
potential to fundamentally transform manufacturing practices. The proposed
project will offer the 3D printing community a low cost, mobile-friendly
solution for quality analysis of parts made by additive manufacturing.
Understanding the inevitable variations between design and production is an
important step in process improvement and innovation. This I-Corps team is
creating an open source software system to compare scans of 3D printed objects
with their digital designs, presenting the results in a visually rich,
interactive form on mobile devices. Current offerings focus on expensive
proprietary software and hardware, limiting participation and technical
contributions by a vibrant and rapidly changing community. This team's open
source solution is designed to connect users throughout the 3D printing world
and use their experiences to grow better and more innovative technologies and
techniques through quality analysis. The product will provide a powerful tool
for evaluation to small companies, researchers, and members of the growing maker
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project adds statistical measures
and a workflow derived from X-ray tomography to an existing open source
visualization app that runs on handheld tablets and smartphones. The goal is to
compare the digital form of the 3D model as sent to the 3D printer with a 3D
measurement of the actual printed object as obtained with available scanning
technology. A quantitative comparison of a design's digital model with the
point-cloud or surface data generated by one of these scans can reveal important
qualitative results. The product will display results based on the type and
precision of the scanning technology used, such as laser-based metrology scans,
X-ray and CT scans, and physical metrology systems. The statistical workflow and
visualization software will be tabulated and rendered on a workstation or
server, and presented using a version of Kitware's KiwiViewer that the team has
customized for the application. The proposed system will be distributed open
source, providing quality analysis to growing numbers of small companies,
researchers, and artisans, delivered to mobile devices and desktops alike. A
vibrant open source community in a rapidly changing field like 3D printing can
drive a great deal of technical and market innovation. While the scope of the
current project is to demonstrate existing quality examination techniques in a
highly usable form, the potential exists to utilize the community's experiences
to explore and improve numerous materials, techniques, and aspects of structure
used in additive manufacturing.