* 1550041
* Collaborative Research: Evolution of Arctic Water Column Hydrography during the Holocene Based on a Novel Instrumentation Combination
* GEO,OPP
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2019
* Reinhard Kozdon, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 06/30/2019
* USD 267,094.00

During the past few decades, the Arctic has warmed approximately twice as
rapidly as the entire northern hemisphere, associated with substantial retreat
and thinning of the Arctic sea-ice cover during the past decade. Associated with
the Arctic warming and waning sea-ice cover is a reorganization of the surface
and deep-water circulation of the Arctic Ocean, but understanding of the
associated processes is limited. The early to mid-Holocene provides a post-
glacial analogue of a seasonally ice-free Arctic Ocean, similar to scenarios
that have been proposed for the next several decades. This early-mid Holocene
sea ice minimum, 10?6 thousand years ago, is often attributed to changes in
solar forcing. However, records providing information on upper Arctic water
column stratification during episodes of minimum sea ice cover are sparse. The
normal paleoceanographic proxies for water mass stratification cannot be applied
in the Arctic; different approaches are required to reconstruct water column
hydrography. The proposed research has the potential to greatly improve our
knowledge of past Arctic water column hydrography from the early to mid-Holocene
sea ice minimum and inform scenario development of future conditions in the
Arctic Ocean. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will contribute to workforce
development through support for the training of a PhD student. The technology
developed will be proactively transferred to the international science community
through a formal workshop. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent innovations in the
combined use of secondary ion mass spectrometry (SIMS), laser-ablation
inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry (laser-ablation ICP-MS) and Isotope
ratio mass spectrometry (IRMS) have shown that a wealth of environmental
information about water column stratification can be extracted from single
shells of fossil foraminifera. Neogloboquadrina pachyderma (sinistral) (Nps),
grows its chambers (ontogenetic calcite) near the Arctic surface, and
subsequently sinks through the water column where it adds a thick calcite crust
around the thinly calcified chambers at sub-mixed layer depths. Thus, each
individual Nps shell contains chemical and isotopic zonation from waters with
distinctly different physical properties ? the generally cold low salinity
surface mixed layer and warmer subsurface halocline. Intrashell variability can
be measured with in situ analytical approaches. The principal investigators
(PIs) propose to apply a multi-instrument approach to quantify intrashell
geochemistry in Nps shells obtained from an array of boxcore samples across the
Arctic Ocean. They plan to combine intrashell ä18O and ä13C measurements in
&lt;5 ìm-sized domains by SIMS with analyses of Mg/Ca (proxy for temperature),
Ba/Ca (proxy for river runoff or meltwater discharge), and Na/Ca (proxy for
salinity) by laser-ablation ICP-MS on the same Nps shells. The innovative SIMS
ultra-small domain isotope analytical approach was developed within the last few
years by PI Kozdon, and calibrated in the lab of PI Spero. Both SIMS (spot-
measurements) and laser-ablation data (depth profiles through the calcite
layers) can be correlated to well defined domains in the foraminiferal shells
that reflect a specific stage in the specimens? ontogenetic development (?time-
markers?). Each of the measurements can be assigned to a general water depth
range that is related to the depth of calcite addition as Nps migrates through
the water column during its ontogenetic development. Thus, the proposed
analytical approach provides an unprecedented opportunity to reconstruct past
water column stratification between the surface and halocline from individual
shells of Nps in sedimentary assemblages. This innovative multi-instrument
approach will be applied to mid-Holocene and late Holocene Nps shells from ~50
14C-dated box-coretop samples from the Arctic Ocean. The cores will be carefully
selected, mainly from U.S. core repositories, using the following criteria: (I)
good coverage of the Arctic Ocean with a focus on key-areas sensitive to changes
in water mass stratification and (II) existing 14C dates, although some of the
cores will still need to be dated.