* 1550909
* Collaborative Research: The Role of Surplus Production in the Emergence of a Complex Coastal Society
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Victor Thompson, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2020
* USD 124,195.00

Surplus production is often linked to social development and the rise of
politically complex societies. It has historically been thought to help people
buffer risks. Largely, however, past work has focused on agricultural societies,
with fewer studies considering how surpluses were produced and managed under
other economic systems. With support from the National Science Foundation, Drs.
William Marquardt, Victor Thompson, and Michael Savarese will conduct research
at the Mound Key and Pineland archaeological sites to investigate the role of
surplus production among the Calusa of southwest Florida, who were the most
powerful group in peninsular Florida in the sixteenth century A.D. The Calusa
king collected tribute from a population in excess of 20,000 distributed among
50 to 60 Calusa communities extending from the northern reaches of Charlotte
Harbor to the Florida Keys. However, unlike the farming people of the interior
river valleys of the southeastern U.S., the Calusa relied primarily on fish and
shellfish for protein, collecting wild plant foods and using only a handful of
plants from home gardens. Most importantly, they did not grow maize, which
formed the basis of surplus production and political complexity for many groups
across the Southeast. This project focuses on surplus production and
distribution in a complex fisher-gatherer-hunter society. Few archaeologists
have examined surplus production among fisher-gatherer-hunters, especially those
in the sub-tropics. This research will shed light on long-term sustainability of
fisheries, a topic of considerable world-wide interest, and address the
potential impact of over-harvesting shellfish. The project will also help train
the next generation of interdisciplinary scientists, both undergraduate and
graduate students. As part of the research, the team will teach a field school
that will involve students drawn from a broad geographical region. Students will
be trained in research, as well as specialized methods and traditional
archaeological excavation. The research will bring students with interests in
archaeology, geology, and ecology together to address a burgeoning field in
geoscience: conservation paleobiology (applying the theories and analytical
tools of paleontology to solving problems concerning the conservation of
biodiversity). The project will also partner with the Florida Public Archaeology
Network as well as the Randell Research Center to engage the public throughout
the research process.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Specifically, by means of coring and
archaeological excavations in structures thought to be fish and shellfish
storage and processing features, the team will examine how the Calusa produced
and managed large-scale food surpluses presumed to be necessary to sustain their
large populations. This work aims to discover how surplus production was
situated within the larger histories of the Calusa, and how these practices
structured interactions with Europeans. This work will serve as a comparative
study against examples that focus on the links between surplus, storage, social
development, and the transition to agriculture and animal husbandry. Development
of comparative case studies such as this one will help disengage the concepts of
surplus, storage, and social relations in terms of both individual agency and
collective action.