* 1550603
* Workshop: Enabling Composable and Modular Manufacturing through Abstractions:  Where Computer Science Meets Manufacturing; San Francisco Bay Area; Fall 2015
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2017
* Vadim Shapiro, International Computer Science Institute
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 08/31/2017
* USD 99,703.00

The award will support a workshop on "Enabling Composable and Modular
Manufacturing through Abstractions," which will be held in the San Francisco Bay
area in the fall of 2015. The purpose of the workshop is to identify research
opportunities and priorities at the intersection of computing and manufacturing.
The workshop will engage research leaders in the computing community, including
individuals whose domain expertise promises key insights in manufacturing but
who previously may not have considered using 21st century manufacturing
challenges to inspire their research, and research leaders in the manufacturing
community who have increasingly been focused on identifying computational
solutions to advance their field. Workshop results will be published in the form
of a workshop report and will be available electronically via the International
Computer Science Institute (ICSI) website.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The agenda for
the 2-day meeting will be broken into four half-day sessions: three focused on
grand challenges in the manufacturing enterprises of the 21st century and a
fourth in which the first draft of the workshop report will be produced. Each of
the grand challenge sessions will be co-organized by two individuals, one each
from the manufacturing and computer science communities. Tentatively, the three
grand challenge sessions will be: Data, Models and Representations in
Manufacturing; Modular, Composable, and Open Manufacturing, and; Architecture
and Virtualization, including efficiency, security, robustness.