* 1550037
* I-Corps: Study of Commercialization Aspects for nFE Technology
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2015,12/31/2015
* Debjyoti Banerjee, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Rathindra DasGupta
* 12/31/2015
* USD 50,000.00

Devices and systems that are employed for heat removal or heat addition are
often referred to as "Thermal Management Platforms." These systems impact
various applications ranging from cooling (refrigerators, air-conditioners,
opto-electronic chips/ lasers, computers, etc.), to oil exploration (e.g., deep
drilling), to biotechnology (e.g., rapid thermo-cyling for nucleic acids), to
power generation (e.g., thermal power plants involving coal, solar, nuclear,
geo-thermal power, etc.). This team has discovered that boiling and condensation
of refrigerants can be enhanced by using nanoparticle coatings and using
engineered surfaces with nano-scale surface roughness (this is called the
"nanoFin Effect" or "nFE" technology). The proposed innovative surfaces (with
engineered nano-scale roughness or nanofins) are shown to significantly enhance
heat transfer during boiling as the roughness is increased. This is highly
desirable as it enables miniaturization of devices involving boiling at high
heat loads while also enabling the reduction in operating temperatures. The
proposed activities in the I-Corps project will be utilized to gain insights
about the suitable markets segments for targeting deployment of nFe Technology
and the aspects of nFE Technology that needs to be strengthened in order to be
more responsive to needs of customers in various market segments. Substantial
market demand exists for nFE technology (the market for energy efficient devices
in the US alone was $5.1 billion and is projected to grow at a rate of 8% over
the next 5 years). The exponential increase in the use of air-conditioning in
emerging economies adds further urgency to the need to devise energy-efficient
solutions for solar heat gain. Thermal management requirements will
significantly affect the growth of electronic packaging industries.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;"nanoFin Effect (nFE)" was discovered and leveraged for
developing tunable thermal-impedance networks by integrating nanoparticle
coatings and additives with temperature nano-sensors. Numerical models indicate
that nFE arises from the coupling of enhanced surface area of nanoparticles with
the interfacial thermal impedance networks. Hence nFE Technology can be
leveraged for various acute thermal management needs. The proposed study
addresses an important technical bottleneck for many industries (and the
Department of Defense), and has a great potential for significant commercial
impact. Impregnation of the nFE technology into a variety of market segments
would provide transformative solutions in: energy conservation (buildings/
HVAC), renewable energy (concentrated solar power/ CSP, photo-voltaics/ PV),
traditional power generation (nuclear, coal, geothermal), transportation
(aerospace, automotive, marine), civil engineering (water resources management
using micro/nano-fluidics), chemical/ process industries (petro-chemicals),
power management (opto-electronics, chip cooling), homeland security, and life-
sciences (agriculture, biomedical, pharmaceuticals/ therapeutics, drug
discovery, drug delivery). One specific marketable application of nFE with low
barriers to entry - is tailoring the performance of compact heat exchangers (HX)
and Heat Transfer Fluids (HTF). Wide varieties of heat exchangers can be
tailored using nFE Technology for various applications ranging from energy and
defense to process industry applications. Other applications include: (a)
Biotechnology; (b) Homeland Security/ Bio-Safety; (c) Energy Harvesting
(including oil and gas exploration, conventional/non-renewable and renewal
energy technologies); and (d) Energy Efficiency/ Sustainability.