* 1550777
* EAGER: The Professional Development and Instruction of Design Comparing both Distance Learning and Face-to-Face Delivery Methods
* ENG,EEC
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2018
* Leigh Abts, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Mary Poats
* 09/30/2018
* USD 299,599.00

Design is a practice (the activity) and a product (the design). The challenge
facing educators is the Next Generation Science Standards (NGSS) requirement to
transform the sit in your chair learning environment into working spaces that
use technology to support the instructional practices and products of design.
Success will be strongly tied to the teachers own self-confidence and self-
efficacy in aligning design to their classrooms. Teachers must align content
ranging from biology to mathematics to physics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
collaborative project with the University of Maryland College Park and Morgan
State University will immerse teachers from three demographically diverse
Maryland school districts in the design process through the use of MyDesign, a
mobile application developed through an NSF I-Corps Learning award, which
utilizes a growing library of web-based applications to teach and practice
design. The teachers will be guided to develop instructional content specific to
their classrooms. Developing and testing two PD models across these school
districts has the potential to impact the teaching and practice of design. The
data and experiences derived from this exploratory and high-risk research could
provide timely insights into the comparative strengths and weaknesses between
face-to-face and on-line PD for design. Teaching design online utilizing
MyDesign has the potential to expand the instruction of design using Massively
Open Online Courses (MOOCS) and to personalize the learning of design. The
online teaching and practice of design has the potential to engage more women,
underserved minorities, those requiring special accommodation, and returning
military by providing an anytime, anyplace tool-box to solve relevant problems.