* 1550129
* Workshop: A System of Systems Perspective on Critical Infrastructure Management; Charlottesville, Virginia; March 6-9, 2016
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2016
* Eugene Stakhiv, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Chen
* 12/31/2016
* USD 49,600.00

Since 1980, the U.S. has experienced 151 weather disasters with damages
exceeding 1 billion dollars each. With changing climate and development patterns
and the severity and frequency of extreme weather events increasing, the U.S.
must address the vulnerability of its critical infrastructure systems of
systems. The Nation's critical infrastructure provides the essential services
that underpin the American way of life. A vast array of interdependent
infrastructure and information technology networks, services, and resources
enable communication, facilitate travel, power our homes, run our economy, and
provide essential government services. The aging or deteriorating condition of
significant parts of these systems both weaken our resilience and negatively
affect our nation's security and prosperity. This workshop will address: (i) the
projected impacts of climate change, including sea-level rise and the increasing
severity and frequency of extreme weather events; and (ii) the consequential
damage or disruptions that result in cascading effects across our communities,
with immeasurable costs in lives lost and billions of dollars in property
damage.

Adaptation and adjustments to natural, or to human systems in response to
actual, or expected climate change, will require a risk management strategy to
protect vulnerable sectors and communities. This workshop will examine and
assess the well-documented sources of risk and uncertainty associated with
climate change and sea-level rise and incorporate the multiagency interactive
infrastructure within a comprehensive approach to federal agency infrastructure
planning for coastal urban areas. Workshop participants will include: experts in
response to extreme weather events that include federal agencies, scientists and
practicing engineers, and academics studying resilience, vulnerability in the
context of risk-based systems engineering, and possibly international experts in
the workshop's theme. All would collaborate to develop a practical,
hierarchically linked risk management framework that will effectively limit and
proactively manage the myriad sources of risk associated with climate change
adaptation strategies for critical infrastructure. The risk management framework
would help to streamline the often segmented and limited jurisdictional
responsibilities and authorities within a three tiered integrated, hierarchical
decision-making framework to restructure: (i) agency implementation processes of
climate adaptation guidelines; (ii) programmatic policies, evaluation principles
and decision criteria; and, (iii) project level design, planning and operating
rules.