* 1550691
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award: Conquest And Conversion In Historic Islamic Iberia: A Bioarchaeological Approach
* SBE,BCS
* 11/15/2015,10/31/2016
* Katelyn Bolhofner, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 10/31/2016
* USD 24,885.00

Contact between distinctive ethnic and religious groups often results in tense
social boundary negotiations, persecution, and even genocide and war. The
opportunity to examine past interactions among these groups offers new
possibilities for the development of greater cross-cultural understanding. This
doctoral dissertation research project will employ archaeological, historical,
and biological data to offer a contextualized examination of the nuances of
migration, religious conversion, and social interaction in Iberia following the
conquest of the peninsula by Muslim Arabs and Berbers (AD 711-1492). The results
of this project will elucidate the dynamics of the spread of Islamic culture and
peoples in the Iberian Peninsula, which remain contested and poorly understood.
This project will demonstrate that a better understanding of historical contexts
and deep time perspectives is keenly relevant in this era of migration tensions
and conflicts between ethnically distinctive religious groups.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order to explore the manner in which religious and
ethnic identities are altered through culture contact, this project will examine
the degree to which conversion, rather than migration, contributed to the spread
of Islam following conquest. The researchers acknowledge the personal nature of
religious identity and the archaeological difficulty in discernment, yet propose
that mate choice and funerary ritual allow insight into the public and
interpersonal ramifications of religious conversion. Family studies of modern
humans and non-human mammals suggest that certain inherited skeletal and dental
traits provide significant insight into population structure and relatedness.
The researchers propose that altered social group affiliations in Islamic
Iberia, particularly patterns of conversion and intermarriage, will be
recognizable in changing patterns of variation in these traits. To estimate
changes in variance through the Islamic period, researchers will employ
biodistance analysis, the use of skeletal and dental traits in the inference of
genetic relatedness, in the examination of Iberian and North African samples
dating from the 3rd to the 18th centuries. A suite of cranial and dental metric
and nonmetric traits will be recorded and statistically analyzed. The results of
these analyses will be interpreted along with historical and archaeological data
to identify the segments of the population in southern Iberia that appear to
have converted to Islam, the general timing of these conversions, and the degree
to which intermarriage contributed to this process.