* 1550852
* EAGER-NEON: Collaborative Research: Formation of a NEON Microbial Metagenomics Data Synthesis Working Group
* BIO,EF
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2018
* Folker Meyer, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Elebeoba May
* 09/30/2018
* USD 173,451.00

The goal of this collaborative project is to enhance the ability to analyze
microbial metagenomics datasets of the National Ecological Observatory Network
(NEON). Microbial metagenomics, the characterization of microbial communities by
the genes present in the sample, is important for fully understanding microbial
processes. This project will enhance the comparative analytical capabilities
available to the scientific community for describing properties of microbial
communities, which will enable better integration of biological and geoscience
data with other current earth-systems observing efforts. These improved analytic
tools will facilitate developing better interconnections between environmental
factors, biogeochemical processes, and microbial ecosystem structure and
function in a more holistic fashion. The project will establish a Synthesis
Working Group that will collect community input for guiding cyber-infrastructure
and bioinformatics tool development and for answering fundamental questions with
the NEON microbial metagenomics data sets. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
collaborative project will form and coordinate a Synthesis Working Group for
analysis and integration of NEON metagenomics data, leveraging ongoing
development of bioinformatics and cyber-infrastructure tools for metagenomic
data in partnership with other concurrent earth-systems observing efforts
EarthCube and Critical Zone Observatories. The Synthesis Working Group will
enhance scientific advancement by 1) facilitating formation of a diverse team to
inform and utilize NEON microbial metagenomic data, 2) exploring strategies for
synthesis of NEON metagenomic data using existing and new bioinformatics and
cyberinfrastructure tools, and 3) synthesizing NEON metagenomic datasets via
integration with multiple existing and developing open data archives. This
project will enable comparisons that cannot be adequately synthesized today,
which is necessary for evaluating the sustainability and resilience of microbial
ecosystems, as well as the function of these microbial communities in supporting
key ecosystem services. The project will engender broad scientific
dissemination, use, and intercomparison of NEON data products through targeted
scientific outreach activities and engagement of the scientific community,
including integration of NEON with other earth-systems observing efforts.