* 1550347
* CAREER: Ionic and Thermal Transport Properties of Complex Oxides from First Principles
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2021
* Nicole Benedek, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 06/30/2021
* USD 475,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ionic and thermal transport phenomena
are ubiquitous in the chemical, biological and physical sciences. For example,
the movement of heat or ions plays a crucial role in the efficiency, lifetime,
and cost of many important technologies, such as high-power electronics,
batteries, and jet engines. However, despite the importance of these processes
to many technologies, understanding how the ionic and thermal transport
properties of materials depend on the way their atoms are arranged is very
challenging. This impedes our understanding of the properties of existing
materials and hinders the design of new materials with enhanced properties. This
CAREER award supports theoretical and computational research and education that
aims to use computers to predict and understand the ionic and thermal transport
properties of materials. In particular, the PI will elucidate the atomic-scale
factors that determine how quickly ions can move through materials. This
knowledge is critical to the design of more efficient energy devices, since the
power delivered by batteries and fuel cells is largely determined by the rate at
which ions can be inserted and extracted from the electrodes and transported
through the electrolyte. The research team will also focus on the connection
between a material's crystal structure and its ability to transport heat.
Thermal properties of materials are important in many applications, including
e.g. microelectronics (where heat needs to be transported away as efficiently as
possible) and thermal barrier coatings, which protect the structural components
of gas-turbine engines from excessive heat. The PI will use a combination of
symmetry principles, simple crystal chemical models and large-scale quantum
mechanical computations to develop the fundamental understanding that would
allow the design of new materials with tailored thermal
properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The educational component of this CAREER award
has two goals. The first is to engage the general public and promote a more
inclusive image of science by upending the popular stereotypes associated with
scientists and their work. To achieve this goal, the PI will conduct public
outreach in Austin highlighting stories and contributions of scientists that may
be less well known to the general public. Such direct public outreach should
allow the PI to portray the work of scientists in a way that is more engaging
and realistic than what is normally encountered on television or film. The
second educational goal is focused on developing a set of computational
exercises to teach key materials science concepts to undergraduate engineering
students in a more effective way. Computational skills are vital for engineering
graduates entering the workforce, as engineering and manufacturing businesses
increasingly rely on computational approaches in many areas of product
development. By working in close collaboration with experts in materials
informatics and undergraduate education, the PI will integrate computational
materials and materials informatics research with this education initiative to
equip engineering students with the skills they will need to succeed in the
modern engineering workforce. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports theoretical and
computational research that will unravel the microscopic mechanisms of ionic and
thermal transport in the complex oxides materials family. The PI will use a
combination of symmetry principles, simple crystal chemical models and first-
principles calculations to uncover the fundamental knowledge that will
facilitate the rational design of materials with tailored transport properties.
First-principles techniques are crucial for the discovery of new ideas and
insights into the ionic and thermal transport properties of materials because
mechanistic details are typically not available from experiments alone. This
research program will address several open questions related to the ionic and
thermal transport properties of complex oxides. These include (i) the effects of
dimensionality and atomic disorder on ionic transport in layered oxides, (ii)
the strong coupling between specific structural distortions and ionic transport
and the control of these distortions (and hence transport properties) in oxide
thin-films through epitaxial strain, (iii) the role of electron-lattice
interactions in reducing (lattice) thermal conductivity and (iv) the origin of
the anomalously low thermal conductivity observed in some ferroelectric oxides.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The educational component of this CAREER award has two
goals. The first is to engage the general public and promote a more inclusive
image of science by upending the popular stereotypes associated with scientists
and their work. To achieve this goal, the PI will conduct public outreach in
Austin highlighting stories and contributions of scientists that may be less
well known to the general public. Such direct public outreach should allow the
PI to portray the work of scientists in a way that is more engaging and
realistic than what is normally encountered on television or film. The second
educational goal is focused on developing a set of computational exercises to
teach key materials science concepts to undergraduate engineering students in a
more effective way. Computational skills are vital for engineering graduates
entering the workforce, as engineering and manufacturing businesses increasingly
rely on computational approaches in many areas of product development. By
working in close collaboration with experts in materials informatics and
undergraduate education, the PI will integrate computational materials and
materials informatics research with this education initiative to equip
engineering students with the skills they will need to succeed in the modern
engineering workforce.