* 1550126
* US-EA CENTRA: US - East Asia Collaborations to Enable Transnational Cyberinfrastructure Applications
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2021
* Jose Fortes, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 09/30/2021
* USD 519,575.00

This project supports collaborative cyberinfrastructure (CI) research activities
designed to educate a new generation of researchers who are technically and
culturally competent to engage with international scientific networks. The goal
of this project is to advance the scientific understanding of distributed
software-defined cyberinfrastructures and the ability to run scientific
applications using data and tools in different countries. Specifically, the
targeted applications are in environmental modeling, disaster management and
smart cities, focusing on how these domains impact each other. The related
middleware research seeks solutions for software-defined data sharing,
middleware interoperability via software-definition, and coordinated software-
definition of distributed IT systems. This project pursues rigorous
understanding and solution of the scientific problems via international
collaborations which bring out real-world contexts of transnational applications
and create transnational cyberinfrastructure instances where researchers get
practical insight.

Junior U.S. Ph.D. candidate researchers are expected to have short stays at
collaborating sites in different countries working on project-related topics and
have direct access to leading-edge facilities, local instances of global
problems and top scientists working on these problems. At the same time they are
immersed in international team activities. Annual workshops help conceptualize,
frame, advance and report on collaborative research projects and contribute to
establishing the coordination framework. Key institutional partners in East Asia
include the National Center for High-Performance Computing of the National
Applied Research Laboratories of Taiwan and the National Institute of
Information and Communication Technologies of Japan. This project is to
contribute towards a framework to coordinate CI-based and CI-enabled research
with East Asian partners in order to achieve scientific progress and engage
junior researchers in international activities.