* 1550242
* Workshop: Engineering Design and Systems Engineering Foundations; Clemson University, Clemson, South Carolina; November 14-17, 2015
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2016
* Georges Fadel, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Rich Malak
* 09/30/2016
* USD 49,500.00

This workshop brings together educators and researchers in the fields of
Engineering Design and Systems Engineering to assess the state of the art in
these fields, identify promising directions for future research, exploit the
synergies between the two fields, and strengthen the design and innovation
capabilities of practitioners. Additionally, current NSF grantees from both ESD
and SYS programs (Engineering and Systems Design; Systems Science) will be able
to present posters explaining their work and get feedback from their colleagues
and the program director. Participants will identify and discuss past
contributions that have had a strong impact on education and practice. and
discussed their domains of applicability, their limitations, and what needs to
be done to strengthen their future potential and impact.

The main objective of the workshop is to enable the engineering design and
systems engineering communities to exchange ideas and find synergies. The
workshop will bring together about 150 researchers and divide them in small
groups of ten to discuss three specific topics. First, workshop participants
will focus on method validation and research methodology. Many design and
systems engineering methods, approaches and tools have been suggested in the
last forty years. There is a need to take stock, critique, agree on the
potentials and limitations of these methods, and define evidence-based
approaches to further improve them. A second workshop topic is to determine
future research directions and to establish a framework in which these future
contributions can be organized. The focus will be on directions that can most
affect the ability of engineering and systems designers to innovate and to deal
with the increased complexity of products and systems. Third, the education of
engineers and of practitioners will be discussed to identify best practices, the
right mix between experiential education and lectures, and the critical topics
that will provide the breadth and depth required to move the fields forward at
the various educational levels.