* 1550448
* EAGER: Integrated Planning and Operation of Electricity-Transportation Networks for Wireless Electric Vehicle Charging
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2017
* Khaled Abdelghany, Southern Methodist University
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Chen
* 08/31/2017
* USD 154,920.00

Several cutting-edge technologies are expected to fundamentally change the way
engineers would plan, design and operate the highway infrastructure system.
Among these technologies are electric vehicles with in-motion wireless charging
capabilities. Unlike the widely available plug-in electric vehicles, the new
technology enables vehicles to charge wirelessly while traveling via charging
pads installed along the highway links. This emerging technology is expected to
increase the travel range of the electric vehicles, and hence improve its social
acceptance, which ultimately leads to reducing dependence on conventional fuel
resources for transportation. This EArly-concept Grant for Exploratory Research
(EAGER) project is motivated by the need to develop an integrated framework for
policy making, planning and operation management of wireless charging technology
in urban transportation networks. This framework addresses several conceptual
and methodological complexities inherited in the interconnected transportation-
electricity infrastructure systems, and provides necessary tools to design and
operate such complex infrastructure systems. The successful completion of this
EAGER is expected to advance the development of sustainable transportation
infrastructure systems characterized by reduced greenhouse gas generation and
improved urban mobility. The interdisciplinary research involves the
collaboration of expertise in the areas of planning and operation of electrical
power networks, transportation network modeling and traffic operation
management, and operations research and system engineering. The collaborative
environment leads to rapid dissemination of knowledge and discovery results to
the research and education community, and stimulates educational development in
sustainable transportation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The framework incorporates
mathematical formulations and cutting-edge solution methodologies representing
the mutual interactions between policy making efforts to promote electric
vehicle technology, and market-driven coordinated expansion planning and network
design in the hybrid electricity and transportation infrastructure systems. The
market-driven structure is presented by complementarity models with non-convex
feasible set that capture the demand elasticity and policy-driven incentives.
The competition in electricity and transportation network operation is presented
by hierarchical oligopoly structure coupling equilibrium problems with
equilibrium constraints. Each problem represents non-cooperative multi-leader-
follower game with incomplete information to model the strategic behavior of the
participants. The effectiveness of the solutions are validated through
developing a high-resolution agent-based simulation platform which represents
the integrated operation of the traffic and electricity networks considering
multiple scenarios representing the uncertainty in the operation environment.