* 1550202
* EAGER: Collaborative Research: Lighthouse: A User- Centered Web System for High-Performance Software Development
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2018
* Boyana Norris, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 07/31/2018
* USD 157,973.00

The role of computing in science and engineering has been growing steadily in
recent years, leading to ever larger and more complex problems. Their solution
requires high-performance resources, which has resulted in many efforts to
produce new mathematical approaches, programming models and languages, software
libraries, and runtime environments for advanced parallel computers. This vast
and growing number of solution methods presents a challenge to scientists who do
not want to invest the time needed to locate and learn new computational tools.
&lt;br/&gt;The PIs are developing Lighthouse, a taxonomy-based system, that
equips practitioners with easy discovery and use of high-performance software
solutions to a variety of common problems arising in scientific and engineering
applications. Lighthouse also integrates information about the performance of
multiple implementations of numerical algorithms. It thus allows users to
readily find and start using the best method for addressing a particular
challenge with the computers available to them. Less time spent in learning
numerical packages and faster scientific simulations directly increases
scientific productivity.&lt;br/&gt;Lighthouse is a web-based framework that
offers a solution to two main research challenges. First, it aids in the
creation of complex high-performance applications that leverage the latest
advances in applied mathematics and computer science research. Second, it
facilitates effective intra- and cross-domain communication for computer
scientists, applied mathematicians, computational scientists, and students as
they tackle scientific and engineering computing problems. Lighthouse
incorporates an extensible taxonomy that enables different types of searches for
numerical solutions depending on a user?s level of expertise. It then provides a
mechanism for generating code templates based on the search results. Lighthouse
thereby reduces the substantial learning curves associated with using state-of-
the art high-performance software libraries. The Lighthouse system integrates
taxonomy information for an expanding number of high-performance numerical
libraries that presently comprises the linear algebra packages LAPACK, PETSc,
and SLEPc. Lighthouse employs machine learning methods to automatically classify
routines based on their performance attributes. In this way, it helps to provide
more accurate search results that take into account not only functionality but
also problem scale, performance, and available computational resource
requirements. Finally, Lighthouse improves communication within and between
communities by providing an accessible web-based interface to taxonomies of
numerical packages that includes documentation, references, and performance
information.