* 1550808
* Meeting: Workshop on Plant Development and Drought Stress, to be held November 1-4, 2015 at Asilomar Conference Grounds in Pacific Grove, CA.
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2016
* M. Kathryn Barton, Carnegie Institution of Washington
* Standard Grant
* philip becraft
* 07/31/2016
* USD 5,000.00

Funds will support a new conference entitled "Workshop on Plant Development and
Drought Stress" to be held from November 1 to November 4, 2015 at Asilomar
Conference Grounds in Pacific Grove, CA. The purpose of this meeting is to bring
together plant developmental biologists and plant stress biologists in order to
generate a better understanding of how plant growth and development are altered
by drought and related environmental stresses. Related stresses include heat or
the high concentrations of salt that can affect irrigated fields. Plant stress
biologists strive to understand cellular responses to harsh environments: for
instance what protective metabolites the cell makes in response to drought and
the nature of the machinery the cell uses to sense a harsh environment. Plant
development is the study of how plants grow: for instance how plants make new
body parts, such as leaves and stem, from groups of stem cells at the tips of
branches, how cells of different types become organized in roots, stems and
leaves and how plants control their size. The proposed workshop brings both
groups of scientists together for three days. It is expected the synergy
resulting from interactions between the two groups of scientists will lead to
advances in understanding how plants alter their growth and development in
response to a lack of water. This in turn is expected to lead to improved
strategies for breeding drought tolerant plants. Postdoctoral researchers and
graduate students will be chosen from submitted abstracts for travel
scholarships, with priority given to individuals from underrepresented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over the last two decades, both fields on their own
- developmental biology and stress biology - have reached high levels of
sophistication with detailed knowledge of core mechanisms. Much is now known of
the regulatory networks controlling development and likewise the regulatory
networks controlling stress responses. The fields are therefore ripe for
exploring known development and stress networks for overlap and interaction.
Invited speakers who are recognized leaders in their fields will present talks.
Speakers will also be chosen based on the excellence and relevance of their
submitted abstracts. Junior investigators (graduate students, postdocs and
assistant professors) will be encouraged to apply for speaking slots. Efforts
will be made to include speakers and attendees from groups underrepresented in
the sciences. To assure an informal atmosphere that allows for ample give and
take between scientists the workshop will be limited to 100 attendees.