* 1550405
* INSPIRE: Quantitative Estimation of Space-Time Processes in Volumetric Data (QUEST)
* CSE,OAC
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2019
* Vitaly Galinsky, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* William Miller
* 12/31/2019
* USD 999,589.00

This INSPIRE project is jointly funded by the Division of Advanced
Cyberinfrastructure in the Directorate for Computer &amp; Information Science,
Physics of Living Systems in the Division of Physics in the Directorate for Math
and Physical Science, Physical and Dynamic Meteorology in the Division of
Atmospheric and Geospace Sciences in the Directorate for Geoscience, and the
INSPIRE program in the Office of Integrative
Activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Advances in scientific instrumentation and
computational hardware and software have resulted in an unprecedented ability to
acquire, simulate, and visualize time resolved three-dimensional (3D) volumes of
data, offering the promise of a greater understanding of complex systems
previously beyond our technical grasp. However, as the size and complexity of
these data increase, analyzing them becomes increasingly problematic, inhibiting
scientific discovery and limiting the utility of the data acquired at great
expense and effort. Two particularly cogent examples come from two seemingly
disparate scientific fields: neuroscience and meteorology. Magnetic resonance
imaging (MRI) scanners can now acquire functional MRI (FMRI) volumes of brain
activity in almost real time, while mobile Doppler radar (MDR) systems are
capable of acquiring time-dependent volumetric images of thunderstorms during
tornado formation. In this project, entitled QUantitative Estimation of Space-
Time processes in volumetric data (QUEST), the University of California, San
Diego, Center for Scientific Computation in Imaging (CSCI), in partnership with
the Center for Severe Weather Research (CSWR) and the Cooperative Institute for
Meteorological Satellite Studies (CIMSS) will develop a novel framework for the
analysis of time-varying 3D volumes, guided by large scale numerical
simulations, to investigate two of the outstanding scientific questions of our
age: What is the relationship between brain structure and function?, and How do
strong, long-track tornadoes form? The resulting computational platform will be
disseminated to the NSF community through the open source analysis and
visualization platform (STK) to improve the ability of researchers to
quantitatively analyze, visualize, and explore complex time varying volumetric
datasets. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This INSPIRE project develops advanced methods
for automated quantitative characterization of subtle space-time patterns
embedded within spatio-temporal data from 3D voxel-based digital imaging
modalities based upon the team's recently formulated entropy field decomposition
(EFD) theory, a probabilistic method efficiently that employs the information
field theoretic approach with prior information supplied using the team's
entropy spectrum pathways theory, in conjunction with numerical simulations
designed both to constrain results to physically realizable solutions. The
cross-disciplinary approach focuses on two outstanding problems in the
respective fields of neuroscience and severe weather meteorology: 1) The
identification of structural and functional modes of the human brain from high
resolution anatomical MRI, diffusion tensor MRI, functional MRI data from the
Human Connectome Project combined with numerical simulations of diffusion and
functionally weighted MRI signals, and 2) The identification of signatures of
tornado genesis and maintenance from MDR data from the Doppler-On-Wheels network
in conjunction with tornado simulations using the CM1 model. Significant social
impact would result from the ability to categorize states of brain activity in
normal and diseased populations and the ability to reduce the lead time between
tornado formation and warning to threatened populations. More generally, this
novel methodology has the potential to transform the way analysis is conducted
in a wide range of disciplines by enabling automated, quantitative detection of
important, though perhaps subtle, variations in large, complex datasets
undetectable by current traditional techniques.