* 1550285
* EAGER: Development of a Modular Ion Mobility Mass Spectrometry System for Structural Biology
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2017
* Matthew Bush, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 08/31/2017
* USD 146,334.00

With the support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program, Professor
Bush at the University Washington develops a Modular Ion Mobility Mass
Spectrometry (MIMMS) system that enables new experiments to probe the solution
and gas-phase structures of proteins and protein complexes. The self-assembly of
proteins into 'molecular machines' enables cells to perform sophisticated
functions that are otherwise inaccessible. There is a growing need for
complementary structural tools to determine the quaternary structures of the
proteome and mass spectrometry (MS) plays an increasingly important role in
fulfilling these unmet needs. The research plan makes large impacts in the field
of native MS by providing new, sensitive instrumentation for multistage
characterization of proteins and protein complexes, and by providing fundamental
insights into the conformational landscapes of proteins and protein complexes in
the gas phase, which may lead to new opportunities in the fields of analytical
instrumentation, structural biology, and characterization of biopharmaceuticals.
Professor Bush also provides support to a graduate student researcher with
interdisciplinary training opportunities on instrument development and state-of-
the-art analytical method development in the rapidly growing fields of native
mass spectrometry and ion mobility spectrometry.

The research objectives are to demonstrate the use of modules to shape separate,
trap, and shape select ions of proteins and protein complexes and networks of
modules to perform higher-order ion mobility mass spectrometry experiments.
These modules are combined to form networks that may enable new experiments that
are not possible using existing mass spectrometry instruments. Key advantages of
this approach are that the modules will share dimensions, design elements, and
drive electronics; be individually refined independently from a complex
instrument; and then be added to networks of modules, without compromising the
capabilities of the other modules.