* 1550313
* TWC TTP: Small: Collaborative: Privacy-Preserving Data Collection and Access for IEEE 802.11s-Based Smart Grid Applications
* CSE,CNS
* 06/15/2015,08/31/2017
* Kemal Akkaya, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 08/31/2017
* USD 214,055.00

The modernized Smart Grid (SG) is expected to enable several new applications
such as dynamic pricing, demand response and fraud detection; however,
collection of such fine-grained data raises privacy issues. This project aims to
design and implement several novel mechanisms for securing data collection and
communication in SG Advanced Metering Infrastructure applications while
preserving user privacy when the data are to be accessed. The underlying
communication infrastructure, namely Neighborhood Area Networks, is to be built
with wireless mesh networks using the IEEE 802.11s, an IEEE 802.11 amendment for
mesh networking. The project investigates user privacy preservation mechanisms
using partially and fully homomorphic encryption during data collection in the
Neighborhood Area Networks. For the collected data at the data repository,
attribute-based access control mechanisms are studied. As part of these access
control mechanisms, novel scalable key establishment and group key management
schemes are investigated. A testbed consisting of IEEE 802.11 Linux routers is
part of the project to assess the overhead of privacy mechanisms under quality
of service constraints.

The testbed will be a community resource for researchers, educators and students
as well as utility companies interested in SG communications and privacy.
Ensuring practical user privacy solutions will increase the participation of
customers in SG applications saving cost and energy. The testbed will be a great
help to utilities, researchers and educators who work on SG communications. The
software and technical manuals will be made available as open-source documents.
New graduate courses on the Smart Grid will be introduced into the academic
curriculum.