* 1550387
* Student Travel for the 18th International Conference on Solid-State Sensors, Actuators and Microsystems
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2015,12/31/2015
* Robert Candler, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Mona Zaghloul
* 12/31/2015
* USD 15,000.00

Proposal 1550387&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ECCS: Student Travel for the 18th
International conference on Solid State Sensors, Actuators and Microsystems
&lt;br/&gt;PI: Robert Candler.&lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of
California.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Objectives:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Transducers
2015, the 18th International Conference on Solid-State Sensors, Actuators, and
Microsystems, will be held from June 21st through June 25th, 2015 in Anchorage
Alaska. The meeting will include participants from academia, industry, and
government research entities. The conference will create an atmosphere for open
discussion of recent research results through oral and poster presentations. As
in previous years, the Transducers conference will continue to provide a
student-centered platform for research discussions, providing graduate students
a large number of opportunities to present and discuss their research. Funding
is being requested from the National Science Foundation to support travel costs
for graduate student presenters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical
abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The International Conference on Solid-State
Sensors, Actuators, and Microsystems provides an immersive technical experience
for attendees, showcasing major technological, scientific and commercial
breakthroughs in mechanical, optical, chemical&lt;br/&gt;and biological devices
and systems using micro and nanotechnology. The 18th session of this meeting,
commonly called "Transducers", will be chaired by Prof. Tom Kenny, who has 25
years experience in the MEMS community. The technical program
includes&lt;br/&gt;world-renowned plenary and invited speakers, as well as
sessions for peer-reviewed oral and poster presentations. Transducers will
continue its tradition of being a student focused conference, where a large
majority of the presentations are given by graduate&lt;br/&gt;students and
postdoctoral scholars. This award will support the travel of graduate students?
to attend the conference and meet top speakers on the
subject.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The support from this award will result in
several graduate students attending this meeting Transducers 2015. The areas of
the conference MEMS/NEMS and transducers are very important areas for the
current technology. The impact of this award will be as
follows:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(1) Opportunities for a diverse group of graduate
student researchers to interact with&lt;br/&gt;senior members of the research
community, broadening their scientific&lt;br/&gt;perspective and promoting their
career development&lt;br/&gt;(2) Enhance understanding of the science that
underpins the development of&lt;br/&gt;micro/nanoscale sensors, actuators, and
microsystems&lt;br/&gt;(3) Foster and promote long-term relationships between
researchers in diverse fields&lt;br/&gt;including bioengineering, chemical
engineering, mechanical engineering,&lt;br/&gt;electrical engineering,
chemistry, and physics&lt;br/&gt;(4) Promote the development of
multidisciplinary teams that can address difficult&lt;br/&gt;problems using
micro- and Nano-technologies by exposing the conference&lt;br/&gt;attendees to a
broad range of micro/nanoscale scientific
advances.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recommendation:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Based on the
description of the topics that will be covered in Transducers meeting 2015, the
intent is to support large number of students to participate in the conference ,
as well as the specific purpose of the funds to support students travel, we
recommend that this proposal be funded in the requested amount of $15,000.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mona Zaghloul&lt;br/&gt;Program Director ECCS/CCSS