* 1550985
* Workshop on using Digital Logic Instruction to Introduce Computing Concepts
* CSE,OAC
* 11/01/2015,10/31/2016
* Jerry Trahan, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Sushil K Prasad
* 10/31/2016
* USD 49,927.00

Due to the ubiquity of computers and their critical role in society, modern
computer engineering and science curricula incorporate a far wider range of
topics than was traditionally taught. As a result, some fundamental concepts may
not be sufficiently reinforced across the curriculum to allow students to
understand them with full clarity. This deficiency in the Computer Engineering
curriculum, a field with significant technological, scientific and societal
ties, could have long-term negative impact.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project
will organize a workshop to convene faculty and experts in the discipline of
Computer Engineering to address ways to improve instruction across the
curriculum that (1) ensures that key ideas are sufficiently reinforced and (2)
current curricular coverage is maintained. It will emphasize parallel and
distributed computing, a key component of modern computer engineering and
science education.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Direct impacts of this project are on
expected improvements in student retention and graduation rates, and overall
career success. The systematic and planned exposure of students to advanced
computing concepts across the curriculum will better prepare engineers to work
on complex systems. More broadly, this project will promote science by helping
produce engineers well-grounded in the fundamentals who will become the next
generation of scientists, researchers and faculty
members.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to improve education in parallel
and distributed computing (PDC) by introducing key "concept dots" early on in
the curriculum that can be "connected" in subsequent advanced courses. This
approach is useful for a sustained reinforcement of fundamental ideas through
the curriculum. More specifically, this project seeks to introduce PDC concepts
through a first course in digital logic. A workshop to bring together
instructors and experts in PDC and digital logic will be organized. The goals of
this workshop are twofold: &lt;br/&gt; (a) Concept Inventory: Learning different
approaches to and experiences from teaching core courses in computer engineering
and science (including digital logic), identifying important and difficult
topics and developing a set of best practices (for which topics to emphasize and
how; &lt;br/&gt; (b) Concept Application: Encouraging attendees to incorporate
some of the ideas from the workshop into their courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt
;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br
/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1