* 1550283
* Design of an Integrated Borehole Seismic and Geodetic Sensor
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2017
* Mark Zumberge, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Continuing Grant
* David Lambert
* 08/31/2017
* USD 100,423.00

The understanding of tectonic and earthquake processes depends upon observations
of earth motions that span periods from years to fractions of a second and
amplitudes from nanometers to meters. Up until now such observations came from a
variety of instruments such as seismometers, geodetic-quality GPS receivers,
gravimeters, and strain meters. Even as GPS networks are reaching up to nearly
seismic frequencies and observatory quality seismometers extend down into the
geodetic range, the multiple instruments required are complex and expensive to
deploy and operate. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will fund the concept and
design of a combined instrument that will provide much of the relevant
information. This instrument concept will meet the stringent requirements of the
Global Seismographic Network while providing geodetic measurements with
significantly lower noise than GPS. Housed in a simple borehole sonde, the
instrument will be inexpensive to construct, install, and operate. If our
expectations are met it will become practical to significantly expand the
network of geodetic/seismic observations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Locations in
which both seismic and geodetic data are relevant to socially-important problems
include volcanoes, areas of subsidence, oil fields, and CO2 sequestration The
proposed instrument will provide low noise and extremely broadband data in such
settings, enhancing the ability to understand such processes as induced
seismicity, reservoir dynamics, and pre-eruption behavior.