* 1550398
* Multiphase Chemistry of Organic Nitrates from Monoterpene Oxidation and Their Role in Aerosol Growth
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2020
* Paul Shepson, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 03/31/2020
* USD 480,858.00

In this project funded by the Environmental Chemical Sciences program of the
Chemistry Division, Dr. Jonathan H. Slade of Purdue University is investigating
the processes that affect the lifecycle of organic nitrates that are produced in
the atmosphere from organic compounds that are emitted by trees. Organic
nitrates serve as an important reservoir and sink for nitrogen oxides, the
precursor to tropospheric ozone. Organic nitrates also impact the formation and
fate of particulate matter, which affects human health, cloud formation and
Earth's surface temperature. To better understand the role organic nitrates play
in air quality and climate, new measurements are being made regarding the
uptake, multiphase processing, and fate of organic nitrates that contain
reactive functionalities and remain reactive in the particle phase. This effort
consists of both laboratory and field work which significantly extends a growing
knowledge base of the impact organic nitrates have on the evolution of
atmospheric particulate matter, air quality, and
climate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on the multiphase chemistry
of olefinic organic nitrates and their impact on the formation and fate of
organic aerosol in forested environments. The organic nitrate yields from the
oxidation of multi-olefinic monoterpenes, and the aerosol uptake kinetics of
synthetic multifunctional monoterpene organic nitrates are examined as a
function of relative humidity and particle acidity using chemical ionization
mass spectrometry (CIMS) coupled with a reaction chamber and aerosol flow
reactor. In addition, the hydrolysis rates and subsequent aqueous-phase chemical
transformations including oligomerization and sulfonation of these organic
nitrates are being evaluated. The production and chemistry of gas- and aerosol-
phase terpene nitrates in a forested environment are being investigated during
two summer field studies. The research contributes broadly to a fundamental
understanding of the factors affecting air quality and climate, with respect to:
air pollutants and climate forcers, ozone and particulate matter. This work
broadly impacts the education of undergraduate and graduate researchers. The
research is used to develop an annual outreach program aimed at providing local
area high school students the experience of conducting research related to
atmospheric science, weather, and air quality.