* 1550171
* Workshop: The Past, Present, and Future of NSF's Macrosystems Biology Program, August 5-6, 2015, Arlington, Virginia
* BIO,EF
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2016
* Adrian Rocha, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* timothy kratz
* 07/31/2016
* USD 25,000.00

This award will partially cover participant support for the 2015 MacroSystem
Biology (MSB) principal investigator meeting on August 5-6 at NSF headquarters
in Arlington, Virginia. This is the last MSB meeting under the current program
solicitation. Goals of the meeting include highlighting program successes and
discussing future directions for MSB science. Support will be allocated to about
10 participants on a case need basis. Inclusion of these participants will
facilitate achieving meeting goals by helping to ensure full participation of
MSB projects and enabling full assessment the progress of MSB science over the
course of the program. Large-scale atmosphere-biosphere feedbacks and
interactions are a large source of uncertainty in predicting the impact of
future climate change. The MSB program has served as a catalyst to understand
this issue by encouraging interdisciplinary collaborations with researchers in
computer science, geography, climatology, biology and ecology. The MSB program
is currently on hiatus to reassess program priorities and restructure future
iterations. This MSB meeting will be an integral part of this process, as it
will highlight the successes and discuss logistical challenges for MSB research.
Participant support requested in this proposal is especially important for
allowing greater participation and reflection among the diverse group of MSB
projects.

Understanding atmosphere-biosphere interactions and feedbacks under a changing
climate is an urgent need facing society. However, such large scale
understanding requires an interdisciplinary approach because of the complexity
of scaling up observations and model predictions in time and space. The MSB
program was formed in order to address this need and to provide a venue to
support inter-disciplinary collaborations. At this meeting, participants will
reflect upon the successes of and challenges facing MSB type research in the
future through a series of oral and poster presentations and breakout sessions.