* 1550302
* EAGER: Practical Graph Sparsification on GPUs
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2017
* Srinivasan Parthasarathy, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2017
* USD 111,168.00

A large number of real-world problems can be concisely abstracted and modeled as
a graph or a network. A fundamental challenge with processing and analyzing such
graphs is the issue of scale, millions or billions of nodes and billions and
trillions of edges. While advances in technology have led to the development of
faster and better architectures, simply porting existing codes to such
architectures will not suffice -- performance gains are typically not
commensurate with advances in technology in part due to the inherent data
movement costs associated with such algorithms. This project seeks to
investigate two complementary strategies (graph sparsification and architecture-
aware algorithm designs) to address this challenge head on. The key outcomes of
this research will be algorithmic and systemic innovations that can radically
impact next generation graph analytic systems. This effort is expected to
provide a model for the research, education and training of both undergraduate
and graduate students including those from under-represented groups.

With respect to innovation, practical graph sparsification strategies as a
generic strategy to scaling down the data movement requirements of modern graph
and network analysis algorithms will be investigated. Specifically, innovative
hashing-based approaches to accommodate edge directionality, weighted graphs,
and heterogeneous content will be developed. Additionally, radically new ways to
implement and re-architect such analysis algorithms on current and next
generation Graphics Processor Unit (GPU)-based systems while expicitly
accounting for data movement costs within the architecture will be designed.
Specifically, a novel sketching strategy will be employed for this purpose. In
terms of impact, the sparsification-based approach can be significant in terms
of the wide use and application of such strategies for scaling up tasks such as
link prediction, community discovery, and collective classification and
deploying them on modern GPUs. Exemplar outcomes are expected to include a high
performance GPU-based network analysis tools for data scientists, and the
interdisciplinary training of students in data mining, network science and high
performance computing leveraging research in pedagogy, in conjunction with Ohio
State University's new undergraduate major in data analytics.

For further information see the project web site at: http://www.cse.ohio-
state.edu/~srini/GraphSpar/