* 1550474
* EAGER: Diversity of Animal Immunity and Somatic DNA Modifications in the Sea Urchin
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2017
* Matan Oren, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* rollie clem
* 07/31/2017
* USD 300,000.00

Immunologists have searched for the origins of adaptive immunity in vertebrates
for years with only limited success. Knowledge of the origins and evolution of
this complex biological system can aid in understanding the details of its
characteristics, which will enable development of optimal approaches for solving
human diseases such as the targeted destruction of cancer cells. The sea urchin
genome has a unique set of immune genes that are turned on when pathogens are
detected, and which encode a large array of anti-microbial (i.e., defensive)
proteins that have similar structures. In the vertebrate adaptive immune system,
antibody genes are changed in immune cells by "cutting and pasting" their DNA
sequences by so-called RAG enzymes. The consequence of the RAG enzyme activity
is a shuffling of the DNA sequences that code for the antibodies, thereby
producing the adaptive variation in immune defense that is capable of responding
flexibly to new pathogens. The preliminary results presented in this project
show that there are changes to the sea urchin immune gene family suggesting that
the DNA sequences for these genes may also change by a "cut and paste"
mechanism. Sea urchins also have RAG enzymes similar to those of vertebrates.
The investigators propose to determine whether the sea urchin immune gene family
is altered by "cutting and pasting" events and if this is controlled by the sea
urchin RAG enzymes. If so, they will also identify the DNA targets that the RAG
enzymes use to change the immune gene family. Identifying a mechanism that
alters the structure of a sea urchin immune gene family by the "cut and paste"
mechanism, which is currently only known for vertebrates, is expected to have a
significant impact on our understanding of the evolutionary origin of, and
functioning of adaptive immune systems. The investigators propose to engage
scientists and non-scientists in discussions of how immune systems function at
local, national and international meetings. Minorities and underrepresented
groups will be identified and invited to participate. They will present a series
of hands-on demonstrations for local grade school children to teach them about
marine invertebrates, their ecology and how they can be used for scientific
research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Sp185/333 gene family in the purple sea
urchin has up to 60 genes, which are small, tightly clustered, and show
extraordinary sequence diversity. The Sp185/333 genes are expressed by
phagocytes in response to immune challenge, and single phagocytes express a
single Sp185/333 gene, inferring significant restriction of expression from the
family. Immune challenged coelomocytes show a new gene size compared to non-
challenged controls, which also show changes in the ratios of gene sizes among
different coelomocyte samples and compared to other adult tissues. The
investigators hypothesize that somatic changes to the Sp185/333 gene family may
be the basis for restricting the Sp185/333 gene expression in individual
phagocytes. They propose to characterize the structure of the Sp185/333 gene
family in single phagocytes using whole genome amplification, fragment (=
amplicon) size analysis, and amplicon sequencing. FISH will be used to detect
possible large scale changes to the Sp185/333 gene family structure. In
addition, they propose to identify enzymes that may be involved in the Sp185/333
DNA modifications and they will focus on RAG1/2 homologues plus TdT and Artemis,
all of which are expressed based on RNAseq data. Antibodies to SpRAG-2L will be
used with ChIP to capture chromatin from phagocytes to identify target sequences
to which SpRAG2L may bind. Results will be confirmed using chromatin sequences
identified by ChIP as baits for gel shifts with protein lysates from sea urchin
phagocytes. Bound proteins will be identified by MS. Results are expected to
provide information on immune diversification in sea urchin phagocytes that
enables them to keep pace in the arms race against their pathogens. The
mechanism(s) may be similar to that employed by vertebrates, and are expected to
broaden or perhaps alter our thinking about the evolution of animal immunity,
the origins of adaptive immunity, and will lead to new lines of investigation by
invertebrate immunologists.