* 1550871
* I-Corps: Improving software project outcomes
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2015,01/31/2016
* Daniel Sturtevant, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* lydia mcclure
* 01/31/2016
* USD 50,000.00

There is an overwhelming chance that any long-lived software project will be
troubled or will fail. As a result, billions of dollars are wasted worldwide. It
is believed that softwarecomplexity is a key factor. Code complexity, which
sometimes grows unsustainably over time, can significantly affect developers,
thereby impacting risk, revenue generation, productivity, cost, and business
survival. Over the past 10 years, this I-Corps team has done quantitative work
linking architectural degradation to business outcomes. This team has created
financial models linking software architecture and software economics data, and
tools that can help technologists evaluate and address high-value problems. This
I-Corps team believes that the proposed technologies, which could give managers
the ability to understand, monitor, estimate, and address code problems and the
resulting business impact, could create significant financial value. This team
aims to systematically explore the market potential of the proposed research and
technologies by doing iterative customer discovery and validation using
techniques pioneered by Steve Blank. The team also intends to use this process
to pull insights gathered from potential customers directly into our prototype
and product design process.

During the first eight-week phase of the project, this team aims to interview
100-150 potential customers representative of important segments such as 'people
in Fortune 1000 enterprises' and 'those doing diligence on software assets.' The
team plans to interview SMEs in person, using teleconferencing technology, and
at conferences such as the 'Agile Alliance' event in early August 2015. The goal
of this process will be to determine if market potential exists and to identify
important early beachheads. The team will use the business model canvas method
to capture information about segments, value ropositions, channels, partners,
customer relationships, etc. Another team goal is to learn how to manage a
routinized outreach process that could later be used to drive a disciplined
sales effort. In adition, the team will rapidly create and refine prototypes and
technology demonstrations to show people in key segments. The goal of these
prototypes will be to illustrate the potential of the proposed technology and
get market and product feedback. This I-Corps project will dramatically improve
and accelerate the team?s ability to identify (if it exists) the market
potential for a decade of academic research.