* 1550103
* EAGER: DG-SLAM: Differential Geometric Simultaneous Localization and Mapping
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2015,02/28/2019
* James Forbes, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Reid Simmons
* 02/28/2019
* USD 100,002.00

The research objective of this project is to further the state-of-the-art in
simultaneous localization and mapping (SLAM) methods for robotic vehicles. SLAM
is the process of building a map of the surrounding vehicle environment while
simultaneously localizing the vehicle relative to the map under construction.
This work is motivated by cooperative control of small, agile, aerial robotic
systems that are envisioned to execute tasks such as the transportation and
manipulation of payloads using grippers or cables, assembly and construction of
structures, and continuous surveillance and reconnaissance. The sensors these
vehicles typically use are corrupted by bias and high-frequency noise. On-board
computers are computationally limited as well. A computationally simple yet
effective online SLAM algorithm that is immune to bias and noise typical of on-
board sensors is crucial to the proliferation of autonomous robotic systems, and
the focus of the proposed research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses
on theoretical advancements to DG-SLAM that will make it more practicable.
Specifically, (a) how to account for measurement bias, and (b) how to use vector
measurements directly, will be the focus of the proposed research. These two
extensions of DG-SLAM are critical to the robustness, reliability, and ease of
implementation of DG-SLAM on real-world vehicles.