* 1550235
* Meeting: 2016 Neurobiology of Stress Workshop, Irvine California, April 12-15, 2016
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2016
* Tallie Z. Baram, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 07/31/2016
* USD 16,894.00

The goals of this four-day workshop on the Neurobiology of Stress are to bring
together researchers from diverse disciplines and at all professional levels
(undergraduate student to full professor) to share and discuss recent advances
in the neurobiology of stress research, promote intensive exchange of ideas
across disciplines, foster community among stress researchers, and nurture
professional development for trainees and junior faculty participants. This
workshop, which takes place in Newport Beach, CA, is the 4th of a biannual
workshop series that offers the only small forum focused on the neurobiology of
stress. The award provides support to junior faculty, trainees, and high school
science teachers to attend this workshop. The intellectual merit of the workshop
derives from its relatively small size, which promotes interactions and
extensive exchange of ideas among participants, the assembly of top
neuroscientists in the field of stress, and the multidisciplinary nature of the
plenary session topics. With a substantial fraction of the speakers being women
and about half of the participants being trainees, including trainees recruited
through national minority scientist networks, this workshop reaches out to and
offers opportunities for groups underrepresented in science. The inclusion of
local science high school teachers in this workshop seeds dissemination of
insights in classrooms. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The topics of this workshop on the
Neurobiology of Stress range from epigenetics and stress to evolutionary
perspectives on stress, and incorporate recent advances in molecular biology,
genetics, microbiotics, imaging, and systems biology. The format entails 5
plenary sessions with 4 speakers each; 2 roundtable sessions, one of which is
dedicated to mentoring of trainees in small informal groups; poster sessions
(trainee presenters only); and one keynote lecture. Workshop participants will
be invited to contribute manuscripts reporting findings related to workshop
topics to the open access journal Neurobiology of Stress. The broader impacts of
this workshop include broadening participation, extensive opportunity for
exchange across professional levels, and public outreach to the local schools.
These aspects, combined with the workshop's central goal of exchanging and
advancing promising new ideas in stress research, constitute long-term benefits
for the larger stress neurobiology community.