* 1550727
* EAGER:   Differences in the Job Mobility and Earnings of U.S. Scientists and Engineers
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2015,12/31/2016
* Rajshree Agarwal-Tronetti, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Maryann Feldman
* 12/31/2016
* USD 46,166.00

Advances in science, are underpinned by matching individual scientists and
engineers to jobs within science-based organizations. Mobility between jobs
ensures optimal matches between individuals and jobs. However, the existing
literature is largely silent on how individual characteristics pose as barriers
to mobility. This project explores gender differences in the mobility patterns
and earnings of U.S. scientists. The goal of this pilot project is to
investigate how family-related mobility constraints, particularly those related
to marital and child-rearing status, explain a considerable share of the
earnings disparity. The results are important for policy aimed at increasing
participation in the sciences and enabling individuals to realizing a full
return on their and society's investment in scientific human capital.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using the restricted access data-files in the National
Science Foundation's Scientists and Engineers Statistical Data System (SESTAT),
this project uses econometric techniques to understand in STEM education efforts
of potential selection effects that may cause men and women of similar ability
and preferences to sort into different science and engineering fields and labor
force. This project adopts an integrative framework that analyses the interplay
of gender, family status, mobility and earnings for scientists and
engineers.&lt;br/&gt;