* 1550532
* EAGER: Improving Resource Utilization Through Peer-to-Peer Resource Sharing Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2017
* Jennifer Pazour, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 08/31/2017
* USD 150,000.00

A novel way to increase resource efficiency is through the use of existing, idle
capacity. A Peer-to-Peer Resource Sharing System is one where a resource owned
by an individual is collectively shared with a group of users. The shared
resource can be a physical resource (like a power drill) or a human resource
(like the ability to perform a task). By focusing on access over ownership,
these Systems allow physical assets to be consumed as services and tasks to be
completed by independent individuals. A fundamental characteristic in these
Systems is that both supply and demand originate from independent freelance
users. Therefore, to match supply with demand in these Systems, a sequential
process is common. A central mechanism recommends a set of available
alternatives to decentralized users, who then select an alternative (or none at
all) based on the user's valuation of the alternatives. This EArly-concept Grant
for Exploratory Research (EAGER) award supports fundamental research to
understand how to effectively match independent individuals through a central
mechanism that allows for user selection. The new knowledge gained through this
research can lead to Peer-to-Peer Resource Sharing Systems that are better
understood, designed, and operated, which has the potential to positively impact
important systemic societal issues such as transportation congestion, rising
population increases, and limited natural resources. As the younger generation
is early adopters of these systems, the integration of this research with
educational and outreach activities has the potential to excite a new generation
of engineers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will improve understanding of
how to model and incorporate independent freelance user behavior into an
optimization framework and introduce a new class of problems that considers how
a central mechanism recommends a set of alternatives to decentralized users for
selection. It will develop high fidelity models that incorporate theories and
methods from the fields of recommender systems and consumer choice models to
describe user preferences and selection behaviors in Peer-to-Peer Resource
Sharing Systems. An outcome of decentralized user selection is that a 1-to-1
match of supply to demand does not always occur. Thus, a new understanding on
how to determine the best way to rectify the demand requests and supply slots
that have either been rejected or have duplicate selections will be explored. In
doing so, a number of questions about the design of sequential, simultaneous,
and hybrid protocols that match decentralized supply with demand will be
answered.