* 1550399
* EAGER: Viruses of the Protozoan Parasites Perkinsus spp.: Isolation and Characterization
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2018
* Joaquin Martinez Martinez, Bigelow Laboratory for Ocean Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Purnima Bhanot
* 07/31/2018
* USD 298,674.00

Oysters and clams are often challenged by parasites, including Perkinsus
species. Perkinsus spp., causative of Dermo disease, can lead to mass
mortalities of farmed and wild bivalve populations and hence have important
detrimental ecological and economic consequences. Perkinsus is on the World
Organization for Animal Health's list of reportable diseases. Most of the
studies aimed to understand and intervene against Dermo have centered in a game
of two: parasite and host. However, previous ultrastructural studies have shown
the presence of virus-like particles in the nucleus of the parasite. Yet,
nothing is known about these viruses' genetics, mechanism of infection, or
consequences on Perkinsus ecology. Research on other parasitic protozoa
(including some with human hosts) has revealed many interesting biological
phenomena that suggest that there is every reason to expect that viruses have a
profound effect on the propagation, life style and virulence of Perkinsus spp.
Proving viral infection of Perkinsus spp. and understanding the host's
functional responses to infections will represent a paradigm shift in our
thinking about Perkinsus spp. ecology and virulence toward their bivalve hosts.
Furthermore, it will open the door to new approaches for intervention against
the disease-causing agent. This project is considered high risk-high payoff
since, thus far, compelling evidence of viruses infectious to Perkinsus is based
on ultrastructural studies using electron microscopy, but information to assess
ease of virus isolation is lacking. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses
on isolating and characterizing viruses that infect Perkinsus spp. This is a
necessary first step toward understanding the dynamics of viral infection of
Perkinsus spp. cells and the effects of viruses on the propagation and virulence
of this protozoan parasite. In this study, work will focus on the three
Perkinsus spp. (P. marinus, P. chesapeaki, and P. olseni) for which there is
previous evidence of viral infection. The investigators will isolate viruses
specific to several Perkinsus strains already in culture as well as from new
Perkinsus spp. isolates. Effort will be put in establishing cultures from those
isolates and to optimize propagation and maintenance of the viruses in the
laboratory. They will also conduct growth curve experiments, and investigate the
effect of viral infection on Perkinsus physiology and as a potential trigger for
cell differentiation. Having well characterized model virus-host systems in
culture is essential to investigate the environmental parameters that affect
viral replication success and specificity. It will also aid in understanding the
mechanisms of virus-host interactions and their ecological and physiological
consequences through hypothesis driven experimental manipulation. Overall, this
project will help to evaluate the ubiquity of viruses that infect Perkinsus spp.
and the roles they play in shaping the life cycle and the virulence of these
parasites of bivalves.