* 1550574
* Salzburg Learning Symposium, Untapped Talent: Can Better Testing and Data Accelerate Creativity in Learning and Societies? (December 12 -19, 2015)
* SBE,SMA
* 12/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Susan Levine, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Soo-Siang Lim
* 05/31/2016
* USD 50,000.00

This proposal requests funding for eight American scientists to attend a meeting
at the Salzburg&lt;br/&gt;Global Symposium entitled, "Untapped Talent: Can
Better Testing and Data Accelerate&lt;br/&gt;Creativity in Learning and
Societies" The five day conference focuses on the current need
to&lt;br/&gt;develop assessments that measure skills critical for success in the
21st century workplace. &lt;br/&gt;Currently available assessments are not
adequate to tap these important skills, and have not been sufficiently connected
to instructional plans about how to build on areas of strength and bolster areas
of weakness. The goal of the symposium is to develop new pathways for people to
develop important skills and attitudes about learning, with particular attention
to identifying and developing these skills in marginalized groups at risk of
exclusion across generations. This session will specifically address the growing
demand for assessments that inform educational practice, helping educators
individualize instruction and improve learning.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Participation at this meeting will allow the sharing of
insights from a decade of cognitive and neuroscience research funded by NSF?s
Science of Learning Centers. This will facilitate the use of cutting edge
research on learning and assessment in action plans for the development of
innovative assessments. The scientists attending the conference will share
information about domains of knowledge that are both malleable and important for
STEM success, notably spatial learning, and the importance of assessing
attitudes about learning in addition to assessing knowledge and cognitive
skills. They will present recent advances in integrating assessments with
instruction, and the use of Big Data to make assessments efficient and
informative.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These interactions between scientists and
assessment professionals will also stimulate new research questions about how
people learn and the ways that assessment design and use can optimally be used
to identify and foster talent. The Salzburg Global Forum has a well-established
record of convening international meetings to tackle a wide-range of global
challenges through engagement of diverse constituencies and expertise from
scientists, education practitioners, and policy makers, government institutions,
industry leaders, entrepreneurs and other stakeholders. Participation of the US
scientists at this meeting will enable the dissemination of research about
learning to a diverse audience, not generally represented in conventional
scientific/professional meetings