* 1550929
* Understanding Chromium Redox Systematics Mafic Magmas:  Applications to Magmatic fO2 Calculations and Chromite Solubility
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2016,09/30/2018
* Aaron Bell, University of New Mexico
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 09/30/2018
* USD 285,761.00

Stratiform chromite deposits hosted in layered mafic intrusions are by far the
most economically important source of the element Chromium (Cr). Chromium is a
key ingredient required for the manufacturing of stainless steel alloys, as well
as a myriad of other technologically important 'super alloys'. While it is
widely accepted that the chromite deposits found in layered mafic intrusions are
a crystallization product of a parental magma body, the fundamental geochemical
processes that induce the crystallization of chromite in the magma bodies that
host these deposits are still poorly understood and the subject of much
scientific debate. One of the main objectives of this study is to quantify how
variables such as the chemical composition of a silicate melt and the oxidation
state of the Cr dissolved in the silicate melt affect the crystallization
behavior of chromite. The results generated from this study can be used to
deduce the chemical circumstances under which mafic magmas become saturated with
and crystallize chromite. In a broader context, the results of this study can
also be applied to quantifying the oxidation state of mafic magmas. Developing
new tools to quantify the oxidation state of basaltic magmas is a foundational
aspect of understanding the oxidation state of the earth?s mantle and a major
step toward understanding the speciation and mobility of volatile elements
between the deep earth and surficial reservoirs. This project will support a
masters or doctoral student at the University of New Mexico, as well as an
undergraduate student thesis. Both of these students will be trained in state-
of-the-art analytical and experimental techniques and assist in research
conducted at a U.S. synchrotron facility.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Understanding
chromite stability is a critical aspect of developing models for the formation
mechanisms of stratiform chromite ore deposits associated with layered mafic
intrusions. Chromite stability in basaltic magmas is influenced by variables
such as temperature, pressure, the chemical composition of the melt, and its
oxidation state (i.e. fO2). The primary objective of this study is to produce a
quantitative portrait of Cr-redox behavior and chromite stability in mafic
magmas and how it relates to the aforementioned variables. This study combines
high temperature-pressure petrology experiments conducted at the University of
New Mexico with X-ray Absorption Near Edge Structure (XANES) measurements of Cr
valence ratios in the experimentally grown olivine crystals and quenched melts.
The XANES measurements will be conducted at the Advanced Photon Source, Argonne
National Laboratory. The phase equilibria and Cr valence data generated by this
study will be used to develop a new geochemical model of chromite
crystallization in mafic magmas. Furthermore, the Cr valence measurements in
olivine crystals will be used to develop a new tool for assessing the fO2 of
basaltic magmas. A preliminary investigation has shown that the Cr-valence in
olivine records changes in fO2 that may have occurred during pheoncryst growth.
In this way, Cr valence measurements in olivine may be developed into a robust,
quantitative redox chronometer for magmatic systems.