* 1550790
* Opportunities for Minority Undergraduate and Graduate Students in STEM at the 2015 NOBCChE Annual Conference; Orlando, Florida; September 21-26, 2015
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Malinda Swoope, Alabama A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Bushey
* 05/31/2016
* USD 70,280.00

This award supports the participation of 100 undergraduate students, graduate
students, and postdoctoral students at the 42nd Annual National Organization for
the Professional Advancement of Black Chemists and Chemical Engineers (NOBCChE)
conference, held in Orlando, FL on September 21 - 26, 2015. Selected
participants are from underrepresented minority groups in the Science,
Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (STEM) fields who come from majority
institutions, Historically Black Colleges &amp; Universities (HBCUs), and
Hispanic Serving Institutions (HSIs). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award provides
opportunities for participants to engage in four major areas of focus: 1)
technical and professional development; 2) networking and mentorship
opportunities with professionals working in STEM fields; 3) exposure to high-
profile minority role models in STEM; and 4) career advancement opportunities.
Participants present their original research to a forum composed of industry,
government, and academic peers while meeting colleagues from other HBCU, MSI,
and majority institutions to develop research collaborations and to explore
opportunities to pursue graduate degrees in the chemistry or chemical
engineering disciplines. These opportunities may not only impact these specific
participating individuals, but also benefit the larger community of STEM field
practitioners as these activities are useful in recruiting and retaining
individuals from underrepresented talent pools. NOBCChE seeks to increase the
number of minorities in the STEM workforce. Results of this activity are
submitted for publication in peer-reviewed journals so that the indentified best
practices can be more widely adopted.