* 1550346
* SI2-SSI:Collaborative Research: ENKI: Software infrastructure that ENables Knowledge Integration for Modeling Coupled Geochemical and Geodynamical Processes
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Dimitri Sverjensky, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Seung-Jong Park
* 08/31/2020
* USD 217,827.00

Earth scientists seek to understand the mechanisms of planetary evolution from a
process perspective in order to promote the progress of science. They model the
chemistry of melting of the interiors of planets as a result of heat flow within
the body. They calculate the flows of energy and mass from the interior to the
surface. They model the interaction of fluids and rocks, which drives chemical
weathering and the formation of ore deposits. They seek to understand the
synthesis and stabilities of organic compounds and their economic and biological
roles. They study the interactions of atmosphere, oceans, biosphere and land as
a dynamically coupled evolving chemical system. To achieve this level of
understanding of planetary evolution, Earth scientists use software tools that
encode two fundamentally different types of models: (1) thermodynamic models of
naturally occurring materials, and (2) models of transport that track physical
flows of both fluids and solids. Much of the fundamental science of planetary
evolution lies in understanding coupled thermodynamic and transport models. This
grant funds development of a software infrastructure that supports this coupled
modeling of the chemical evolution of planetary bodies. It is their aim to
establish an essential and active community resource that will engage a large
number of researchers, especially early career scientists, in the exercise of
model building and customization.

This is a project to create ENKI, a collaborative model configuration and
testing portal that will transform research and education in the fields of
geochemistry, petrology and geophysics. ENKI will provide software tools in
computational thermodynamics and fluid dynamics. It will support development and
access to thermochemical models of Earth materials, and establish a standard
infrastructure of web services and libraries that permit these models to be
integrated into fluid dynamical transport codes. This infrastructure will allow
scientific questions to be answered by quantitative simulations that are
presently difficult to impossible because of the lack of interoperable software
frameworks. ENKI, via the adoption of state-of-the-art model interfacing
(OpenMI) and deployment environments (HubZero), will modernize how thermodynamic
and fluid dynamic models are used by the Earth science community in five
fundamental ways: (1) provenance tracking will enable automatic documentation of
model development and execution workflows, (2) new tools will assist users in
updating thermochemical models as new data become available, with the ability to
merge these data and models into existing repositories and frameworks, (3)
automated code generation will eliminate the need for users to manually code web
services and library modules, (4) visualization tools and standard test suites
will facilitate validation of model outcomes against observational data, (5)
collaborative groups will be able to share and archive models and modeling
workflows with associated provenance for publication. With these tools we seek
to transform the large community of model users, who currently depend on a small
group of dedicated and experienced researchers for model development and
maintenance, into an empowered ensemble of model developers who take ownership
of the process and bring their own expertise, intuition and perspective to
shaping the software tools they use in daily research. ENKI development will be
community driven. Participation of a dedicated and diverse group of early career
professionals will guide us in user interface development - insuring portal
capabilities are responsive to user needs, and in development of a rich set of
documentation, tutorials and examples. All software associated with this project
will be released as open source.