* 1550415
* Evaluating Mantle and Crustal Processes in Off-axis Volcanism on Iceland
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2021
* David Peate, University of Iowa
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 07/31/2021
* USD 250,479.00

Most volcanoes in Iceland are concentrated in a NE-SW rift that traverses the
center of the island. This rift marks where two tectonic plates are drifting
apart, which causes the underlying mantle rocks to rise and melt, forming magma
that creates volcanic eruptions at the surface. However, the reasons are less
clear why some volcanoes are found in the Snaefellsnes Peninsula in the western
part of Iceland (including Snaefellsj√∂kull - made famous in Jules Verne's novel
as the place where travellers could 'Journey to the Center of the Earth'). This
project aims to understand why and how the mantle melts in this region by
analysing the chemical composition of the lavas. From the size distribution and
chemical composition of crystals of specific minerals in lavas, it is possible
to determine how and where the crystals were formed, thereby revealing details
of what was happening at depth beneath each volcano prior to lavas eruption.
College-level teaching resources will be developed based on these samples that
integrate chemical data sets with field photographs and a web-based digital
virtual microscope, and made available to other educators. Public outreach
activities will be coordinated through the University of Iowa Museum of Natural
History, with the creation of a "Discovery Trunk" on Volcanoes for local schools
to use, and participation in the Museum's public lecture
series.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More attention has been given to melt
generation and storage in the Iceland rift zones because of their dominance on
melt production, but the reasons for melt generation at large (~100km+)
distances from the rifts, like at Snaefellsnes, remain uncertain. This project
will be the first in-depth study of primitive lavas in this off-axis zone that
focuses on how melts are generated and transported to the surface, to
investigate the underlying cause of melting and how details of melt aggregation
and transport through thick lithosphere contrasts with the extensional setting
and thinner lithosphere of the rift zones. Crystallization depths will be
estimated from glass analyses (using ol-cpx-plag saturation) and clinopyroxene
thermobarometry, and melt diversity will be characterized with olivine-hosted
melt inclusions and clinopyroxene compositions. Radiogenic isotopes and U-series
disequilibria will be used to provide insights into the compositional
heterogeneity and melting behavior of mantle sources and the process of melt
extraction, and additional constraints on the details of melting will come from
REE inversion models. The potential of high-precision minor element analyses of
olivines to show involvement of non-peridotite sources for off-axis magmas will
also be evaluated. The project will provide training in research methods and
data acquisition/interpretation for a Ph.D. student, and research experiences
for undergraduates. Results will be disseminated through journal articles and
conference presentations.