* 1550213
* NeTS: NSF NeTS Early-Career Investigators Workshop 2015
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2016
* Aditya Akella, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 07/31/2016
* USD 75,000.00

This award supports a workshop aimed at developing the early career NeTS
research community to work on key emerging challenges and pursue challenging
research agendas in the areas of computer and information networking. This
workshop will provide early career participants the opportunity to engage in
discussions with peers to share perspective and build research collaborations.
The workshop will also include keynote and plenary talks from leaders in the
field of networking on various topics pertaining to build successful research
programs and identifying strong research problems. Furthermore, a group of
invited mentors will actively steer discussions during breakout sessions to
enable participants to find interesting and rich topics to discuss. The workshop
will involve participants and invitees spanning a variety of topics in
networking, including for example, wired and wireless networks, theory and
systems, modeling, measurement, and network economics.

Intellectual Merit: This workshop presents an opportunity for rich exchange of
research ideas among early career NeTS researchers and leaders in the field of
networking. The participants will have opportunities to learn about how to do
high-impact research in networking from the leaders in the area. If successful,
the workshop may also seed strong cross-cutting research collaborations on
cutting-edge problems in networking.

Broader Impacts: This workshop provides an opportunity to bring together early
career researchers in different areas of networking to engage in discussions and
form rich collaborations and to learn about key elements of building a
successful research career, e.g., how to build successful large research
programs, and how to identify good research problems. The workshop participants
will produce a publicly-available report describing the invited talks as well as
the discussions during break sessions.