* 1550222
* EAGER: GOALI: Perfluoro(poly)ethers - a new class of drinking water contaminants
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2015,09/30/2017
* Detlef Knappe, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 09/30/2017
* USD 89,849.00

1550222 Knappe

Because of their persistence, bioaccumulation potential, and (eco)toxicity,
long-chain perfluoroalkyl substances such as perfluorooctanoic acid and
perfluorooctane sulfonate are being replaced with short-chain fluorinated
alternatives. Almost no information exists about the occurrence of fluorinated
alternatives and their behavior during water treatment. The overall goal of the
proposed research is to begin to fill this knowledge gap by studying one class
of fluorinated alternatives, perfluoro(poly) ethers.

Specific research objectives include to: (1) develop a quantitative liquid
chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry method for the analysis of 13
perfluoro(poly) ethers in water, (2) apply the liquid chromatography-tandem mass
spectrometry method to (a) determine perfluoro(poly) ether fate in a surface
water, (b) quantify perfluoro(poly) ether concentrations and mass flows at the
intake of a water treatment plant, (3) in collaboration with the water utility,
trace parcels of water through the plant to quantify perfluoro(poly) ether
removal/transformation in full-scale water treatment processes, and (4) trace
parcels of water through the water distribution system to determine
perfluoro(poly) ethers fate during drinking water distribution. This data would
be used to estimate human exposure to perfluoro(poly) ethers via consumption of
drinking water. Given the data scarcity surrounding fluorinated alternatives, it
is anticipated that the results of this research will receive wide interest.