* 1550290
* Collaborative Research:  Submarine Melting of Greenland's Glaciers: What are the relevant ocean dynamics?
* GEO,OCE
* 05/01/2015,09/30/2015
* Patrick Heimbach, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 09/30/2015
* USD 27,450.00

Intellectual Merit: Submarine melting of Greenland's glaciers has emerged as a
key term in the ice sheet?s mass balance and as a plausible trigger for their
recent acceleration, which contributed to doubling Greenland's contribution to
sea-level rise. Notwithstanding its importance, our understanding of submarine
melting is limited and it is presently absent or crudely parameterized in
glacier, ice sheet and climate models. Greenland's tidewater glaciers end in
about 600 to 800 m deep, long fjords that connect the margins of the ice sheet
to the shelf. The glaciers termini are typically grounded several hundreds of
meters below sea-level and, as such, are exposed to a thick portion of the
fjord's water column. Unique data, recently collected by two of the
investigators, from two large glacial fjords in south-east Greenland show that
these are filled year-round with cold, fresh waters of Arctic origin and warm,
salty waters of subtropical origin whose different properties influence the
circulation at the ice-edge. Furthermore, ship-based and moored velocity
measurements show that the fjords are characterized by fast, highly variable,
sheared flows and a vigorous fjord/shelf exchange which, likely, play a role in
transporting heat to the glaciers termini. The implication is that submarine
melt rates depend on a suite of oceanic processes including externally forced
fjord circulations, fjord/shelf exchange and the distribution of properties on
the shelf. Yet, the details of how these processes may contribute to the
submarine melt rate or affect its variability are presently
unknown.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will fill this gap by combining the
analysis of ship-based and moored data from the two fjords with a hierarchy of
models (laboratory and numerical) to identify the parameters and mechanisms
which control the properties and circulation in the fjords and the rate of
submarine melting at the ocean/glacier interface. Having identified the controls
on the submarine melt rate, the project investigators will then use historical
oceanographic and atmospheric data to determine fjord conditions and submarine
melt rates for the period preceding the acceleration of the glaciers when no
fjord data are available. Climate model predictions will be used to estimate the
potential impact of future oceanic variability on submarine melting of
Greenland?s glaciers. Collaborations with experts in outlet glacier dynamics,
the physics of the ice-ocean boundary and fjord circulations will provide
expertise in related disciplines and a two-way exchange of information for this
intrinsically multidisciplinary problem. The work proposed is aimed at
understanding a newly discovered wiring of the climate system: that ocean
variability can have a rapid and direct impact on the Greenland's ice sheet mass
balance. It is timely because of the large and unpredicted changes that are
occurring in Greenland and relevant because ice sheet/ocean interactions are
presently absent from climate and ice sheet/glacier models. It is complementary
to the study of ice sheet/ocean interactions around Antarctica (the more studied
of the two) since both the large-scale ocean circulation and the presence of
narrow, long fjords in Greenland contribute a unique set of relevant dynamical
mechanisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This work seeks to increase
our understanding of a previously overlooked, important connection in our
climate system which has profound implications for our ability to accurately
predict sea-level rise - an issue of grave and immediate societal concern. It is
expected that results from this work will contribute to the inclusion of the
relevant dynamics (even if in parameterized form) in future models and, as such,
lead to the improvement of future sea level predictions. The work plan involves
several international experts from complementary fields and, as such, will
contribute to fostering interactions between the multiple disciplines involved
and beyond national boundaries. It involves two graduate students and one post-
doc who will be exposed to a cutting-edge problem and multidisciplinary team of
researchers. Results from this project will be widely disseminated to scientists
across disciplines, as demonstrated by the PIs long-track of organizing summer
schools and working groups, and to the public through different media outlets,
as shown by the recent coverage of the investigators' Greenland work in venues
that include the Museum of Science in Boston, the New York Times, the Weather
Channel and Italian National Television.