* 1550730
* EAGER: Collaborative Research: Cyber-Eye: Empowering Learning through Remote Visualizations using Unmanned Aerial Systems
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2017
* Pasha Antonenko, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 08/31/2017
* USD 58,145.00

The Cyberlearning and Future Learning Technologies Program funds efforts that
will help envision the next generation of learning technologies and advance what
we know about how people learn in technology-rich environments. This project
explores the possibility of using Unmanned Aerial System (UAS) technology to
support learning in construction engineering and management courses. Today,
construction projects are becoming increasingly more complex. Students can learn
about how projects unfold through field trips to build sites, but expense,
timing, and safety precautions make it hard for students to see how a variety of
construction projects unfold in time and space. This project will help students
learn about construction projects by using unmanned aerial vehicles to record
video of build sites over time; students and their teachers will be able to
select important project aspects to view, and recorded video will help establish
a case library for future students to see how the realities of job sites differ
from contstruction documents.

This project focuses on facilitating the integration of procedural and
configurational knowledge in construction and engineering management by
supporting teaching of spatio-temporal constraints through case-based reasoning.
The CyberEye system will be built and refined through iterative design of two
components: first, the remote video and image generation component, which will
integrate the aerial vehicle, a ground control station, and a communications and
control platform to allow the cameras to capture desired aspects of the
construction site; and second, a system to support learner access to the video,
which will support creation of instructive cases, allow instructor and student
planning and input of aerial missions (both synchronously and asynchronously),
and archiving and reflective viewing for learners. The system will study both
the learning outcomes and propose design principles using a four-iteration
design-based research methodology implemented in college-level construction
engineering courses. Semi-structured interviews and participant observation will
be used to support formative evaluation, while pre-post experimental comparison
will gauge the impact of the CyberEye intervention on student learning and
especially spatial reasoning within the CEM domain for each iteration.