* 1550850
* The Role Of Resource Control In The Development Of Social Complexity
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2016,09/30/2021
* Mitch Hendrickson, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 09/30/2021
* USD 240,867.00

Dr. Mitch Hendrickson, at the University of Illinois at Chicago, and his
international collaborative team, is undertaking research on the role of iron
production in the expansion of medieval states, with specific focus on the
Angkorian Khmer Empire in Cambodia. Iron has long been viewed as an important
catalyst for societal development yet few studies have effectively demonstrated
evidence of changes in the scale of production or the impact that sudden access
to high quality sources had on agricultural, architectural and military
activities. Archaeology offers critical new insight into the way that iron was
made, distributed and consumed over time as well as identifying the type of
political-economic relationships between the state and local stake holders who
lived around major resources. Fundamental to this investigation is how and why
do major sources suddenly become a critical part of state development? New
technologies and increased access are two important factors enabling control
over resources that were often known but left untouched for hundreds of years.
Parallel processes are witnessed today within the oil and gas industry and the
expansion of China?s global resource interests across Asia and
Africa.&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Hendrickson?s team will investigate whether
intensification and control of industrial activities were responsible for vast
and sudden imperial expansion in the past. The geographic focus of the project
is the Phnom Dek region in central Cambodia, the largest iron ore source
available to the Angkorian Khmer Empire. The research team comprising
archaeologists, archaeometallurgists, paleobotanists, and geologists will record
the spatial and temporal history of industrial production and the relationship
between the state consumers and local producers over a period of five hundred
years. Excavation and intensive survey of smelting sites will identify critical
changes in production technology and corresponding shifts in the quantity and
quality of iron used for tools and weapons. The impact of this industrial
history will be examined on two levels. First, what type of control did the
state exert over the groups responsible for producing iron? Second, is there a
direct correlation between increased production and major architectural building
episodes and military campaigns undertaken by the Khmer Empire? The results will
provide a dynamic history of resource management and political process that will
become a benchmark for understanding the successes and failures of states and
their impact on manufacturing communities. In addition to providing new
opportunities for education and student training this project will generate
important regional databases on metallurgical technology, the archaeomagnetic
intensity curve of the earth, and industrial forest management that will be
generally available and have broad, immediate scientific significance.