* 1550307
* EAGER: Exploratory Research on Rock Damage from Geologic and Induced Thermal Loading
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2018
* Elizabeth Holley, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 07/31/2018
* USD 317,049.00

The behavior of rock under short- and long-term thermal excursions is a critical
knowledge gap in rock science and engineering disciplines. Such advanced
understanding will be important in many applications, including mined and civil
excavations, in situ resource extraction or geothermal development for which
excavations will be extended into rock masses at elevated temperatures. Most
analyses have focused on rock stress as result of tectonics and depth. With
insight into how thermal changes influence the fabric and structure of the rock,
new excavation methods and technologies may be developed that lead to a truly
engineered design of thermally-induced rock breakage. The most relevant
questions to be investigated are: How does the PT (Pressure-Thermal) history of
intact rock (and a rock mass) induce damage and influence behavior? Which
mechanisms are most important in influencing the changes in mechanical structure
of heated rock? How do these mechanisms influence excavatability, stability and
strength? This EArly-concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) project
involves geology, civil and mining engineering, and extractive metallurgy and
mineral processing. This multi-disciplinary approach will help broaden
participation of underrepresented groups in research and positively impact
engineering education.

The assessment of induced damage will involve rocks with well-defined thermal
and stress history and composition. Rock samples will be subjected to additional
selective heat-treatment (e.g., microwaves) in dry and saturated states, and the
resulting damage and changes in properties will be evaluated using thin section
petrography, optical cathodoluminescence, scanning electron microscopy and
automated mineralogy. Investigations of geologic damage caused by thermal and
stress history (e.g., skarns in the contact zone of local metamorphism,
pegmatitic intrusions) will study samples from core and mined exposures. The
temperature and pressure history will be evaluated using geothermobarometry of
mineral pairs and placed in regional context based on existing thermochronology
studies (e.g. U-Pb/He thermochronology of apatite and zircon). These results
will be compared with those from experiment 1) to identify cracking behavior and
generation of stresses and damage at grain boundaries as result of heating.
Finally, numerical simulation of thermal loading of will be analyzed numerically
and the results will be compared to the experimental observations.