* 1550565
* I-Corps:  Digital Loft: A Learning Platform for Instructors and Trainers
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2015,01/31/2016
* Elizabeth Gerber, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* lydia mcclure
* 01/31/2016
* USD 50,000.00

Societal problems, such as climate change, poverty, and illiteracy, can only be
solved with social innovators - people who understand societal challenges in
context, design new technologies, and can work with diverse stakeholders. To
become social innovators, learners must gain experience tackling complex,
illstructured design challenges that are not easily solved by a single
individual within a fixed time frame. This makes innovation difficult to teach:
individual mentoring is effective but expensive; extra-curricular environments
provide flexibility but insufficient guidance; and classroom instruction is too
rigid and timebound for solving complex public problems. Social innovators can
better be developed via social innovation networks - learner communities
collaborating to solve real-world problems. Social innovation networks: a) teach
learners to design solutions to real problems, b) are led by learners and
supported by faculty and professional experts, c) extend nationally through a
network of local hubs and d) have pro-social missions. Unfortunately, such
networks are difficult to orchestrate: facilitators must coordinate many project
teams with varying levels of expertise and work on different problems to address
unpredictable needs of community clients. This project will test the design
argument that digital studios can help social innovation networks develop
innovators through pedagogical affordances that create networked teaching hubs
in support of learner-driven projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project
will develop an understanding of the customer needs inherent in social
innovation networks and develop sustainable business model to commercialize the
proposed Loft platform. Analysis of digital studios in innovation networks will
include interviews, observation, and surveys and empirically grounded design
principles. It will build novel systems based on new insights and evaluate
developed tools and methods through software deployments. The team's
researchers, designers, and programmers from Northwestern University's Segal
Design Institute, School of Education &amp; Social Policy, and industry have
expertise in cyberlearning, innovation education, peer production, web
development, and scaling educational initiatives. As a new cyberlearning genre,
the proposed Loft digital studio has the potential to radically change who
innovates and how people innovate. Developing core principles for designing
successful digital studios for innovating education will contribute to
cyberlearning research areas, including badging, peer production, learning-by-
cases, design-based learning, and online learning communities.