* 1550261
* Workshop: The United States and Germany Collaborative Research in Advanced Manufacturing; Bonn, Germany; February 10-12, 2016
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2016
* Barbara Linke, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 07/31/2016
* USD 46,466.00

This award provides partial support for an NSF and German Research Foundation
workshop to foster collaborative research between the United States and Germany.
Both the United States and Germany have vibrant manufacturing sectors, pervasive
technology proliferation, and high wages. Both countries rank among the world
leaders for technological sophistication, high technology product development
and advanced manufacturing activity. Both countries have strong support for
scientific and engineering research, and there are significant overlap and
synergies between the funded research portfolios. While there are potential
areas for collaboration, there are few venues where research topics that are
mutually beneficial can be identified. This workshop will discuss mechanisms of
collaborations between the United States and Germany in manufacturing research,
and recommendations for the roles NSF and German Research Foundation can play in
fostering such collaborations. Results of this workshop can also be useful to
fostering collaborations between the two countries in other
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop will be held in Bonn, Germany,
February 10-12, 2016. About 15-20 advanced manufacturing researchers from each
country will participate in the workshop. The objectives of the workshop are to:
(1) examine research needs in advanced manufacturing across a range of
technologies; (2) identify needs, gaps and challenges facing advanced
manufacturing; (3) identify best practices of collaborations between the United
States and Germany in manufacturing; (4) formulate recommendations for future
joint research initiatives; (5) provide a forum for researchers from the United
States and Germany to network and develop future collaborations; and (6)
identify administrative / organizational / structural challenges for
international collaborations observed by researchers in both countries.