* 1550234
* SI2-SSI: Collaborative Research: Paratreet: Parallel Software for Spatial Trees in Simulation and Analysis
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2018
* Thomas Quinn, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 08/31/2018
* USD 139,977.00

Many scientific and visualization methods involve organizing the data they are
processing into a hierarchy (also known as a "tree"). These applications and
methods include: astronomical simulations of particles moving under the
influence of gravity, analysis of spatial data (that is, data that describes
objects with respect to their relative position in space), photorealistic
rendering of virtual environments,reconstruction of surfaces from laser scans,
collision detection when simulating the movement of physical objects, and many
others. Tree data structures, and the algorithms used to work on these
structures, are heavily used in these applications because they help to make
these applications run much faster on supercomputers. However, implementing
tree-based algorithms can require a significant effort, particularly on modern
highly parallel computers. This project will create ParaTreet, a software
toolkit for parallel trees, that will enable rapid development of such
applications. Details of the parallel aspects will be hidden from the
programmer, who will be able to quickly evaluate the relative merits of
different trees and algorithms even when applied to large datasets and very
computation-intensive applications. The combination of such an abstract and
extensible framework with a portable adaptive runtime system will allow
scientists to effectively use parallel hardware ranging from small clusters to
petascale-class machines, for a wide variety of tree-based applications. This
project will demonstrate the feasibility of such an approach as well as generate
evidence of community adoption of this technology. If successful, this project
will enable NSF-supported researchers to solve science problems faster as well
as to tackle more complex problems, thus serving NSF's science
mission.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project builds upon an existing
collaboration on Computational Astronomy and the resultant software base in the
ChaNGa (Charm N-body GrAvity solver) code. ChaNGa is a software package that
performs collisionless N-body simulations, and can perform cosmological
simulations with periodic boundary conditions in co-moving coordinates or
simulations of isolated stellar systems. This project will extend ChaNGa with a
parallel tree toolkit called ParaTreet and associated applications, that will
allow scientists to effectively utilize small clusters as well as very large
supercomputers for parallel tree-based calculations. The key data structure in
ParaTreet is an asynchronous software-based tree data cache, which maintains a
writeback local copy of remote tree data. We plan to support a variety of
spatial decomposition methods and the associated trees, including Oct-trees, KD-
trees, inside-outside trees, ball trees, R-trees, and their combinations.
Different trees are useful in different application circumstances, and the
software will allow their relative merits to be evaluated with relative ease.
The framework will support a variety of parallel work decomposition methods,
including those based on space filling curves, and support dynamic rearrangement
of parallel work at runtime. The algorithms supported will range from Barnes-Hut
with various multipole expansions, data clustering, collision detection, surface
reconstruction, ray intersection, etc. The software includes a collection of
dynamic load balancing strategies in the Charm++ framework that can be tuned for
specific problem structures. It also includes support for clusters of
accelerators, such as GPGPUs. This project will demonstrate the feasibility of
such an approach as well as generate evidence of community adoption of this
technology.