* 1550446
* Collaborative Research: The Role Of Ritual And Hierarchical Social Structure In Mediating Culture Change
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Enrique Rodriguez-Alegria, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2020
* USD 77,494.00

Dr. Kristin De Lucia of Weber State University and Dr. Enrique Rodríguez-Alegría
of the University of Texas at Austin will undertake research to investigate the
roles of religion and ritual in the construction of power during the growth of
empires and in situations of conquest. Anthropologists have long studied to the
study of the role of religion in political life and have noted how leaders
frequently appropriate rituals and symbolism to create a sense of legitimacy,
political solidarity, and to constitute power. The Aztecs, for example employed
ritual sacrifice as a means of supporting conquest and legitimizing their own
rule. After the Spanish conquest of Mexico, religion continued to be one of the
varied strategies of domination used by colonizers, along with violence,
coercion, and negotiation. Such processes are not unique to the past but may
also be found in the modern world, particularly in situations of religious
fundamentalism. How do leaders use religion to recruit new followers? What
strategies work and which ones do not? If one can better understand these
tactics, it will be possible to shed light on how these processes both shaped
the past and play out today. Archaeology is uniquely suited to study the long-
term influences of religion on political life as it is the only discipline that
allows us to look at change over long periods of time. This research is also
important because it will provide undergraduate and graduate students with
opportunities to gain training and experience in both archaeological excavation
and laboratory analysis. The researchers will likewise work closely with
community members to enhance knowledge of local history and archaeology and to
promote science and learning among adults and
youth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although it is known that religion played an
important role in both Aztec and later Spanish domination, there is still little
understanding of how and when elites appropriated and manipulated popular
cosmologies, how provincial elites related to the religion of the capital, and
how ordinary people responded to religious change. In order to better understand
these processes, the investigators will conduct archaeological research at the
pre-Hispanic regional center of Xaltocan, in the Basin of Mexico. The case-study
of Xaltocan is particularly important since researchers are able to examine
change spanning its 1,100-year history from the site?s initial founding as a
small community, its growth into an important political center, and its eventual
conquest by the Aztec Empire, and finally, the Spanish Empire. The research team
will excavate ritual sites dating to the pre-Hispanic through colonial periods,
including a possible pre-Hispanic temple, using rigorous scientific
methodologies including ground penetrating radar (GPR), large-scale horizontal
excavation, chemical analysis of living surfaces, and the analysis of micro-
remains. These interdisciplinary datasets will permit examining long-term change
in ritual practice and they will provide a better understanding of the
strategies of intermediate elites, such as those of conquered towns like
Xaltocan. This project will contribute to the literature on intermediate elites
in ways that should be of interest to scholars in Aztec studies, anthropology,
and religious studies.