* 1550488
* SI2-SSI: Integrating the NIMBLE Statistical Algorithm Platform with Advanced Computational Tools and Analysis Workflows
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2022
* Perry de Valpine, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 09/30/2022
* USD 999,709.00

The software developed in this project will enable scientists to learn more from
complex data and to share new analysis methods more easily. Increasingly,
scientists in many fields aim to draw sound conclusions from large and complex
data sets. Such fields include environmental biology, political science,
education research, atmospheric and oceanic science, climate science, and many
others. Data may be complex because many related variables are measured and/or
because some measurements are not independent from each other. Non-independence
can arise when some variables are measured repeatedly through time; or when
measurements are made at nearby locations; or when measurements are made on
groups of related individuals; or for a combination of those and other similar
reasons. For such cases, general statistical methods have been developed to
allow researchers to tailor their analysis to each data set in order to account
for the relationships among the data. Such methods rely on computer algorithms
to explore the range of possible conclusions given the uncertainties inherent in
limited data. Within those general methods there are many varieties of specific
approaches that have been and continue to be developed. Thus, a major software
gap has emerged: Many new and evolving methods are not easily available for
application by a wide range of scientists because there has not been a software
framework that makes them easy to program and disseminate. This project will
support continued development of the NIMBLE software to help fill that gap. As a
result, scientists will be able to use computational analysis methods more
flexibly, to combine and compare different algorithms more easily, to integrate
such algorithms into other software workflows, and to gain better computational
performance. This will enable more advanced and more routine use of some modern
computational methods for analyzing complex data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
existing NIMBLE framework for hierarchical statistical models and algorithms
comprises a model specification language, a language for programming model-
generic algorithms within the R statistical environment, and a compiler that
generates, compiles and interfaces to model- and algorithm-specific C++ for
efficient execution. These enable general implementation and dissemination of
methods such as Markov chain Monte Carlo, sequential Monte Carlo, and many
related methods. In this project NIMBLE will be extended and generalized to be
more powerful and flexible, enabling use in a variety of software workflows.
Extensions to NIMBLE's core capabilities will include harnessing automatic
differentiation and parallelization in generated C++, enhancements to its
existing linear algebra capabilities, more efficient implementation of large
statistical models including those with structural uncertainty such as latent
group membership, and extensions to the statistical modeling language.
Enhancements to facilitate integration of NIMBLE-generated models and algorithms
with other software will include generation of stand-alone executables,
generation of clearly defined application-programmer interfaces such as for use
by Python, features to call user-provided libraries from algorithm code,
features to load and save data via standard formats such as JSON and NetCDF, and
separation of NIMBLE components into distinct packages. The project will include
substantial outreach, training, and user community development. These activities
will include development of uses cases in fields such as population and
ecosystem ecology, oceanography, climate science, political science, and
education. They will also include workshops, user meetings, key-user visits, and
training material. This award by the Advanced Cyberinfrastructure Division is
jointly supported by the NSF Directorate for Mathematical and Physical Sciences
(Division of Mathematical Sciences).