* 1550822
* EAGER research: Gas exchange over the air-water interface of freshwater systems
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Michael Pace, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Blood
* 08/31/2018
* USD 284,994.00

This EAGER project (EArly-concept Grant for Exploratory Research) explores a new
way to more accurately measure the exchange of oxygen, carbon dioxide and
methane between the water and the air above streams, lakes and rivers. This is a
critically important process in ecosystems, yet current measurement approaches
are difficult to employ and all have substantial weaknesses. If proven, this new
approach would fundamentally change our understanding of gas exchange processes
for aquatic ecosystems. Project findings will be disseminated through web site
development, sessions and workshops at international meetings, and scientific
papers. Undergraduate and graduate students will be trained in high frequency
data acquisition with complex instruments and analysis of big data produced in
this project. The new procedures will be tested and evaluated at field sites
that have been the focus of considerable other support related to the prediction
of tipping points in aquatic ecosystems; if this new approach works, these other
studies will immediately benefit.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A new dual oxygen-
temperature sensor will enable two parallel independent estimates for the
exchange coefficient, one based on the oxygen flux and one on the heat flux. The
core novel idea is to apply this tested approach upside down right below the
air-water interface and from measured vertical gas fluxes and concentrations
below and above the interface, calculate the much sought after gas exchange
coefficient. Measurements will be performed from two platforms, a stationary one
for shallow rivers and streams with unidirectional flow, and a small radio-
controlled moving surface vessel for reservoirs and lakes without consistent
well-defined current flows.