* 1550792
* Summit on Global Sustainability in Engineering Education: Developing Knowledge and Planning for Strategic Processing
* ENG,EEC
* 09/15/2015,10/31/2016
* Jorge Rodriguez, James Madison University
* Standard Grant
* Carmina Londono
* 10/31/2016
* USD 48,268.00

Sustainability has become a very important topic in engineering education.
According to Outcome H of the Accreditation Board for Engineering and Technology
(ABET) engineers need to have "the broad education necessary to understand the
impact of engineering solutions in a global, economic, environmental, and
societal context." Therefore in order for engineers to fulfill their
responsibility to find sustainable solutions to worldwide challenges new
graduates must have the necessary knowledge, skills, and awareness to discover
viable, desirable, and feasible solutions that include sustainability concepts.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs are convening a "Summit on Global Sustainability
in Engineering Education" to: (a) gather a select group of researchers to
explore pedagogical models that incorporate sustainability awareness and
principles in engineering education; (b) formulate action plans for developing
and deploying said learning modules; and (c) introduce global sustainability
awareness at different universities in the Americas. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;All
participants are required to disseminate Summit and post-Summit results through
conference publications. The PIs will target dissemination through the Latin
American and Caribbean Consortium of Engineering Intuitions and the ASEE Annual
Conference &amp; Exposition. In addition all materials developed based on the
Summit will be posted and available online.