* 1550220
* EAGER: Collaborative Research: Examining Links Between Innovation and Economic Development Using Business R&D and Innovation Survey Microdata
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2017
* Marc Doussard, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 08/31/2017
* USD 37,104.00

This Early-Concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) will support a project
that will use Business R&D and Innovation Survey (BRDIS) microdata to test
whether innovation results in job growth and whether particular types of
innovation and industries generate more growth than others. The project will
provide information and insights regarding the linkages between innovation and
economic development by identifying the impact of specific types of innovative
activities on industry-level growth in output and employment. Project results
will provide information about the relative contribution of different types of
technological, product, and process innovations to employment growth. Because
the investigators will evaluate the role that industry characteristics play in
converting innovation into economic outcomes, the project will provide framework
for relating research on innovation to the goal of economic development. By
distinguishing a variety of relationships among types of innovation, types of
industries, and economic development, the project will help to adjust and expand
innovation policies currently focused on high-technology sectors.

The investigators will conduct statistical analyses of a range of distinctive
valuables in the BRDIS database developed by the U.S. Bureau of the Census,
including variables that deal with prototyping, product innovation, process
innovation, and other innovation activities. They will conduct systematically
test the many of the policy-relevant conclusions of existing case-study
research, and they will extract industry-level innovation and employment
indicators that can be used by other researchers. This EAGER-supported project
responded to a Dear College Letter issued by the NSF Science of Science and
Innovation Policy (SciSIP) Program designed to facilitate the use of STAR
METRICS, NCSES, and other databases in order to evaluate relationships among
science funding, employment, and outcome metrics.