* 1550590
* I-Corps:  Portable Hands Free Medical Suction Device for Combat and Emergency Medicine
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2016
* Yusheng Feng, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 07/31/2016
* USD 50,000.00

During emergency situations the primary priority of a responder is to create and
maintain a patient's airway. Once an airway has been established the responder
then works to determine the location of any hemorrhages and staunch the blood
loss. How quickly and efficiently a responder can accomplish these tasks often
determines the probability of survival of the patient. This is especially true
for scenarios where a responder is dealing in a remote location. Skilled
interventions often make the critical difference in survival for patients with
actual or impending airway compromise and/or hemorrhaging. Creating, managing,
and maintaining an airway in combination with stopping blood loss are difficult
in the best of situations. An operation or response where a well-equipped
hospital is not available generates additional layers of unique and complex
challenges. Emergency care providers lack some of the advanced life saving tools
normally available in hospitals such as high-powered suction, which may not be
available or effective when responding to patients in the field. In even more
hazardous environments such as during military operations, the confined spaces
and hostile action limit the ability to intervene with an artificial airway or
assisted ventilation for wounded soldiers. Therefore, the development of a
powerful, lightweight, handheld vacuum suction device would greatly enhance the
ability of a military medic to clear and maintain a soldier's airway, as well as
the ability to clear wounds and stop bleeding. For most triage injuries the
ability to have intermittent but effective suctioning increases the chance of
survival significantly until a higher level of emergency care can be applied.

Suction is a critical yet simple and effective way to clear and maintain an
emergency airway, or allow a responder to locate the source of a hemorrhage in
debris filled wound. But, despite how critical suction is to saving patients, it
remains one of the most difficult functions to perform in remote medical
environments due to the lack of adequate tools. Therefore, the ultimate goal for
this I-Corps team is to prototype, test, and prepare for manufacture a portable
suction device for use in emergency airway management and hemorrhage control.
The device under development is intended to replace current devices on the
market, which are unsatisfactory in terms of effectiveness, portability, suction
power, and particulate removal. Ongoing work in the lab has led to early
designs, and the continued development of a suction device would greatly enhance
the ability of emergency responders and military providers to care for
critically wounded patients. Continued work will consist of development and
implementation of a design feedback and control system to meet the needs of
emergency care and ensure patient safety. This proposed project will provide a
systematic marketing study and define device performance specifications. In
addition, incorporation of customer feedback will be blended with the
engineering design process to ensure that the final product will be the best
solution for the customer. Finally, fluid dynamic analysis, mathematical
modeling, and verification and validation will be applied to ensure the efficacy
and safety of the device for human use, and to ensure that the device preforms
to the level that will be outlined in the specifications.