* 1550918
* CAREER: Multiscale stochastic processes, Monte Carlo Methods and Irreversibility
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2022
* Konstantinos Spiliopoulos, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 05/31/2022
* USD 479,977.00

One of the challenges facing today applied mathematics and probability is to
obtain accurate and provably efficient methods to approximate and simulate a
range of complex systems using probabilistic models. Probabilistic models are
commonly used to represent physical, biological and financial phenomena that are
often however too complex to solve, approximate or even simulate. The primary
purpose of this research is to rigorously investigate problems related to
multiscale systems, rare events and related Monte Carlo simulation methods. We
are interested in studying stochastic dynamical systems that may have different
time scales and understudying and quantifying related events that may be rare in
a given time scale, but can have important consequences for the system itself.
Exact solutions are typically impossible, so one has to rely on simulation and
for this reason rigorous development of provably-efficient approximation methods
and simulation Monte Carlo methods is in the core of our analysis. The problems
of interest in this project are motivated both by fundamental mathematical
questions and by a broad array of questions in other branches of science.
Examples range from estimation of rare event probabilities in chemical physics,
genetic switch models in biology, tracking loop problems in engineering to
network failure and large portfolio losses in complex financial systems, where
multiscale features and rare events are core issues. In addition, the research
project is integrated with an educational program that is designed to help in
the training of undergraduate and graduate students in applied mathematics,
physics, engineering and chemistry in the exploration of rare events, multiscale
processes and their analysis, calibration and
simulation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project leads to the development
of a rigorous mathematical framework that allows to design provably efficient
algorithms associated to modeling and estimation of rare events as well as
statistical calibration methods. We are interested in both the large deviations
regime (tail or rare events) as well as in the moderate deviations regime (the
gap between the typical center and the tail of the distribution). We develop
provably-efficient Monte Carlo methods such as importance sampling and
statistical calibration methods. In a closely related direction we rigorously
investigate the consequences of violation of time-reversibility in the design of
Monte Carlo methods such as steady state simulation and algorithms for
acceleration of convergence to equilibrium. The research project attempts to
crystallize concepts and methods that are not well understood such as the effect
of metastability on Monte Carlo methods and of multiple scales on large and
moderate deviations, on Monte Carlo methods and on statistical estimation
methods. The goal is to provide a useful and reliable methodology for simulation
and statistical procedures for complex stochastic multiscale dynamical systems
that can be used by a wide collection of disciplines and also open frontiers for
research. Metastability behavior and multiscale phenomena are of central
interest.