* 1550133
* Physical and Numerical Experiments of Slip Partitioning under Oblique Strike-slip
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2016,02/29/2020
* Michele Cooke, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Steven Whitmeyer
* 02/29/2020
* USD 269,926.00

Much attention is focused on the main strands of major strike-slip faults, such
as the San Andreas Fault in California, for their potential to generate large
devastating earthquakes. However, non-strike slip motion associated with these
large faults is often accommodated on secondary faults, which may also be the
source of large earthquakes as demonstrated in the 2010 Haiti earthquake. The
tectonic conditions that cause slip along these secondary faults are not fully
understood. This project uses a combination of physical and computer modeling
experiments to better understand why slip takes place on these secondary faults
rather than the main fault. The proposed research advances desired societal
outcomes through: (1) full participation of women and persons with disabilities
in STEM through support of a hearing-impaired female PI and a female graduate
student; (2) continued mentoring of deaf and hearing-impaired students; (3)
improved STEM education through posting of animations from analog experiments on
YouTube and web cam broadcast of experiments Google+ Hangouts transmissions; (4)
development of a globally competitive STEM workforce through graduate student
training; and (5) a better understanding of earthquake hazards along fault
systems such as the San Andreas Fault.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project uses
physical and numerical experiments to investigate slip partitioning along
strike-slip systems within two types of settings, oblique plate motion and
restraining bends. Both of these settings are observed to have slip partitioned
faults with strike-slip along vertical fault strands and oblique slip along
dipping fault strands, but the loading differs between the models. The physical
experiments will test the conditions under which strike-slip faults develop
outward verging secondary faults. The experiments explore the controls on and
thresholds for slip partitioning and will quantify the nature of slip
partitioning within these systems. The analog models utilize wet kaolin to
simulate a range of oblique strike-slip boundary conditions that explore the
conditions for secondary contractional fault development. The physical
experiments data include measurements of the evolving horizontal displacement
field using digital image correlation, changes in uplift patterns using stereo
imaging, measurements of dilational stress using pressure transducers and
estimates of relative water flux along faults using an infrared camera. The data
from the analog experiments will be used to track the evolution of kinematic
efficiency to test if slip partitioned systems accommodate oblique convergence
more efficiently than non-partitioned systems. Numerical simulations of the
experiments will assess the work budget of the slip partitioned systems and test
if the fault systems evolve to minimize work. 3D numerical simulations of the
various experimental setups will provide complete stress and strain fields that
facilitate calculation of the complete work budget within the system. This will
provide insights, for example, on the tradeoffs between work against gravity and
internal deformation as the fault system evolves. The combined physical and
numerical investigations in this proposed study will provide a critical bridge
between theories of slip partitioning under oblique strike-slip and geologic and
experimental observations.