* 1550722
* Collaborative Research: Student Outreach Support Activities at IEEE-CS TCPP Sponsored Conferences
* CSE,OAC
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2017
* Ajay Gupta, Western Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* Sushil K Prasad
* 07/31/2017
* USD 28,251.00

A crucial training aspect of graduate students in STEM fields consists of
attending and presenting their work at premier scientific conferences. However,
students attending technical meetings unaccompanied by their advisors or other
mentors often feel isolated and do not fully gain from the experience because
many may not know how to effectively navigate a technical conference or network
with other researchers. Student-centric programs which are well-integrated with
the conferences play a crucial role in providing younger attendees with the
tools to take better advantage of their participation at these conferences.
Student programs have emerged at several leading conferences, but are still far
from being widely adopted. In particular, the International Parallel and
Distributed Processing Symposium (IPDPS), the flagship research conference
sponsored by IEEE Computer Society Technical Committee on Parallel Processing
(TCPP), has a tradition of hosting a PhD forum for many years. This program
started as a simple poster presentation and has recently evolved into a
comprehensive training workshop that includes sessions on career planning and
hands-on tutorials on writing and presentation skills. Moreover, the IPDPS PhD
forum provides effective opportunities for student networking. This project
seeks to seed similar student programs into the TCPP-sponsored sister
conferences of IPDPS that fall under the broad umbrella of parallel and
distributed processing, such as Parallel Architecture and Compilation Techniques
(PACT) and High Performance Computing (HiPC). In addition, the project seeks to
further improve the current student mentorship programs at IPDPS, thereby
contributing toward more productive workforce development in the high
performance computing disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal will
support student programs and student attendance at IPDPS and other sister
conferences sponsored by IEEE-CS TCPP. The goal is to cover the whole parallel
and distributed processing spectrum by making sure that more specialized
conferences also get adequate student support. The beneficiary conferences will
be required to host, at the very minimum, an introductory session where students
will be enabled to network with peers and mentors. Additionally, conference
organizers will be provided with the logistic plan of the PhD Forum at IPDPS and
will be encouraged to emulate some of its activities including a student-driven
poster session. In this way, students will not only have access to the
conference but will also get a more fulfilling and integral experience. To be
eligible, the applicant must be enrolled in a degree program at a US-based
institution at the time of the conference. The application will include a budget
request and justification, gender and minority status, citizenship, and
optionally, paper acceptance notice and all the reviews. This project will
especially target students that typically would not be able to attend these
conferences without financial support, including undergraduate students,
graduate students in their first year, and students attending their first
conference. In order to increase the diversity of attendees, the project will
strongly solicit participation of female and other minority groups.