* 1550671
* I-Corps:  Indoor Magnetic Beacon Localization
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2015,01/31/2017
* Lauro Ojeda, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 01/31/2017
* USD 50,000.00

The field of indoor localization, mapping and navigation is rapidly developing
and has the potential to change the way society interacts with its built
surroundings. The proposed technology enables the precise localization of
personnel and assets inside buildings where&lt;br/&gt;other technology (such as
GPS) does not work. In heavy industrial settings (such as power plants, oil
refineries, and chemical plants) the inability of knowing where workers and
security personnel are located during routine operations, maintenance, and
emergency situations leads to accidents and incidents that impact the safety and
security of the facility. Adoption and integration of the proposed technology
with other physical security infrastructure has the potential to decrease
injuries and accidents and increase the effectiveness of plant operations and
security. The localization technology enables highrisk workers (those that work
in industrial settings and generally wear protective gear like hard-hats, safety
glasses, hearing protection etc.) to have their location broadcast to an
operations center. This is especially useful for alone workers, workers in
confined spaces, or workers in areas that have restricted access due to either
heavy equipment traffic or other safety issues (need for other protective
clothing etc.). Areas within a facility can&lt;br/&gt;have geo-fences installed
for individuals alerting them that they are in a high-risk area and in an
emergency situation allow security or first-responder personnel to locate
individuals quickly.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps team's localization
technology has been demonstrated in the lab and a lab-proto-type has been
developed. The team is currently developing a field proto-type. The technology
goals consist of building the field proto-type to be able to give demonstrations
to interested parties and test the system in real-world applications. This team
is developing key quantitative milestones on both the technology and business
execution sides. Working with the team mentor, I-Corps instructors and I-Corps
peers; this team is confident that it would identify a path to developing a
pilot technology study with industry partners, identify first customers, the
minimal viable product and clearly quantify the value proposition for its
customers. The hope for the field proto-type is to clearly demonstrate the
localization precision in different indoor environments.