* 1550161
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Standardized bone tools: investigating a new technology in the Middle Paleolithic
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2017
* Teresa Steele, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 12/31/2017
* USD 18,086.00

The emergence of behaviorally modern humans, approximately 50,000 years ago,
amid multiple other Late Pleistocene hominin groups has been of great interest
to the general public in recent years, as evidenced by many popular science
articles and television programs. A key focus of Paleolithic archaeological and
anthropological research is the study of the origin of modern human behaviors,
including cognitive and behavioral similarities and differences between our
species and our closest relative, the Neandertals. Much evidence suggests that
the Neandertal and modern human populations that overlapped geographically and
chronologically exhibited similar behaviors. Ultimately, however, modern human
populations replaced Neandertals, but the mechanisms behind Neandertal
extinction remain a subject of continued debate. This project considers the
implications for standardized bone tool technology in Neandertal contexts. This
particular technology may have been innovated by Neandertals, passed by
acculturation from modern humans to Neandertals, or, conversely, learned by
modern humans from Neandertals. The data collected from this project will
provide an independent line of evidence that will contribute to the discussions
on the nature of cognition related to technology, the relationship between
Neandertals and modern humans, and the understanding of Neandertal extinction.
The significant international collaborative component of this project will bring
various viewpoints (more traditional and more technology-driven approaches)
together to form a cohesive research program. Additionally, this project will
establish new methodological approaches for research on bone tools by combining
traditional qualitative with innovative quantitative analyses. Ultimately, this
project will contribute to the understanding of hominin behavior through a
detailed analysis of bone tools before and after the replacement of Neandertals
by modern humans. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project by PhD candidate Naomi L.
Martisius (University of California, Davis), under the supervision of Dr. Teresa
E. Steele, will build a research program around the study of recently described
Neandertal-made bone tools, called lissoirs (a French term meaning "smoothers"),
and investigates their potential function and innovation through experimental
and comparative research. This discovery shows that Neandertals were capable of
producing standardized bone tools, a technology previously thought to have been
restricted to modern humans. This research will assess modern human-made
lissoirs to understand the extent of their variation in relation to function
within these tools, engaging in experimental and comparative research to
investigate raw material selection, if ribs were pre-shaped or shaped through
use, and how they were used through an innovative approach to study the traces
left on bones through use, and an attempt to identify additional pieces from
other Neandertal assemblages to determine their temporal span. Clear,
demonstrable production and use of standardized bone technology by Neandertals
will transform understanding of their behavior and the relationship between
Neandertals and modern humans.