* 1550635
* EAGER: Computational Models of Essay Rewritings
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Diane Litman, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 08/31/2018
* USD 307,912.00

Natural language processing (NLP) is an integral part of an intelligent tutoring
system for writing; it allows the system to automatically analyze student
writings and provide feedback to help students to learn. For example, methods
have been developed to automatically detect and correct grammar usage errors and
to assess aspects of student writing. However, current technology does not offer
enough support for teaching students to revise their writings. Unlike mechanical
error corrections, the rationales behind revisions are harder to determine.
There may be multiple possible changes for an unclear passage in a draft;
conversely, one specific writing change might be due to several possible
underlying reasons. This EAGER award investigates whether NLP methods can help
students to learn to make a more concrete connection between the abstract
principles of rewriting (e.g., "A paper should have a clear thesis") and the
particular contexts in which the revision is carried out. The success of this
project would enable educational applications that benefit the
society.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project evaluates the viability of revision
as a pedagogical technique by determining whether student interactions with the
revision assistant enables them to learn to write better -- that is, whether
certain forms of the feedback (in terms of the perceived purposes and scopes of
changes) encourage students to learn to make more effective revisions. More
specifically, the project works toward three objectives: &lt;br/&gt;(1) Define a
schema for characterizing the types of changes that occur at different levels of
the rewriting. For example, the writer might add one or more sentences to
provide evidence to support a thesis; or the writer might add just one or two
words to make a phrase more precise. &lt;br/&gt;(2) Based on the schema, design
a computational model for recognizing the purpose and scope of each change
within a revision. One application of such a model is a revision assistant that
serves as a sounding board for students as they experiment with different
revision alternatives. &lt;br/&gt;(3) Conduct experiments to study the
interactions between students and the revision writing environment in which
variations of idealized computational models are simulated. The findings of the
experiments pave the way for developing better technologies to support for
student learning.