* 1550147
* Collaborative Research: Quantifying Paleotopography and Paleoclimate to Test Geodynamic Models in the Peruvian Andes
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2020
* Daniel Breecker, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Whitmeyer
* 05/31/2020
* USD 61,138.00

Although plate tectonics provides a first-order explanation of the origin of
mountain belts, the tectonic processes that drive surface the uplift and
exhumation of mountain belts are not well understood. Even less well understood
are the interactions of between uplift, erosional processes, and climate that
shape the mountain landscape. This project uses state-of-the art to examine the
interaction of tectonics, erosion, and climate in the Peruvian Andes to test new
and controversial ideas concerning the uplift of the Andes. The project advances
desired societal outcomes through: (1) full participation of women and
underrepresented minorities in STEM through support of an female researchers and
students plus outreach programs to high school and undergraduate students from
underrepresented minorities; (2) increased public scientific literacy and public
engagement with STEM through participation of outreach programs that provide
research experiences for high school and undergraduate students from
underrepresented minorities ; (3) development of a diverse, globally competitive
STEM workforce through undergraduate and graduate student training and support
of several early career researchers; and (4) increased partnerships through
international collaboration. The Division of Earth Sciences Tectonics and
Geomorphology &amp; Land Use Dynamics Programs and the NSF Office of
International Science and Engineering supported this
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Earth's surface topography responds directly to
mantle processes and plate tectonics, controls surface drainage and sediment
transport patterns, and influences atmospheric circulation and climate. As the
type example of ocean-continent subduction-generated high topography, the
Central Andes are critical to evaluating geodynamic models of orogenesis.
Although previous studies of the structural history, past elevations, and
incision record have provided important insights on surface uplift, these
studies also suggest a disparate range of uplift histories and associated
tectonic drivers. Current geodynamic models for Andean orogenesis include: (1)
continuous late Cenozoic crustal thickening and shortening, resulting in gradual
surface uplift and canyon incision; (2) late Cenozoic delamination of South
American lithosphere, resulting in rapid surface uplift and a late Miocene pulse
of incision; and (3) early Cenozoic contraction-driven crustal thickening,
resulting in near modern elevations in the west by late Eocene and propagating
deformation eastward through the Cenozoic. To distinguish between models, this
project uses: (1) stable isotope analyses of volcanic glasses and soil
carbonates to provide quantitative estimates of paleoelevations over time,
coupled with geochronology to constrain timing; (2) isotope-enabled general
circulation modeling to determine how changing elevations affected climate and
to quantitatively interpret stable isotope data, constrained by modern
elevation-isotope and climate-isotope relationships; (3) data-validated fluvial
erosion modeling to predict the erosional response to different models; and (4)
fluvial and lacustrine sedimentology and sediment provenance to identify changes
in drainage system extent and basin development. By synthesizing these data, the
research team will quantify surface topography and erosion during orogenic
evolution and distinguish between proposed tectonic and climatic controls.