* 1550840
* Meeting of Experts: Discussion of National Science Foundation Division of Earth Sciences Workshop Report on "Future Seismic and Geodetic Facility Needs in the Geosciences"
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2015,03/31/2016
* Elizabeth Eide, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Gregory Anderson
* 03/31/2016
* USD 42,296.00

Non-technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The National Academies of Sciences,
Engineering, and Medicine (the Academies) is convening an ad hoc "meeting of
experts" to discuss and provide individual, expert opinions on a National
Science Foundation (NSF) report from a recent workshop supported by NSF's
Division of Earth Sciences (EAR). The workshop gathered input from numerous
Earth scientists on future research and facility needs for advancing the
understanding of Earth processes that generate movement of Earth's tectonic
plates, earthquakes, gravity, tidal motions, the motion of ice sheets, and other
phenomena. Two large multi-user facilities supported by NSF currently provide
instrumentation, networks, data, and educational materials for this kind of
deep-earth research. As the multi-year operational agreements for these
facilities will expire in 2018, NSF is preparing to recompete one or more
Cooperative Agreement(s) to support management and operation of future
facilities with these kinds of capabilities. Continuing to advance research on
Earth processes through multi-user access to a range of technologies, data, and
networks will enhance opportunities for scientific collaboration among a broad
research community, increase understanding of changes in the behavior of the
Earth, and help to inform decision making regarding preparation for and
adaptation to these changes. Additional, independent opinions from the experts
convened by the Academies is helping to strengthen the scientific framework for
the recompetition of these facilities and thus support key research on deep-
earth processes, their results and impacts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Division of Earth Sciences in the
Directorate for Geosciences at the National Science Foundation (NSF) currently
supports two large multi-user facilities, the Geodesy Advancing Geosciences and
EarthScope (GAGE) Facility and the Seismological Facilities for Advancement of
Geosciences and EarthScope (SAGE), that provide geodetic, seismic, and
geophysical instrumentation, data and data management, network operations,
education, and workforce training to a broad research community. GAGE and SAGE
operate global and regional networks of continuously operating geodetic,
seismic, and related geophysical instrumentation; portable seismic, geodetic,
and related geophysical instrumentation; systems for archiving, managing, and
distributing geophysical data; they also develop education and outreach
materials for various audiences. NSF is preparing to recompete Cooperative
Agreement(s) for these kinds of research facilities and recently funded a
workshop to identify key scientific questions and facility needs for future
seismic and geodetic research. This project is bringing together an ad hoc
"meeting of experts" with backgrounds in solid Earth science and particular
expertise in seismology, geodesy, geodynamics, active tectonics, structural
geology, and natural hazards to discuss and provide individual, expert opinions
on the NSF-generated report from that workshop. The experts are focusing
particularly upon science and research questions posed by the community at the
workshop; the types of seismic and geodetic facilities that are essential to
support this research; and education, outreach, training, and workforce
development opportunities provided by such research and the associated
facilities.