* 1550739
* Increasing Accessibility of Scientific Ocean Drilling Data in the NOAA NCEI Deep Archive
* GEO,OCE
* 11/15/2015,10/31/2016
* Barry Eakins, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* James Allan
* 10/31/2016
* USD 85,470.00

This award will develop an application programming interface to allow the deep
data archive of the Deep Sea Drilling Project (DSDP), Ocean Drilling Program
(ODP), and JOIDES Resolution- sourced data of the Integrated Ocean Drilling
Program and International Ocean Discovery Program (both IODP) to be machine
discoverable over the world wide web and thus more easily obtained for
scientific users. This data is stored at the National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration?s (NOAA?s) National Centers for Environmental Information (NCEI;
formerly the National Geophysical Data Center) through agreement with the
National Science Foundation. The requirement for storage of flatfield DSDP, ODP,
and IODP data as a deep archive at this site is given within the language of the
current Cooperative Agreement Award OCE-1326927 to Texas A&M University
regarding operation of the JOIDES Resolution drillship for the International
Ocean Discovery Program. Currently, this deep archive data is only available via
NOAA personnel retrieving data by hand from tape storage, thus preventing
machine discovery or easy data recovery by science community members, and
placing the data itself at risk through the requirement for higher level of data
maintenance at a time of reduced resources at NOAA. This proposal would thus
?shore up? the DSDP, ODP, and IODP deep archive, and make the data also
available for innovative community efforts to make discoverable data sets that
merge Expedition and post-Expedition data sets.

This work is relatively straightforward but essential for making the deep
archive of the DSDP, ODP and IODP available through the World-Wide Web for
modern data discovery methods. The proposal applies tools developed at the NOAA
NCEI to transfer the data off of tape files unconnected to the web to the NCEI
Extract system (NEXT), adding metadata about the data to the NEXT catalog. The
work will be done by University of Colorado staff that serve as NCEI software
developers and managers, working with NCEI Federal staff. This work will thus
modernize the DSDP, ODP, and IODP deep archive, helping to ensure both its
continued existence and improve its relevance and value to many thousands of
geoscientists worldwide.