* 1550991
* Collaborative Research:   cliques, stable sets and approximate structure
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2015,07/31/2018
* Maria Chudnovsky, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 07/31/2018
* USD 210,155.00

This proposal deals with a number of problems in graph theory related to the
study of graphs with certain induced subgraphs excluded. The first problem is
the famous Erdos-Hajnal conjecture, and its tournament version due to Alon, Pach
and Solymosi. Following recent results, the PI plans to combine structural
methods with techniques related to Szemeredi's regularity lemma to make further
progress. The second set of problems is a conjecture of Gyarfas and Sumner, and
questions related to chi-boundedness. In particular, the PI plans to study
tournament versions of some of the related classical questions. The last
proposed research direction is the general question of the structure of graphs
with forbidden induced subgraphs, where particular emphasis is placed on perfect
graphs. The PI's have extensive experience in the area, in combination with
recent ideas of "extreme decompositions'', is likely to lead to new
results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal deals with three problems
in graphs theory. All three are about graphs with certain forbidden
substructures (called "induced subgraphs") excluded; and different aspects of
graph behavior are studied in each of the problems. The first two questions
considered in the proposal are known conjectures in the field; their solution,
or any progress on them, will be of interest to many researchers. The last
research direction is more of a "theory building" question, where a general
approach, that can be used for a large number of problems, will be developed.