* 1551843
* EAGER: Towards a Computational Infrastructure for Analysis of Sensitive Data
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Vasant Honavar, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 08/31/2019
* USD 231,578.00

In many applications, e.g., health, education, our ability to realize the full
potential of big data to improve decisions and outcomes is currently limited, by
the lack of practical frameworks for analysis of sensitive data in a manner that
does not violate applicable data access and use policies. This constitutes a
significant barrier to the engagement of researchers with expertise in analytics
in developing and evaluating advanced methods for analysis of such data,
assessing the performance of alternative approaches, or ensuring the
reproducibility of results. Against this background, this high-risk and
potentially high-impact research project aims to explore a framework and a
software infrastructure for data access and use policy (DAUP) compliant analysis
of sensitive data. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project aims to develop a novel
framework for data access and use policy (DAUP) compliant analysis of sensitive
data. The framework will support (i) Querying and retrieval of information from
the data store that are permitted by the user or project specific DAUP. Such
information could include the schema of the data store, metadata that specify
the variables, and their domains and ranges, etc.; (ii) Execution of system or
user-supplied implementations of algorithms for construct predictive or causal
models or visualizations from the data in the data store; (iii) Evaluation of
the predictive performance of the resulting models on benchmark data or user-
provided data; (iv) Deployment of the validated models in the form of web
servers that provide predictions or visualizations over user-submitted data or
over results of user-defined queries against the data store; and (v) Publication
of reusable analytics workflows. This exploratory project seeks to test the
feasibility of the framework using predictive and causal modeling of data from
an online health community as a test case. A major outcome of this project is
the open source software infrastructure for facilitating analysis and
visualization of sensitive data. This research will: (i) fill a major gap in
infrastructure for predictive modeling from sensitive data; (ii) significantly
lower the barrier to the entry of researchers with deep expertise in analytics
to domains (e.g., health, education) that involve sensitive data; (iii) improve
the accuracy of assessment of the state-of-the-art in predictive and causal
modeling in such domains by facilitating rigorous comparison of algorithms; and
(iv) facilitate, reproducible analysis of sensitive data.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This research will (i) yield a prototype open source software
infrastructure to support analysis and visualization of sensitive data; (ii)
Accelerate data-driven advances in domains that involve sensitive data e.g.,
health, education through broad engagement of talent in developing better
algorithms; and (iii) Support incorporation of hands-on experience with such
applications into Data Sciences education through hackathons and competitions
organized around specific sensitive data sets.