* 1551918
* Workshop Identifying SDN Research Problems For Large-Scale Production Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2015,07/31/2016
* Douglas Comer, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 07/31/2016
* USD 67,400.00

This workshop brings together members of the research community and
representatives from companies that are deploying software defined networks
(SDN). The researchers are leaders from both the academic and industrial
research communities. The industrial representatives are part of the Open
Network User Group (ONUG). The ONUG community includes financial institutions
and other enterprises that have extremely large-scale networks, deploy SDN in
their production networks and have real-time and security requirements that are
more stringent than many other large-scale networks. They have not interacted
with the research community in the past, but now are willing to participate in
an open workshop. Including participants who have first-hand experience
deploying SDN will enhance the workshop with valuable insights that are not
generally available to researchers. The companies, especially the financial
companies, while retaining proprietary information about their networks, are
willing to discuss the architecture, scale, technologies, the use of SDN, and
the problems they face. The workshop will introduce researchers to a community
with which there has been little interaction. The research community will gain
valuable insight into aspects of SDN that are already implemented and problems
that remain to be solved.

Intellectual Merit: By interacting with early adopters of Software Defined
Networking (SDN) technologies who are deploying SDN in extremely large-scale
enterprise networks, the research community will gain valuable insight into
aspects of SDN that are already implemented and fundamental research problems,
especially in the areas of real-time, scale, and security, that remain to be
solved. The companies would in turn gain from resulting research solutions.

Broader Impacts: The workshop is important because it connects the researcher
community with an industry that is leading the adoption and use of SDN, but
which has not interacted with researchers in the past. Three extra slots at the
workshop are for PhD students from under-represented groups.