* 1551195
* Organic Carbon Oxidation and Iron Remobilization by West Antarctic Shelf Sediments
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2015,02/29/2020
* John Christensen, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Michael E. Jackson
* 02/29/2020
* USD 780,391.00

General Statement: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The continental shelf region west of
the Antarctic Peninsula has recently undergone dramatic changes and ecosystem
shifts, and the community of organisms that live in, or feed off, the sea floor
sediments is being impacted by species invasions from the north. Previous
studies of these sediments indicate that this community may consume much more of
the regional productivity than previously estimated, suggesting that sediments
are a rich and important component of this ecosystem and one that may be ripe
for dramatic change. Furthermore, under richer sediment conditions, iron is
mobilized and released back to the water column. Since productivity in this
ecosystem is thought to be limited by the availability of iron, increased rates
of iron release from these sediments could stimulate productivity and promote
greater overall ecosystem change. In this research, a variety of sites across
the shelf region will be sampled to accurately evaluate the role of sediments in
consuming ecosystem productivity and to estimate the current level of iron
release from the sediments. This project will provide a baseline set of sediment
results that will present a more complete picture of the west Antarctic shelf
ecosystem, will allow for comparison with water column measurements and for
evaluation of the fundamental workings of this important ecosystem. This is
particularly important since high latitude systems may be vulnerable to the
effects of climate fluctuations. Both graduate and undergraduate students will
be trained. Presentations will be made at scientific meetings, at other
universities, and at outreach events. A project web site will present key
results to the public and explain how this new information improves
understanding of Antarctic ecosystems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description of Project: &lt;br/&gt;In
order to determine the role of sediments within the west Antarctic shelf
ecosystem, this project will determine the rates of sediment organic matter
oxidation at a variety of sites across the Palmer Long Term Ecosystem Research
(LTER) study region. To estimate the rates of release of iron and manganese from
the sediments, these same sites will be sampled for detailed vertical
distributions of the concentrations of these metals both in the porewaters and
in important mineral phases. Since sediment sampling will be done at LTER sites,
the sediment data can be correlated with the rich productivity data set from the
LTER. In detail, the project: a) will determine the rates of oxygen consumption,
organic carbon oxidation, nutrient release, and iron mobilization by shelf
sediments west of the Antarctic Peninsula; b) will investigate the vertical
distribution of diagenetic reactions within the sediments; and c) will assess
the regional importance of these sediment rates. Sediment cores will be used to
determine sediment-water fluxes of dissolved oxygen, total carbon dioxide,
nutrients, and the vertical distributions of these dissolved compounds, as well
as iron and manganese in the pore waters. Bulk sediment properties of porosity,
organic carbon and nitrogen content, carbonate content, biogenic silica content,
and multiple species of solid-phase iron, manganese, and sulfur species will
also be determined. These measurements will allow determination of total organic
carbon oxidation and denitrification rates, and the proportion of aerobic versus
anaerobic respiration at each site. Sediment diagenetic modeling will link the
processes of organic matter oxidation to metal mobilization. Pore water and
solid phase iron and manganese distributions will be used to model iron
diagenesis in these sediments and to estimate the iron flux from the sediments
to the overlying waters. Finally, the overall regional average and distribution
of the sediment processes will be compared with the distributions of seasonally
averaged chlorophyll biomass and productivity.