* 1551693
* CAREER: Carbon Anodes in Potassium-Ion Batteries
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2022
* Xiulei Ji, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 06/30/2022
* USD 530,000.00

CAREER 1551693 - Ji&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ongoing prosperity of society
relies on energy security enabled by sufficient energy supply and efficient
energy storage. Stationary energy storage is the key enabler for intermittent
renewable energy resources, including solar and wind. The nature of stationary
applications requires the storage technologies to have low cost, long cycle life
and most importantly scalability and sustainability. Although lithium-ion
batteries have dominated the market in electronics and electric vehicles,
lithium is generally too expensive to be used in stationary applications. This
calls for alternative technologies based on earth-abundant elements, such as
sodium and potassium. To date, attention has focused on sodium-ion batteries. To
broaden the field, the PI has shown that a broad array of carbon materials can
reversibly store potassium ions with promising performance for energy storage
applications. This project will determine design principles for carbon anodes
using potassium ion chemistry. On the educational side, the project will bring
state-of-the-art knowledge of energy storage to underserved students in Oregon
rural schools by developing a new Science-Tour program. This will be eventually
expanded to include other OSU faculty. This new program will benefit a large
number of students who do not have access to on campus activities at a
university. Additionally, the project will integrate training of high school and
undergraduate students into the research program to accelerate discoveries on
campus.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical goal of this CAREER award is to
elucidate design principles for carbon anodes by determining the structure-
property relationships in potassium ion batteries. The PI plans the following
activities: (1) Identify the functional substructures that are responsible for
K-ion storage in bulk carbon electrodes by investigating the evolving structural
and kinetic properties during K-ion insertion via advanced in situ and ex situ
characterizations; (2) Determine the structure-property correlation by creating
new carbon structures with features controlled at nanometer and atomic scales;
and (3) Develop and disseminate energy science activities to bring STEM
inspiration to underserved students. This project will test the assumption that
bulk carbon anodes cannot reversibly store potassium electrochemically at room
temperature. Furthermore, this project will use potassium ion batteries as a
platform to generate knowledge on the substructures in non-graphitic carbon
anodes that are responsible for metal ion storage. This question will be
addressed by exploiting the structural distortion of carbon electrodes generated
by insertion of large potassium ions, which can reveal invaluable information of
structural properties of non-graphitic carbons with a resolution at nanometer
and atomic scales. To observe structural distortion, the project will employ
neutron scattering, in situ TEM and electrochemical titration techniques. In
addition, the project will draw upon the demonstrated capability of the PI on
rational design of carbon local structures to reveal the impact of substructures
on electrochemical performance. The unique combination of close observation and
fine-tuning of carbon structures at an atomic scale will generate fundamental
understanding of the structure-property relationships for carbon anodes. This
will lead to elucidation of new design principles for carbon materials for
metal-ion batteries. The research may cause a paradigm shift for the battery
community, while initiating a new frontier on understanding and designing
carbons for various purposes.