* 1551753
* Collaborative Research: A community velocity field for East Africa
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2016,01/31/2019
* Robert King, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 01/31/2019
* USD 114,900.00

The break-up of Africa along the East African Rift System has long served as the
type example of how stable continents fall apart in tectonic cycles. As a
result, many geophysical and geologic studies have measured and analyzed
different sections of the very long rift system in detail, including studies
using GPS geodesy to measure the speed, direction, and distribution in space of
the ongoing separation of most of Africa (Nubia) from its eastern part
(Somalia). However, few, if any, of these previous studies took a comprehensive
view over the whole rift and continent, in order to explore how different
sections of the rift link together, interact with one another, or influence
neighboring parts of the continent outside of the rift valleys. Such a
comprehensive view is necessary to better understand the whole continent and,
indeed, how other continents split apart in the past or will in the future. The
broad process of rifting forms the basis of plate tectonic theory, and also
influences the distribution of earthquakes, volcanoes, geothermal resources,
mineral resources, and topography in both time and space.

This experiment addresses two pieces of the task of building such a continent-
scale view of rifting. First, it includes compiling all known geodetic
observations in Africa and surrounding regions from 22 different research groups
representing 10 countries. These data will then be combined into a single large-
scale velocity field, thus minimizing any uncertainties in relative velocities
(and strain rates) arising from variations in reference frame definitions,
processing strategies, or network geometries. Second, it includes re-
measurements of high-value sites with limited or poor past measurement
histories, including a campaign network spanning the Turkana Depression of the
Kenya-Ethiopia borderlands, where two parallel active rift structures in Kenya
relay to a single rift in Ethiopia. Both of these efforts are directed at
providing the highest possible quality present-day tectonic velocity field for
the whole African Rift System at the continent scale, as a basic research
product and as an open-access kinematic framework for many other diverse
research efforts directed at the African system and rifting in general.