* 1551746
* Student Participation at ACM Conference on Online Social Networks (CONS) 2015
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2016
* Reza Rejaie, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 08/31/2016
* USD 15,000.00

This grant supports participation of approximately 17 graduate students from US
institutions in the third instance of the Conference on Online Social Networks
(COSN) of the Association for Computing Machinery, to be held in Stanford
University, California, on November 2-3, 2015 (http://cosn.acm.org/2015/). CONS
provides a premier publication venue that features high quality research from
academia and industry across multiple disciplines focused around the study of
online social networks (OSNs). COSN is an international conference that
stimulates exchanges between various international research communities.
Participation in conferences such as COSN is an important part of the graduate
school experience. Attendance at the conference will enhance the scientific
workforce in this emerging research area by developing a group of promising
young researchers interested in online social networks. The support will enable
these young researchers to interact with other researchers and conference
events; to learn of potential career paths within academia and industry; to
access an international network of researchers who can support their
professional development; and to observe the interdisciplinary nature, diversity
and interrelationships of research in online social networks. The support
provided for student participation will promote diversity by encouraging and
enabling women and other under-represented minorities to participate in and
benefit from the CONS experience. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CONS focuses on systems,
security and privacy, graphs, data management, analysis, and data mining,
relevant to the design, analysis and development of OSNs. This year?s conference
invites submissions on a wide range of research on social networks, including
systems and algorithms for social search, infrastructure support for social
networks and systems, social properties in systems design, clean-slate designs
for social systems, learnings from operational social networks, transient OSNs
(e.g. Snapchat)s, special purpose OSNs (e.g., Instagram, Vine), measurement and
analysis of social and crowdsourcing systems, benchmarking, modeling,
performance and workload characterization, etc. (see http://cosn.acm.org/2015/).
Student participation is expected to have a positive impact on the students'
research interests. COSN incorporates poster sessions that provide a unique
opportunity for participating students to present their research project and
receive valuable feedback from senior researchers and other members of the
community.