* 1551963
* Collaborative Research: Psychological and Behavioral Preparatory Responses to Male Aggressive Vocal Signaling
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2022
* Steven Gaulin, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 06/30/2022
* USD 111,612.00

Personal aggression has serious consequences yet often starts with seemingly
trivial verbal disputes ("I don't like your tone"). These verbal conflicts are
common between both acquaintances and strangers. Some of these conflicts quickly
end with one party standing down, but others escalate verbally to physical, even
fatal, fights. What role do vocal qualities (not what people say, but physical
aspects of the voice) play in determining whether a verbal dispute becomes a
fight? Research on other animals indicates that vocal qualities often give
information about physical strength and aggressive intentions, which can predict
fight outcomes and thus affect an individual's motivation to fight. For example,
previous research shows that men with lower pitched voices are judged as being
more likely to win fistfights than men with less deep voices. In this case,
pitch is a way to manipulate "signal intensity", which evolutionary theory
suggests would convey important cues useful to a potential attacker. An intense
signal conveys the speaker is more motivated to aggress or is physically
stronger than would a weaker signal. Theory suggests that the listener's
likelihood of retreating or attacking should be affected by perceptions of the
voice, but research has not yet tested those hypotheses in humans. Thus this
project builds on previous findings about perceiving voices, to extend it to
people's preparation to aggress. The investigators use experiments to create
mildly competitive situations and examine whether signal speaker's vocal
features affects listeners' aggressive inclinations. Understanding how vocal
qualities can reduce or increase aggression will help professionals who are
regularly exposed to violence (e.g., police officers) to navigate danger, and
inform intervention programs that aim at curtailing
violence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project tests key hypotheses drawn from M.
Enquist's retaliation-cost model, a leading model of aggressive communication in
animals. The investigators will measure people's psychological and physical
responses to vocal features that serve as strong or weak signals to aggressive
intent or aggressive ability. In three sets of experiments, the investigators
will manipulate whether the signal intensity of a male speaker's voice is strong
or weak. Experiment Set 1 also manipulates facial dominance of the speaker, and
whether the topic of his expressed anger is of significant or minimal value.
Interactions of the three manipulated variables are predicted to affect
listener's judgments about aggressive intent. Experiment Set 2 will test how
listeners' physical strength and cues of competition for mates influence their
attention to and memory of the speaker. Experiment Set 3 extends the Set 2 by
focusing on listeners' aggressive thinking and preparation (e.g., immediate
increases in physical strength) in response to hearing signals of strong versus
weak intensity. To enhance the validity of the project, the investigators will
recruit police officers to participate in Experiment Set 1. To facilitate cross-
cultural comparisons, the investigators will perform parallel experiments in
China, a country with much lower homicide rates than the U.S. This project will
provide a deeper understanding of the evolution and function of voice pitch in
aggressive interactions.