* 1551810
* Collaborative Research: Understanding Temporal Variation in Primate Communities: Integrating Data from Extant and Fossil Species
* SBE,BCS
* 04/15/2016,09/30/2020
* Kaye Reed, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 09/30/2020
* USD 63,464.00

The distribution of species across the globe is influenced by several factors
including climate, habitat, evolutionary history, and interactions with other
organisms. Research on species distribution has primarily focused on modern
climate variation and species distributions. In this project, a novel
combination of paleontological and modern ecological data will be used to
examine how past climate patterns and competition among mammals have contributed
to current primate biodiversity. As habitat loss and fragmentation are occurring
worldwide, research investigating the factors determining primate biodiversity
has implications for conservation management and maintaining the integrity of
tropical forest ecosystems. Obtaining a better understanding of how primate
distributions change through time and in response to changing environments will
inform models for predicting shifts in primate ranges and community structure
for future climates and habitat changes. The project will include the
development of a database and web-based science education resources, and
training of students from traditionally under-represented populations in the
STEM fields. Students will gain important skills in data management and analyses
that can subsequently be used in a wide variety of future career paths.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project seeks to examine primate community
phylogenetic and trait structure across space and through time with abiotic and
biotic factors suggested to cause the changing distributions and adaptations of
primate species. The project is unique because fossil species locations and
traits will be integrated with extant community data for macro-ecological and
evolutionary analyses. Some of the questions addressed will be: Do communities
found in similar environments, but on different continents, converge on the same
structures? Do climate patterns from the Miocene through the present influence
primate community structure? Do the presence and diversity of non-primate
mammals that are potential primate competitors impact primate community
structure? Are trait and phylogenetic structures of fossil primate communities
predicted by climatic characteristics? The research proposed in this project
will address topics that are central to understanding the modern and past
distribution and coexistence of primates and other mammals. Using a community-
level approach is essential for understanding how species interact to impact the
evolution of each other's behavior, ecology, and morphology. Obtaining a better
understanding of how primate communities change through time and in response to
changing environments will inform models for predicting future shifts in primate
distributions and community structure related to climate and habitat change.