* 1551688
* Advancing a Situated Neuroscience of Emotion
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2020
* Kristen Lindquist, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 04/30/2020
* USD 418,808.00

How can we know how other people are really feeling? If emotions are intensely
experienced it may be easy to tell, but some people are good at hiding their
emotions, or they may be unaware of or unable to report what they are feeling.
Fortunately, technological advances in measuring brain activity and emotion
theory can help us to have a more objective understanding of people's emotional
states. Some theories of emotion suggest that different emotional states, such
as fear, anger, or happiness, arise because of specific, dedicated neural
circuitry that responds in the same way any time that emotion is experienced.
For example, the circuitry for happiness is the same whether it arises because
you get a compliment or you learned of a promotion. In contrast, the proposed
research is built on an innovative 'situated neuroscience' model of emotions.
This model hypothesizes that emotions correspond to variable neural patterns.
These variable patterns are hypothesized to be determined by the emotion
category experienced, such as fear, and partly by the context in which the
emotion is experienced. The context includes components from culture and the
situation itself. Dr. Kristen Lindquist, at the University of North Carolina at
Chapel Hill, and colleagues proposed three experiments to examine this model.
Her research will use measures of the location of brain events (functional
magnetic resonance imaging; fMRI) and the timing of brain events
(electroencephalography; EEG). The integration of emotion theory and technology
in this way could help to improve communication about and understanding of
emotions, help us to predict when emotions influence our decisions and
performance, and may have benefits for the way we interact with
others.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The proposed research integrates emotion theory
with technological advances in measuring brain activity to "read" emotional
feelings from brain states. The aim is to develop a situated neuroscience of
emotion that will inform our understanding of the basis of emotions and their
conscious experience. Three experiments are proposed that examine the role of
situational and cultural contexts in emotion and brain activity. The first
experiment examines fear and anger and their interaction with situational and
cultural contexts on brain activity, using functional magnetic resonance (fMRI).
The situation is manipulated to be either social or non-social, and culture
stems from enrolling natives of the US and China who know the emotion-based
norms and values of their respective culture. The second experiment extends this
investigation to the temporal dynamics of emotional brain activity using
electroencephalography (EEG). The third study uses machine learning on data
obtained from the prior experiments to determine which variables best predict
brain activity during emotion, in the different contexts. Understanding the
situated nature of emotion is crucial to an understanding of how neural circuits
map on to subjective mental states. These findings may improve our understanding
of emotional experience in ourselves and others, and enhance our communication,
well-being, and diplomatic relations. It may also inform applied advancements in
the areas of mood-related illnesses and brain-computer interface.