* 1551431
* Quantifying the Volume Changes During Serpentinization of Peridotite using Hydrothermal Laboratory Experiments and X-ray Microtomography
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2016,01/31/2020
* Veronique Le Roux, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 01/31/2020
* USD 350,000.00

The interaction of mantle rocks with aqueous fluids (i.e. serpentinization) is a
widespread hydrothermal process associated with tectonic plate boundaries. By
adding significant amounts of water to mantle rocks, serpentinization causes a
decrease in rock density and mechanical strength. As a result serpentinization
is believed to play a major role in the formation and breakup of continents,
seafloor spreading and subduction. The hydration of mantle rocks impacts the
global geochemical cycles of volatiles, most notably water and carbon dioxide,
with strong implications for Earth's climate, mantle melting in volcanic arcs
and the seismicity of subduction zones. Serpentinization has operated throughout
most of Earth's history and has, via the production of hydrogen, created
geochemical conditions capable of supporting microbial life in extreme
subsurface environments. Despite its key role in a number of global geological
processes, the most basic relations between chemical mass transfer during
serpentinization and associated changes in rock volume have remained poorly
quantified. This project is designed to improve our understanding of these
processes.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The overall objective of this research is to
link changes in fluid composition and mineralogy to concomitant changes in
volume as a function of time and temperature using a combination of hydrothermal
laboratory experiments, mineral and fluid analysis, X-ray microtomography
(Âµ-CT), and geochemical modeling. In particular this project will resolve
whether serpentinization can be regarded as an isochemical or an isovolumetric
process, a long-standing and strongly debated question in serpentinization
research. The results of this study will have important ramifications for our
understanding of the geochemistry, emplacement and deformation of serpentinite
in a wide range of geological settings.