* 1551342
* Acquisition of a Scanning Electron Microscope for Earth Science Research and Training of the Next Generation of Geoscientists
* GEO,EAR
* 03/15/2016,12/31/2018
* David Moecher, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 12/31/2018
* USD 149,947.00

1551342&lt;br/&gt;Moecher&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this proposal submitted to the
EAR Instrumentation and Facilities Program, the PIs requested $149,947 to
support acquisition of a scanning electron microscope (SEM) for grain-scale
textural and chemical characterization of earth materials by faculty and
students in the Department of Earth and Environmental Sciences at the University
of Kentucky (UK). The requested SEM would support NSF/EAR funded research in
petrotectonics and other fields. Specific studies would include investigations
of mid-crustal transpression that require dating of deformed plutonic rocks via
zircon U-Pb geochronology and dating monazite growth tied to deformation
microstructures in metapelites within and bounding zones of transpression. Prior
to U-Pb and monazite geochronologic techniques SEM imaging of zircons and
monazites via SEM is required. Additional research includes studies of the
petrogenesis of granites and sedimentary rocks, the latter with implications for
hydrocarbon reservoir evaluation and for studies of the effects of CO2 injection
on reservoir rock mineralogy and porosity evolution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
requested SEM would support graduate and undergraduate student research training
and local high school outreach efforts by the PI and benefit scientists at the
on-campus branch of the Kentucky Geological Survey, where the instrument would
be housed. This support is congruent with NSFs mission of promoting the progress
of science and advancing the national welfare given the importance of student
training opportunities in microanalysis technologies to support future
scientific workforce needs and the advancement of research that may benefit
future subsurface carbon dioxide sequestration efforts.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;***