* 1551309
* I-Corps Teams: Novel Rapid Non-destructive Cell Culture Platform
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2015,01/31/2017
* Ryan Toomey, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 01/31/2017
* USD 50,000.00

This project aims to evaluate the commercial potential of a rapid non-
destructive cell culture platform based on polymer textures that change shape by
adjusting the temperature. Cell culture is a common activity in medicine and
research in which cells are taken from a source, such as a patient, and put into
a culture dish to multiply. A challenge in this activity is to remove the
attached cells from the cell culture dish for further use. If cells remain
attached for too long and overpopulate the surface they die, so they have to be
regularly transferred to a new dish. The current most popular method of removing
them from a dish uses a chemical dissolving agent which dissociates them but
also damages or kills the cells. Afterward, cells have to be rinsed and need
about a day to recover before they can be used or studied. It's only done this
way because currently, there isn't a better alternative. The motivation for this
project is driven by the need for greater reproducibility in laboratory testing
of human cells. This technology is important in the advancement of stem cell
research/therapies, eliminating animal testing for pharmaceuticals, cosmetics,
and consumer products, as well as other medical-related areas which use culture
of cells. The proposed technology is significant because it allows for a faster
and non-destructive option for culturing cells as compared to current
technologies available in the market place. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To evaluate
the commercial potential of the proposed technology, a rapid non-destructive
cell culture platform, this team will engage in direct conversations with
potential customers and trade partners to determine what is considered
innovation in the cell culture market, identify a market-supported price to
acquire this innovation, and develop an effective market activation strategy.
The potential impact for this technology in several markets using cell culture
is: $170 billion market for stem cell related activities and a $14.7 billion
total cell culture market (2013) which is estimated to grow to $24.5 billion by
2018. Product development activities will consist of investigating rapid device
fabrication, validation of release and viability with various cell types
including stem cells, and developing non-confluent cell release. Development of
this technology into a commercial product could positively impact the speed and
accuracy with which cell culture is performed. The resultant advances in stem
cell research and clinical tests can lead to faster diagnosis, cure, and
management of disease in humans.