* 1551387
* Conference:  Baltimore Earth Stewardship Initiative Demonstration Project, Baltimore, MD; August 9 - 14, 2015
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2016
* Alexander Felson, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* louis kaplan
* 07/31/2016
* USD 14,994.00

Urban environments are designed by people for people. The ecological
consequences of this design in terms of human health and well being are large.
How can ecological knowledge best inform urban design? This demonstration
project, which is part of the Earth Stewardship Initiative, will bring together
city managers, landscape designers, community leaders, and ecologists to
envision the future of Baltimore's people and neighborhoods. Promoting a new
role for ecologists in shaping urban design will require negotiating new
collaborations that will be demonstrated during the 2015 annual meeting of the
Ecological Society of America, which will be held in Baltimore. Graduate
research fellows, landscape architects, Baltimore city officials, research
ecologists, architecture studios, high school students, and community members
will participate equally in the demonstration. Projects developed
collaboratively during the August meeting will be further developed through a
graduate course offered through Yale University?s joint program in Environmental
Studies and Architecture. The initiative has garnered support across the
Ecological Society of American from its sections on applied ecology, human
ecology, environmental justice, education, natural history, agroecology, and
Asian ecology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This year's Earth Stewardship Demonstration
initiative will link community perspectives on neighborhoods, green space, and
environmental stewardship with urban ecological researchers interested in
studying and shaping urban environments and strengthening communities. Teams
will extend 3 nascent Baltimore revitalization projects through a series of
steps that bring together ecological research experiments with community
planning and urban ecosystems functioning. Landscape Architecture Studios at the
University of Virginia, Pennsylvania State University, and the University of
Maryland have investigated these sites through the design process and generated
materials on each of them. Graduate research fellows will serve as core
investigators and organizers with ecology and design advisors. Six project
themes inform the projects that will be developed: Public Health, Access and
Recreation; Degraded Soils and Land; Landscape Performance, Education and
Maintenance; Watersheds and Aquatic Habitats; Biodiversity and Managed
Populations; and Climate Change Adaptation. The demonstration projects will be
implemented through diverse activities, including visits to revitalization sites
in Baltimore, an urban bioblitz, special and organized presentation sessions, a
community workshop, a landscape architecture foundation workshop, design
charrettes, and an open town hall meeting. Graduate student leaders will develop
a project for each of the three sites that will be further developed in a fall
course.