* 1551196
* Constraining the Source of Ancient, Surface-derived Sulfur in the Bushveld Complex
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2019
* Sarah Penniston-Dorland, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 06/30/2019
* USD 142,359.00

The Bushveld Complex, South Africa, is the world's largest body of rock that
crystallized beneath the Earth's surface from molten rock over two billion years
ago. It is host to Earth's largest resource of platinum group elements (PGE) and
also a significant resource for chromium (Cr) and vanadium (V). The enrichment
of the Bushveld Complex in these elements is likely related to a number of
factors, including the original source of the melt and processes occurring
during its ascent and emplacement into the crust. Studying the Bushveld is
important not only for the understanding the formation of PGE ore deposits but
also to comprehend the Earth processes that led to such a large and unusual body
of rock. The Bushveld melt was rich in magnesium, which suggests it was
originally derived from the Earth's mantle, but puzzling crustal isotopic
signatures, including heterogeneous isotopic compositions of Sr, Nd, Pb, O and
S, suggest that it endured a complicated history of ascent, interactions with
its surroundings and possible incorporation of crust. The recent discovery of a
thick succession of highly magnesian rocks (the Basal Ultramafic Sequence) below
what have generally been accepted as the lowermost layers of the Bushveld
provides a unique opportunity to investigate rocks derived from the most
pristine melts associated with the Bushveld and to test hypotheses about the
sources of these crustal signatures. A novel approach that uses the isotopic
composition of the element sulfur (S) will be used to investigate how deep magma
interacted with the shallower crust to yield these rocks and constrain which
Earth processes that led to the formation of the largest PGE deposit on
Earth.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The Basal Ultramafic Sequence provides the
opportunity to investigate rocks that have experienced minimal alteration during
emplacement and crystallization (Wilson 2012; 2015). Existing chemical and
mineralogical data and planned Sr and Nd isotope analyses will be compared to
measurements of Del33S on the same samples. Questions to be addressed include
(1) whether there is a signal of surface-derived S in these lowermost Bushveld
igneous rocks, (2) whether these lowermost units are uniform in Del33S values,
and (3) how S isotopic compositions correlate with other indicators of crust
such as Sr and Nd isotopes. Several hypotheses for the source of the crustal
isotopic signals will be tested including (1) crustal signatures of the Bushveld
derived from sub-continental lithospheric mantle, (2) crustal signatures derived
from continental crust perhaps in a deep crustal staging chamber, (3) crustal
signatures derived from interaction with wall rock upon emplacement, and (4)
exchange between silicate melt and immiscible sulfide melt which enriched the
sulfide in crustal S. The Sr isotopic composition of the Bushveld Complex varies
throughout the igneous stratigraphy, and this variation has been interpreted as
the result of incorporation of different amounts of crustal material in
different magmas ? with varying opinions on the numbers of different pulses of
magma (e.g., Sharpe, 1985; Kruger, 1994). So far, it appears that the Sr and S
isotopic systems are not linked in the Bushveld Complex, since there are
distinct variations in Sr isotopes, but the S isotopic composition appears to be
uniform. However, there are no studies in which both these systems have been
measured on the same samples. This project provides the opportunity to
investigate these two isotopic systems, both indicators of crust, on the same
samples.