* 1551467
* Subcretion Versus Relamination: Testing Processes of Lower Crustal Modification in the Klamath Mountain Accretionary Province
* GEO,EAR
* 01/15/2016,12/31/2020
* Calvin Barnes, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 12/31/2020
* USD 350,000.00

Tectonic collision zones represent locations in which continental crust is
formed and/or physically and chemically modified. It is therefore important to
determine how large masses of rock (terranes) are added to or removed from the
crust during collision events. It is also important to understand the thermal
history of these environments in terms of timing, temperature extremes, sources
of heat, and geologic consequences, including potential for economic mineral
deposits. Traditional theories for terrane addition involves emplacement of cold
oceanic terranes beneath existing continental rocks. However, recent theories
suggest a process (relamination) in which hot, partially melted rocks are
emplaced at the base of the crust. This research will test these theories in the
Klamath Mountain geologic province (CA and OR), where the potential for ancient
relamination is strong. The research will also develop best practices for future
studies of relamination elsewhere and will develop a detailed thermal history of
the Klamath province that can be used to better understand economic resources,
regional geologic history, and landscape development. Lastly, because the
economy of the area is becoming increasingly dependent on tourism, additional
products designed to promote eco-tourism include field guides and web-based
information resources for the general public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Because
relamination involves emplacement of hot metasedimentary rocks at the base of
the crust, a number of distinctive geologic features should result, in
particular: rapid heating and metamorphism of the overlying terranes and lower-
crustal modification of arc magmas due to contamination by relaminated
metasedimentary rocks in the lower crust. The research will tightly constrain
the timing of deformation and high-grade metamorphism relative to magmatism
through detailed field mapping and sampling. High-precision (CA-ID-TIMS) U-Pb
ages on zircon and rutile from high-grade migmatites and key pinning plutons
will provide age constraints of orogenic events. These ages will be combined
with field and microstructural data and P-T estimates (mineral equilibria and
pseudosections) to develop a complete Pressure-Temperature-time-Deformation
(P-T-t-D) history. Regional sampling of plutons that span accretionary events in
both time and space will yield zircons that will be analyzed for oxygen isotopes
(SIMS) and dated and analyzed for Hf isotopes by LA-ICPMS to characterize
temporal and spatial changes in magma sources and contaminants, and thereby the
changes in the lower crustal architecture caused by relamination.