* 1551044
* InTrans: A virtualized SoC platform architecture for mini autonomous drones
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Gu-Yeon Wei, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Whang
* 08/31/2018
* USD 100,000.00

Building on recent results from the RoboBees project, this InTrans project
explores the design of new computing modalities that enable scalable performance
and energy efficiency across a wide range of energy- and weight-constrained
applications, from miniature autonomous drones (e.g., RoboBees) to larger small-
scale flying robots. The pursuit of energy-efficient compute performance remains
an important objective, but computing modalities continue to evolve over time.
Demand for mobility and portability led to laptops and then to smaller smart
phones that pack the functionality and performance of yesterday's computer into
one's hand. Technology is now at the cusp of another paradigm shift with the
proliferation of "internet of things" (IoT) devices and small-scale drones.
Despite the perception that CMOS technology scaling is reaching a plateau, these
applications require ever higher levels of energy-efficient computing with ever
shrinking form factors, demanding a new era of circuits, architectures, and
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One extreme example is the RoboBees project at
Harvard, which set out to create a colony of autonomous robotic bees: &lt;500mg,
insect-sized, flapping-wing robots with sufficient sensing, computing, and
actuation to achieve autonomous flight. This NSF-funded project designed,
implemented, and tested a "brain chip" that met severe weight and real-time
computation requirements. It comprises a general-purpose core with a collection
of dedicated hardware accelerators for the specific sensing, image processing,
and control algorithms needed for autonomous flight. While this chip
significantly improves power and performance compared to those only using
general-purpose cores, a platform that combines multiple one-off accelerators is
inflexible to subsequent changes in computing needs. Future computing systems
for autonomous drones must readily accommodate and adapt to changing workloads
and application needs. A promising research direction is to develop a
virtualized platform architecture constructed out of composable accelerators
that can provide scalability via virtualization. In other words, next-generation
computing systems will comprise computing elements flexible enough to operate
across a range of applications while retaining the benefits of specialization.
Via close collaboration with researchers at Intel, this InTrans project will (1)
identify interesting applications to target within the broad range of embedded
systems that combine sensing, computing, and actuation and (2) develop and
demonstrate new computer architectures that readily scale performance and energy
consumption across a broad range of platforms and system constraints.