* 1551629
* Transitivity of Sentences and Scenes in Early Language Development
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2016,11/30/2022
* Jeffrey Lidz, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Mary Paster
* 11/30/2022
* USD 417,699.00

Children acquire their first language within a few years, and without explicit
deliberation. Their task is extremely complex. They must come to perceive
countless gestures or sounds as having the structure of sentences, with
subjects, verbs, and so on. At the same time, they must come to understand how
these sentences depict the world around them, as it is lived and portrayed by
their caretakers and peers. How do they do this? Answering this question
requires understanding how they experience both the language and the world
around them, at each stage of their development. This research aims at one
central part of the problem: how do infants learn the meanings of transitive
verbs, those with a subject and object? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
approaches the problem from two directions. First, can children younger than 2
correctly perceive the category of 'transitive verb'? This may be difficult,
because such verbs may occur in a variety of contexts that obscure their
category, such as questions where the direct object occurs at the start of the
sentence: "What did Mary see?" Second, how do children at this age tend to
represent the events around them? Which aspects of an event are or are not
salient to them? With some answers to both questions, the project moves on to
asking what expectations children have about the connection between the syntax
of transitive verbs and their meanings, expectations that might help them learn.
This research will deepen our understanding of the relation between linguistic
and nonlinguistic representations, and how these change in the early stages of
language development. Moreover, this work employs methods not previously used in
research on the acquisition of syntax, expanding the range of methods available
for others. Significant effort will also be directed towards outreach events in
which graduate and undergraduate students working on the project will engage
with high school and middle school students about the importance of linguistic
research in general, and about the broader societal lessons that can be drawn
from research on infant language learners.