* 1551628
* Acquiring the language of possibility: consequences for language variation and change
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2016,01/31/2022
* Valentine Hacquard, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Mary Paster
* 01/31/2022
* USD 272,144.00

Humans have a special capacity to think and talk about possibilities beyond the
here and now, enabling them to talk about impossible or hypothetical situations,
such as what the world might be like if dinosaurs had survived, or whether next
summer may be warmer than this one. How do children acquiring their first
language figure what we are then discussing, when mere possibilities, unlike
apples or naps, cannot be directly observed? And how do they come to use words,
such as the modals "may" and "must", that are dedicated to saying what is
possible or likely? This project pursues these developmental puzzles by probing
how the use of modal words by children either matches or differs from that of
their caregivers. The results will provide insights into two broader issues.
What are the natural and unnatural ways of expressing possibility in human
languages? And do the errors that children make sometimes lead to changes in
modal language over time?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will be the most
comprehensive linguistic study of modal development to date and will include
both a series of behavioral experiments, and a corpus study of naturalistic
speech between children and their caregivers. The experiments build on
generalizations from studies of how modals change their meanings over time in
the history of a language, and how they vary across languages. By exploiting
this integration of theories of linguistic meaning and child development with
theories of language change and variation, the project will bridge communities
of researchers that are too seldom in contact. Outreach events supported by this
project will enable high school students to participate in linguistic research
on the language of possibility. Languages and dialects vary in how they talk
about possibility, but also exhibit a common foundation. By understanding both
how languages may vary and what is common among them, students who participate
in the planned outreach activities will gain insight into the capacity that we
share as humans for language and for the processes and representations that
underlie abstract thought.