* 1551463
* EAGER: Study of Longitudinal results and the I CORPS L Ecosystem
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2015,06/30/2018
* Philip Weilerstein, National Collegiate Inventors and Innovators Alliance
* Standard Grant
* Junhong Chen
* 06/30/2018
* USD 300,000.00

This project will conduct a study of the outcomes achieved by teams in the
National Science Foundation Innovation Corps for Learning Program (NSF I-Corps
L) and will analyze the specific activities found to be successful in helping
educational innovations achieve wider use and impact. NSF's Innovation Corps for
Learning Program takes discoveries and promising practices from education
research and development and provides support to help achieve broader adoption
of these STEM education and learning innovations. I-Corps L teams receive
support in the form of mentoring and funding to accelerate scaling of
educational innovations in a sustainable manner. This project will examine the
results from I-Corps L and determine if and how the participating team members
apply what they learned through I-Corps L. This work will identify and monitor
the outcomes of participation in I-Corps L on the scaling up educational
innovations of the team as well as the professional development of the team
members. The project will seek to identify the key features and pathways in the
educational systems which are most useful to I-Corps L teams in successfully
scaling up and sustaining their STEM education-related innovations. This study
will provide a better understanding of the long-term outcomes achieved by the
I-Corps L program. This information will be useful in helping other educational
innovations to achieve greater impact.

This project will document the longitudinal outcomes of the three I-Corps L
cohorts trained in 2015 and early 2016 and will create a greater understanding
of the conditions that are responsible for their relative success. The
investigation will be guided by two main questions. First, what are the outcomes
of participation in I-Corps L on the teams' innovations, the team members'
personal and professional development? Second, what are the key features of and
pathways within the ecosystems in which I-Corps L team members seek to
successfully scale and sustain their STEM education-related innovations? Through
surveys and interviews with participants, experts and education entrepreneurs
the project will document the intermediate and long-term outcomes of
participation in I-Corps L on the teams' innovations and on team members'
personal and professional development and the factors associated with the
I-Corps L process; and identify and define the key features and pathways in the
ecosystem(s) in which I-Corps L team members seek to successfully scale and
sustain their STEM education-related innovations. Results will include a set of
recommendations and observations to support future research and evaluation of
NSF education programs including I-Corps L and recommendations for NSF's role
and policies directed to scaling STEM educational innovations. This study will
become part of an emerging body of literature around educational related
entrepreneurial studies in STEM.