* 1551526
* CAREER: Navigation in Naturalistic and Changing Environments: Perception, Learning and Memory
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2022
* David Lent, California State University-Fresno Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 05/31/2022
* USD 671,230.00

This Faculty Early-Career Development (CAREER) award supports an integrated
research and education project aimed at determining how insects navigate in
complex environments. The ultimate goal of this project is to determine how
animals navigate in dynamic environments to advance our understanding of the
perceptual, learning, and memory mechanisms underlying navigation. The outcomes
of this research provide an understanding of dynamic control systems, reveal how
the nervous system has evolved to handle unpredictability, and drive the
development of novel navigational algorithms and biological sensors. This
project is designed to provide learning and research opportunities to expand
interdisciplinary education for underrepresented groups in the STEM majors. The
investigator integrates this research into curriculum at multiple levels: (i) an
introductory module that engages first-year biology students to use models and
simulations to understand how animals move through the world; (ii) the
development of a summer research program that recruits undergraduate students;
(iii) the establishment of collaboration with high-school biology teachers to
help establish the interdisciplinary approach to biology education before
students enter university.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Insect navigation studies have a
long history, but the mechanisms of control in changing naturalistic
environments remain relatively unexamined. An integrative approach is used to
elucidate how perception of the environment is computed and stored in the
nervous system and acted upon by an organism. There are three major aims in the
proposed research: (i) identify the local and global visual features that ants
extract from naturalistic panoramic scenes; (ii) determine how the viewing
behavior of ants comes to be directed towards the local and global cues used for
route guidance; (iii) define the role of memory in stabilizing routes in the
face of change. The proposed research brings the unpredictable nature of the
field into the lab by employing virtual naturalistic environments in which
complexity and instability can be introduced in a systematic fashion. For
example, the investigator can add, remove, or displace the visual features
within a scene in a closed-loop fashion simulating natural occurring changes in
lighting conditions, wind displacement, and terrain geometry. This research is
of general interest to visual and behavioral neuroscientists and to computer
scientists working with autonomous robots. Visually dependent tasks that are
broadly similar across a wide variety of animals with well-developed visual
systems tend to have areas of convergence in their generating algorithms (e.g.
path integration, visually guided navigation), although the specific neural
implementation may differ between species. Insect navigational behavior provides
an ideal platform to develop precise control models to describe and simulate
cellular events, neural circuits, and complex behavior.