* 1551543
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: A Communicative Perspective on Quantitative Syntax
* SBE,BCS
* 02/15/2016,07/31/2017
* Edward Gibson, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* William Badecker
* 07/31/2017
* USD 11,650.00

This research addresses the question: why are human languages the way they are?
The researchers propose that a number of the properties of languages can be
explained as design choices that maximize ease of communication for the human
brain. Understanding how languages are (or aren't) optimized for communication
will be crucial to developing scientific models of human language understanding
and learning. The resulting understanding of the purpose of certain language
structures will enable more effective teaching of those structures in second
language pedagogy. In addition, understanding why languages are the way they are
will also affect computer systems for natural language understanding. Over the
last decade there have been major advances in computer understanding of natural
language, often using surprisingly simple algorithms. It is not known what
properties of language make it possible to get so far with such simple
algorithms. Once these properties are understood, it will be possible to
leverage them to develop even more effective algorithms.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research focuses on predicting the quantitative word
order properties of languages as observed in large annotated corpora of text.
Data comes from the Universal Dependencies project, a recent collaboration of
several universities and Google to develop uniformly annotated dependency-parsed
corpora for about 40 languages. The researchers will develop simple models of
communication that incorporate the probability of error in communication and
certain well-known points of difficulty in human language comprehension (due to
factors such as limited working memory resources). The frequency distribution of
different word orders in the dependency corpora will be modeled by assuming that
approximately rational speakers selects utterances which have a high probability
of being understood. The researchers aim to use these models to explain the
distribution of dependency length (distance between syntactically related words)
and the distribution of the degree of word order freedom (the extent to which
words can appear in different orders while keeping the same meaning).