* 1551885
* Student Travel Support to Attend ISUILS14 on December 9-13, 2015, in Kauai, Hawaii
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2016
* Wendell Hill, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Cronin
* 07/31/2016
* USD 5,000.00

This award provides support to allow students from U.S. universities to
participate in the fourteenth meeting of the International Symposium on
Ultrafast Intense Laser Science (ISUILS14), to be held on December 9-13, 2015,
in Kauai, Hawaii. This Symposium is held in the United States one out of every
five years, and offers an opportunity for students to present their research
results and to interact with senior scientists from across the United States and
the broader international community. The support of students through this award
makes a substantial contribution to the education and training of future
scientists. Students who graduate with a background in this subdiscipline
(atomic, molecular, and optical physics) acquire a broad range of knowledge and
skills that enable them to contribute to progress in many areas of science and
technology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Symposium is on a topic that is receiving
particular emphasis this year because of a number of reports, such as (1)
"Optics and Photonics: Essential Technologies for Our Nation," from the National
Research Council, (2) "Fast-Track Action Committee on Optics and Photonics:
Building a Brighter Future with Optics and Photonics," from the National Science
and Technology Council, and (3) "Optics and Photonics: Transformative Research
Opportunities in the Mathematical and Physical Sciences," from the NSF
Mathematics and Physical Sciences Advisory Committee. It is also a special year
for this topic because 2015 has been designated the International Year of Light
by the United Nations.