* 1551722
* Collaborative Research: Normal and pathological covariation in the masticatory apparatus of anthropoid primates
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2021
* Claire Kirchhoff, Marquette University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 07/31/2021
* USD 27,946.00

The investigators will study skull and jaw anatomy in primates, to better
understand how the anatomical components of the chewing system (teeth, jaws, and
related joints) work together and how these components are affected by aging and
pathological changes. Although the components of the masticatory (chewing)
system are known to work together as a unit, previous analyses of this system
have typically examined specific components in isolation from the rest of the
anatomy, providing an incomplete picture of anatomical interrelationships. This
project will address how the different anatomical components are correlated with
each other across the entire masticatory system, in the context of changes that
may occur during the lifetime of an individual, such as normal and pathological
dental wear, and normal and abnormal (e.g. arthritis) changes in
temporomandibular joint (TMJ) shape. Quantifying anatomical correlations using
three-dimensional modeling in the dentition and TMJ will allow for new
interpretations of the skeletal masticatory system and an improved understanding
of the evolutionary pressures associated with different feeding behaviors and
diets across primates. Determining whether TMJ pathology covaries with dental
wear and pathology in multiple non-human species will provide an evolutionary
context for dental and TMJ disorders that are very common in humans. The broader
impacts of this research include encouraging gender and ethnic diversity in
science by providing research opportunities for undergraduate students at
universities that primarily educate first generation college and minority
students; supporting the research of three early career female scientists;
training a postdoctoral researcher in advanced techniques for capturing and
analyzing shape variation; building a large database of 3D data that will be
available to both anthropological and biomedical researchers and that may inform
clinical studies of dental problems in humans; and conducting community outreach
that will further disseminate the results of this investigation and help
generate public interest in STEM research.

Because changes in diet and subsistence patterns often lie at the root of major
evolutionary shifts, documenting and understanding the adaptive significance of
the masticatory system during human evolution, as well as across living
primates, has been a major goal of functional morphological studies in
biological anthropology. The masticatory system acts as a single functional
unit, such that perturbations in one portion of this system may affect other
regions of anatomy; thus, age-related changes and pathological conditions of the
masticatory apparatus are likely to be multifactorial and affect the entire
system. Through a detailed assessment of dental and TMJ morphology and
covariance between the dentition and the TMJ, this study examines both normal
and pathological dental wear and TMJ remodeling in 16 anthropoid primate taxa,
including humans. The specific aims include testing for covariation between the
maxillary and mandibular teeth, the cranial and mandibular components of the
TMJ, the teeth and TMJ, and dental and TMJ pathologies. Shape variation in the
dentition and TMJ will be quantified using advanced morphometric techniques,
including 3D landmark and surface data. Specimens will be assessed for pathology
using published criteria for antemortem tooth loss, tooth wear, pulp cavity
exposure, and TMJ osteoarthritis. By determining whether TMJ pathology covaries
with dental wear and pathology in humans and non-human primates, this research
will provide an evolutionary context for the evolution of primate feeding
behaviors and of TMJ disorders in humans. The research has public health
relevance, given the high prevalence of antemortem tooth loss and TMJ disorders
in modern human populations. The resulting data and analyses will be relevant to
a variety of fields including public health, dentistry, biomechanics/kinematics,
feeding ecology, functional morphology, and mammalian evolution.