* 1551444
* EAGER: Collaborative Research: Enabling Economic Policies in Software-Defined Internet Exchange Points
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2018
* Anna Nagurney, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 09/30/2018
* USD 149,992.00

Internet routing---particularly inter-domain routing---suffers from a long list
of well-known problems that makes it difficult to innovate new types of end-to-
end services and applications. Routing decisions are made locally by routers
based on policies that users and their applications have little control over,
resulting in routing decisions that are not optimized for users or their
applications. Moreover, the "money flow," from customers through a sequence of
providers that handle their packets, is determined by business relationships
(service-level agreements (SLAs)) among providers---which change very slowly.
One consequence is that it is virtually impossible in today's Internet to offer
an end-to-end service with any real predictability of quality, let alone a
guarantee. Moreover, concerns about network providers discriminating against
some providers? content (see the net neutrality debate) add another dimension of
complexity.

Software-Defined Networking (SDN) is an emerging networking paradigm in which
data traffic is routed at the granularity of individual flows by a programmable
controller. The ability to route flows at a finer granularity than destination
prefixes, and the potential for various stakeholders to express and enforce
routing policies for their traffic have made SDN appealing also for inter-domain
routing. At the same time, an increasing number of inter-provider connections
are being realized at Internet Exchange Points (IXPs). In this context,
Software-Defined Internet Exchange Points (SDX) have been proposed as a way for
multiple providers to collectively control the routing decisions at Internet
Exchange Points (IXPs). Most SDX research has focused on the problems associated
with composed and possibly conflicting policies specified by providers or with
scalability issues implementing flow-level policies at major IXPs with large
numbers of flow.

Intellectual Merit: While SDXs hold great potential, they also exhibit
considerable challenges: SDXs offer mechanisms to enforce (certain types of)
policies, but they do not define policies. The frameworks needed to define
policies are an open area of research. Policies are typically derived from
economic relationships established between providers, or between providers and
their customers. Moreover, access to, and use of, resources at an SDX itself
(e.g., network capacity, processing, and storage) requires that an economic
relationship be established between a provider and the SDX. In other words, SDXs
act as marketplaces, marketing their resources to providers (e.g., the right to
use link bandwidth, processing cycles, and storage), and SDXs provide a way for
providers to market their (transit) services to other providers on behalf of
their customers. Current SDX designs do not consider these economic
relationships and thus omit a critical aspect of Internet operation. This
project includes fundamental research aimed at the design of controllers for
Software-Defined Internet Exchange Points that can be programmed to implement
end-to-end (i.e., inter-domain) routing policies that are tied to explicit
economic relationships between network entities.

Broader Impacts: The results from this research have the potential for a
transformative impact on how inter-domain routing---which is at the core of
economic interactions between network providers in the Internet---is implemented
and used to provide novel services in networks. The interdisciplinary nature of
this work---crossing the boundaries of engineering and economics---presents
particular challenges in developing solutions that are technically sound and can
be adopted in practice. The work involves an education component. Results from
our work will be disseminated in the form of open-source toolsets and
publications.