* 1551994
* CAREER: CDS&amp;E: Predictive Discovery of Complex Reaction Mechanisms
* MPS,CHE
* 01/15/2016,12/31/2022
* Paul Zimmerman, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 12/31/2022
* USD 625,000.00

Paul Zimmerman at the University of Michigan is supported by the Chemical
Theory, Models and Computational Methods Program and the Computational and Data-
Enabled Science and Engineering (CDS&amp;E) Program to develop new tools to
predict the outcome of chemical reactions. Computational chemistry has a long
history of using the principles of quantum mechanics to create tools which
provide detailed, accurate explanations for a wide variety of chemical
processes. Many of these tools have reached sufficient accuracy that they can be
applied to discover chemical reactions without requiring prior insight from
experiment. Unfortunately, the high computational cost of these methods has
prevented their broad use in predicting chemical reactivity, especially in cases
where the chemistry is highly complex or poorly understood. This grant supports
the development of fully computational, low-cost and highly accurate methods
that are able to predict the outcome of chemical reactions starting only from
the feedstock molecules. The application focus of these methods is catalytic
reactions, providing a highly useful tool for research into chemistries that can
be applied at an industrial level to create high-value chemical products. These
tools are available to the wider computational chemistry community, enabling
maximized impact of the developments to a great number of problems in chemical
reactivity. Due to the diversity of potential applications for this research,
the students involved in this project gain not only algorithm development
abilities, but also fundamental insights into processes governing molecular
behavior, cutting-edge computational research experience, and problem-solving
abilities that are needed to address the challenges of the 21st century. The
proposed methods are transformed into educational strategies that merge
introductory laboratory exercises with real-world research, starting with a
pilot study in honors organic chemistry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
program builds upon work by the Zimmerman group that shows chemical reactions
can be described in terms of a small number of localized, anharmonic reaction
coordinates. These reaction coordinates consist of interatomic distances,
angles, and torsions, and are a reliable, transferable basis for describing
atomic motion. By employing advanced single-ended chain-of-states optimization
algorithms which search along these coordinates for plausible chemical
reactions, this research methodology can efficiently and reliably predict
reactive events without guidance from chemical intuition. The main objective of
ongoing work is to expand this method to cover transition metal elements, enable
efficient conformation searches in systems with floppy degrees of freedom, and
develop machine learning algorithms to automatically process chemical data and
provide great enhancements in computational efficiency. In sum, these new
reaction search techniques enable predictive reaction discovery in a wide
variety of large, highly complicated chemical systems where chemical knowledge
alone is not yet sufficient to make accurate predictions. These methods are
being applied to challenging cases in catalysis where uncharacterized side
reactions are severe impediments to efficient product formation. Ongoing
discovery of these undesired reaction pathways lead to the chemical insight
required to improve reaction selectivity and catalyst stability.These tools
allow beginning chemistry students to hypothesize and evaluate reactions in
silico, resulting in a means for students to perform research at an early stage
of their studies. Such pedagogical tools are distributed to educators outside of
the University of Michigan to maximize their impact.