* 1551958
* Workshop:  Exploring the Complexity of the Contributions of Research Universities to Society
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2017
* Martin Kenney, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 08/31/2017
* USD 85,501.00

This workshop will bring together scholars from a wide range of disciplines to
explore the development of more comprehensive set of measures to better assess
the benefits provided by U.S. research universities to society. The workshop
will yield new insights regarding ways through which the public goods and
economic benefits of research, education, training, and knowledge diffusion can
be measured and assessed. Workshop discussions and a follow-up publication will
consider the full operational diversity of U.S. research universities. New
insights will result regarding the ways through which largely local investments
in universities become manifest in regional, national, and global contexts. The
workshop also will provide valuable information and perspectives regarding
policies, investment strategies, and other approaches that can further enhance
the short- and longer-term benefits associated with university activity.

The workshop will address limitations in past research attempting to evaluate
the contributions of research investments because most of those studies focused
on patents and university-licensed startups. Although these are important
indicators, interviews and historical studies indicate that these metric fail to
address many of the most important economic and social contributions of
university engagement with society. The scholars involved in this workshop will
explore alternate ways to measure the returns of publicly funded research in
terms of commercialization and through a wider range of contributions to the
public good. Participants also will evaluate strategies for initiatives to
increase these contributions. Workshop participants will include researchers
from a range of fields, including university-technology commercialization; the
economics of higher education; and science, technology, and innovation studies
as well as high-level university administrators and policy makers. The workshop
will be conducted at the University of California-Davis during the Summer of
2016. This workshop responds to a Dear College Letter issued by the NSF Science
of Science and Innovation Policy (SciSIP) Program designed to facilitate the use
of STAR METRICS, NCSES, and other databases in order to evaluate relationships
among science funding, employment, and outcome metrics.