* 1551717
* Seismic study of mantle deformation and melt extraction during continental breakup in the ENAM primary site
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2019
* Harm Van Avendonk, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Deborah K. Smith
* 03/31/2019
* USD 234,419.00

Continental drift between the eastern United States and northwest Africa about
180 million years ago was a key event in Earth's plate tectonic history. The
mechanical and volcanic processes that shaped the continental margins of the
eastern U.S. left a record of volcanic crust and deep sedimentary rocks beneath
the coastal plain, and offshore in the Atlantic Ocean. This project will examine
the deep structure of the passive margin and provide a better understanding of
the early tectonic evolution, heat flow, and sediment accumulation along the
east coast of the United States. Understanding the geologic history will improve
our knowledge of natural resources and ancient submarine landslides that
affected the continental slope. The project supports the training of a graduate
student.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the researcher and graduate student
will investigate the deep structure and origin of the Blake Spur Magnetic
Anomaly, which lies offshore the eastern United States. Seismic data collected
during the Eastern North American Margin community experiment will be used to
image the crust and upper mantle beneath this magnetic anomaly. A preliminary
inspection of the seismic data suggests that seismic waves here can travel
through the mantle with a speed that is higher parallel to the magnetic anomaly
than perpendicular to it. This form of seismic anisotropy can be used to test
whether mantle melt infiltration or stretching of the mantle rock created the
rock fabric of the rifted margin.