* 1551875
* EAGER: Research in the Interface of Algorithmic Game Theory and Learning
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2016
* Constantinos Daskalakis, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 08/31/2016
* USD 225,000.00

Recent years have seen tremendous advances in Machine Learning and in the
interface between Computer Science and Economics. Progress in Machine Learning
has been driven by the vast amounts of data that humanity is generating and
collecting. It is now widely accepted that scientific innovation necessitates
the development of computational methodology to process this data and use it for
inference and prediction. This has resulted in remarkable progress at the
interface of Algorithms, Machine Learning and Statistics. At the same time, much
of the world's economic activity has been transferred to the Internet via old
markets that obtained online presence as well as new markets that are directly
inspired and enabled by online activity, such as sponsored search and ad
auctions. Driven by the increasing importance of online economic activity there
has been much interest in investigating its joint computational and economic
characteristics through research at the interface of Computer Science and
Economics, which includes Algorithmic Game Theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI
and his group at MIT have made several contributions to both Learning and
Algorithmic Game Theory. The goal of the proposed research is to push the
research front in the interface between these two
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI and his team plan to pursue 4 goals, as
follows. Goal (1) is to advance understanding of learning dynamics in games.
Goal (2) is to design "learning mechanisms'' to solve learning and inference
tasks when the only access to data is through strategic data providers with a
cost for producing good data. Besides online learning, the team expects that
advances in (1) will have implications to fundamental problems in Algorithmic
Game Theory, particularly in goal (3): improving the state-of-the-art in
algorithms for the computation of approximate Nash equilibria. Progress in (2)
will have immediate applications in crowd-sourcing, but the team also plans to
investigate another application, motivated by the tremendous growth of Massive
Online Open Courses: goal (4) is to develop good peer grading schemes.