* 1551974
* Exploring ways to enhance science learning for English language learners through improvement in teacher self-efficacy beliefs
* EHR,DRL
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2017
* Neporcha Cone, Kennesaw State University Research and Service Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Celestine Pea
* 08/31/2017
* USD 296,395.00

The Discovery Research K-12 program seeks to significantly enhance the learning
and teaching of science, technology, engineering and mathematics by preK-12
students and teachers, through research and development of innovative resources,
models, and tools. This project will explore the influence of a professional
learning community model on preparing preservice and novice science teachers to
teach in culturally and linguistically diverse classrooms of English language
learners. The project will study the effect of a professional learning community
model on teachers' self-efficacy beliefs and practices as it relates to teaching
science to this population. The need to build teacher capacity is two-fold.
First, the project will help the state of Georgia meet the needs of a growing
population of English language learners. Second, the project will help
preservice and novice teachers prepare more English language learners to obtain
the STEM knowledge and skills needed to respond to the increasing demand for a
stronger national STEM workforce as well as to fill more than 200,000 STEM-
related jobs projected to be available in the state by 2018. To address these
major needs, this project will provide opportunities that will empower
elementary science teachers to collaborate and to continuously improve science
teaching and learning for English language learners. The focus will be on
improving instructional practices, strengthening content knowledge, and
expanding literacy skills through lesson plan development and modification,
lesson implementation, individual reflection using assessment data as evidence,
peer debriefing, and collaborative generalization by connecting theory to
practice.

A sequential mixed methods design will be used to capture data about the impact
of the professional learning community on the self-efficacy beliefs of teachers
participating in the project. The PI and graduate students will use Web-based
surveys, semi-structured interviews, and classroom observations using a
quantitated protocol to collect, analyze, and interpret data on the model being
explored. An online statistical software program will be used to compute surveys
at various checkpoints over the two-year period while interviews will be coded
using computer assisted qualitative data analysis software based on constant
comparative analysis. If the project achieve its goals, the outcomes will result
in products that could lead to information that might inform change in teacher
education programs, interventions for classroom practice, and topics for future
research.