* 1551057
* EAGER: NDN-Hadoop: Exploring Applicability of NDN for Big-Data Computing
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2018
* Christopher Gniady, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 07/31/2018
* USD 232,000.00

Large-scale distributed processing of huge amount of data is the underpinning
technology in the era of Big Data. The Apache Hadoop, an open-source software
platform, has become the go-to technology for running multiple types of
distributed applications such as Web indexing, data mining, business
intelligence analysis, machine learning, scientific simulation, and
bioinformatics research. This wide range of applications requires Hadoop to be
flexible and adaptive to different network environments while providing high
performance for each application, resulting in complicated protocol design,
implementation, a large number of parameters to tune, and often unsatisfactory
performance in real deployment. An emerging network architecture, Named Data
Networking (NDN) shifts the focus from point-to-point communication to general
content retrieval, a much better fit to Big Data computing than traditional
TCP/IP, the communication protocol of the internet. NDN can potentially offer
tremendous benefits in simplifying deployments, improving robustness and
performance for Hadoop systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project investigates
the feasibility of integrating NDN and Hadoop to build an NDN-Hadoop system that
will provide a robust, efficient, and scalable foundation for Big Data
computing. Since Hadoop is a complicated ecosystem and NDN is being actively
developed, there are many questions to be answered regarding how they may work
together and how to exploit the potential benefits to the greatest extent. More
specifically, this project will (1) evaluate the applicability of NDN in Hadoop
infrastructure by understanding its benefits and quantifying performance gains
of Hadoop running on top of NDN, (2) design novel Hadoop mechanisms to take full
advantage of NDN and the information it provides for better performance and
reliability, and (3) develop and test a complete system of Hadoop running on top
of NDN to create a platform for future
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Introducing NDN into datacenter-scale networking
and computing will have profound impacts on the design of large data centers,
distributed computing infrastructures, and multiple research communities. The
project will produce the first data-centric Hadoop system, which will benefit
all kinds of applications that use Hadoop. The results can also be translated
into other Big Data computing platforms, broadening the impacts even further. It
provides not only new research directions to the network and system community,
but also performance enhancements to scientific computing community and data
analytics. The experiences gained in this project will feedback to NDN research,
contributing to the development of future Internet. The project offers great
education and training opportunities for graduate and undergraduate students.