* 1551868
* Magma ascent and eruption in the Aleutian arc
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2016,11/30/2018
* Philipp Ruprecht, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Dennis Geist
* 11/30/2018
* USD 243,893.00

Magma ascent and eruption in the Aleutian arc The Aleutian arc is one of the
most volcanically active regions of the world. Frequent eruptions of tall ash
clouds by Aleutian volcanoes present a significant hazard to local communities
and to travelers flying from North America, Europe, and Asia. In order to
mitigate this hazard, Alaskan volcanoes are extensively monitored by the Alaska
Volcano Observatory (AVO), using seismic data, geodetic data and satellite
imagery. These techniques are largely successful in enabling the prediction of
volcanic eruptions; however, the links between precursor signals of an eruption
(as inferred from seismic and geodetic data) and eruptive style are poorly
understood. Factors that are thought to play a role in controlling the vigor of
a volcanic eruption include the volatile content of the magma, the ascent rate
of the magma in the volcanic conduit, and the temperature of the magma. These
parameters are difficult to measure directly, but they can be inferred a
posteriori from the analysis of erupted materials. The goal of the proposed work
is to measure gradients of water and other chemical species in erupted crystals
and glasses from three Aleutian arc volcanoes. These chemical gradients are
signatures of magma ascent, degassing, and cooling. Recently developed
techniques for interpreting such chemical gradients will be used to constrain
ascent rates and temperatures of magmas in the minutes to hours prior to their
eruption. Such measurements will further our understanding of processes
operating in the volcanic conduit in the build-up to an eruption, and will
provide a physical framework in which to place real-time volcano monitoring
data.

The proposed study integrates recently developed petrologic methods for
determining the ascent rates and syneruptive thermal histories of magmas erupted
at three Aleutian arc volcanoes (Okmok, Seguam, and Pavlof) with contrasting
explosivities (Volcanic Explosivity Index, VEI, of 1 ? 3). Magma ascent rates
for each of the three eruptions will be calculated using three independent
techniques: (1) water loss from olivine-hosted melt inclusions of different
sizes; (2) water zonation in olivine; and (3) water zonation in clinopyroxene.
Magma cooling histories during ascent and eruption will be calculated using MgO
concentration gradients inside olivine-hosted melt inclusions. Integration of
these techniques on samples from volcanoes with different eruptive styles will
allow identification of relationships between magma volatile concentrations,
ascent rate, thermal history, and eruptive style. The proposed analyses will
enhance our understanding of the behavior of water and other volatile elements
in olivine-hosted melt inclusions and in arc volcanoes more broadly, and they
will enable more reliable and accurate determination of pre-eruptive volatile
concentrations from olivine-hosted melt inclusions.