* 1551609
* Fostering Successful Innovative Large-Scale, Distributed Science and Engineering Projects through Integrated Collaboration
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2017
* Nicholas Berente, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 08/31/2017
* USD 100,000.00

Large-scale, innovative science and engineering requires collaboration across
geographically-distributed, multidisciplinary teams; however, it is very
difficult for projects to maintain intellectual cohesion, tight coordination,
and integration necessary to manage scalable ?virtual? work that is
distributed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to help teams to
succeed - maximizing efficiency, effectiveness, and innovativeness. This
proposal is to develop the capacity for leaders of Centers, Institutes, Labs and
other collaborations to plan and pursue transformative research agendas in order
to truly create breakthroughs in smart and connected health, cyberphysical
systems, smart cities, cybersecurity, big data, environmental sustainability,
and across the domains of basic research. Training in design and management of
such collaborations will be provided and tools and techniques will be developed.
This work will draw on lessons learned from organization science to develop a
customized curriculum to help large-scale science and engineering teams
effectively and efficiently collaborate at this scale. Using the developed
materials, the first of a series of workshops targeting potential principle
investigators interested in large-scale Computer and Information Science and
Engineering (CISE)-related projects will be conducted in the spring of 2016.