* 1551300
* Physical Properties of Partially Molten Rocks from Microtomography Experiments and Digital Rock Physics
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2016,01/31/2020
* Wen-Lu Zhu, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 01/31/2020
* USD 299,086.00

Melt generated in the interior of the Earth at plate boundaries plays an
important role in the transfer of heat and mass and eventually feeds the
volcanic activity of our planet. It is important to better constrain how much
melt is present at depth and where it is present. Seismic and electromagnetic
measurements provide data to constrain melt distribution but how to convert
these data into melt fraction estimates remains a subject of contention. This
project will analyze three-dimensional images of the distribution of melt in
experimentally produced partially molten rocks and simulate several physical
properties of these samples. Results from this study will make it possible to
link seismic and electromagnetic data with models of melt transport in the
interior of the Earth, which ultimately helps understand how plate tectonics
works and the link between mantle processes and volcanic
activity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will use synchrotron microtomography
to image partially molten mantle rocks in three-dimensions. The samples will be
hydrostatically-annealed aggregates that consist of olivine and orthopyroxene in
different proportions, and contain melt fractions of 0.005 to 0.20. Digital rock
physics simulations will be performed to obtain permeability, electrical
conductivity and elastic moduli of both hydrostatically annealed olivine +
orthopyroxene-basaltic melt and sheared partially molten olivine rocks.
Variation of melt content with distance in the sample will be analyzed to
constrain the bulk viscosity of the sample. This project will quantify the
effects of lithological partitioning due to the presence of orthopyroxene on
melt distribution and show how deformation affects melt distribution, and
induces permeability anisotropy.