* 1551587
* Testing contrasting models for the distribution of hydrothermal circulation in subducting crust
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2020
* Glenn Spinelli, New Mexico Institute of Mining and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Deborah K. Smith
* 05/31/2020
* USD 203,427.00

Subduction zones are where one of Earth's tectonic plates moves under another
resulting in many of the world's largest earthquakes and damaging tsunamis. One
example is the 2011 earthquake and tsunami in northern Japan that killed more
than 20,000 people and crippled the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear complex. These
earthquakes arise from friction on the subduction zone fault that separates the
two tectonic plates. The temperature of the subduction fault zone affects this
friction and can control the size and distribution of earthquakes. In addition,
subduction zone temperatures affect a wide range of other physical and chemical
processes, including the generation of magma that supplies nearby volcanoes. To
understand these processes, it is important to accurately estimate subduction
zone temperatures. Recent discoveries show that seawater circulating within the
subducting tectonic plates is an important control on subduction zone
temperatures. This project will examine how fractures that open in the upper
part of a tectonic plate as it bends down into a subduction zone affect seawater
circulation in the system and how that affects subduction zone temperatures. The
project will develop numerical thermal models for seven subduction zones.
Application of the results of this research has direct societal benefit, by
informing earthquake hazard estimates. In addition, the project will enhance
education at New Mexico Tech, a STEM-focused Hispanic-serving institution. A
graduate student will be trained in geophysics and hydrogeology. Results of the
project will be incorporated into "using data in the classroom" efforts,
improving hands-on experience in undergraduate
courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Accurate subduction zone thermal models are
necessary to understand frictional behavior, metamorphic reaction progress,
release of volatiles from the subducting slab, mantle wedge hydration,
subduction dynamics, and melt generation. Fluid circulation in an oceanic
crustal aquifer is an important control on subduction zone temperatures.
However, there are contrasting hypotheses for how much of the oceanic crust can
host vigorous hydrothermal circulation. Both thickening of the oceanic crustal
aquifer via plate bending normal faults and fluid circulation between subducted
crust and the crust seaward of the trench may contribute to the advective
redistribution of heat that affects subduction zone temperatures. This project
will test the hypothesis that the thermal effects of aquifer thickening prior to
subduction are greater for slabs with a greater degree of curvature. This
project will exploit the fact that aquifer thickening from the outer rise to the
trench and continued fluid circulation in subducting crust are expected to
produce distinct surface heat flux anomalies (a broad low amplitude anomaly for
aquifer thickening; a narrow high amplitude anomaly for fluid circulation in
subducting crust) in order to constrain the thermal effects of each process.
This will advance our understanding of the fluid circulation process that is an
important control on subduction zone temperatures, improving subduction zone
thermal models for the seven margins examined in this project and others.