* 1551271
* EAGER: Braid Statistics and Hard Problems in Braid Groups with Applications to Cryptography
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2019
* Paul Gunnells, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 08/31/2019
* USD 149,989.00

This research project will investigate and develop new mathematical tools in
public-key cryptography. Such tools have been introduced in recent years as
suitable for implementation on low-cost platforms with constrained computational
resources; it is expected that such platforms will become more and prevalent as
consumer devices become "smart" and connect to large networks with the emergence
of the "Internet of Things." Public-key cryptography is used by each person
hundreds and perhaps thousands of times daily, as it is the main security used
in cellular, ATM, and other computer networks. Traditional public-key systems
are based on hard problems in number theory, such as finding the prime factors
of a large number. The tools that will be investigated in this project come from
abstract algebra, namely the theory of braids. Intuitively, a braid is exactly
what the reader pictures it to be: a tangled weave of strands. Braids can be
encoded symbolically, which leads to the computational problems of recognizing
when two braids are the same, or when a braid can be made less complicated
through simple manipulations. Such computational problems have been turned into
cryptographic protocols, and a central problem of this research is to try to
understand just how difficult such problems are, from the perspective of both
"brute-force" attacks and more sophisticated algorithms.

The problems that will be investigated in this project focus on braid groups and
their applications to cryptographic systems. In particular, there have been many
cryptographic protocols proposed in recent years based on braid groups, from the
original Anshel-Anshel-Goldfeld key exchange to the more recent Sibert-Dehornoy-
Girault authentication scheme. Today there are various attacks on some of these
protocols, but present knowledge of the effectiveness of these attacks is far
from complete. The research that will be conducted in this project will help to
address this issue. The first part investigates statistics in braid groups and
generation of random braids, with the goal of establishing effective security
parameters for braid cryptosystems. The second part treats quantitative
connections between the geometry of braids (as automorphisms of the punctured
disk) and effectiveness of various algorithms relevant to braid group
cryptography. The final part investigates the effectiveness of length-based
attacks on computational problems in braid groups.