* 1551925
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Spatial Language and Cognition in Bilingual Minds
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2016,02/28/2018
* Juergen Bohnemeyer, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 02/28/2018
* USD 15,120.00

How do people conceptualize and describe space? They can choose from a variety
of strategies to delineate the location of an object, using for instance the
directions where the sun rises/sets, projecting their own body axes onto the
object, or introducing another object as landmark. These descriptions provide an
opportunity to probe into the way people think and talk about space as a
cultural practice shared among the members of a speech community. Linguists and
psychologists are particularly interested in the factors that influence the
selection among such strategies. Language, cultural factors such as education
and literacy, and environmental variables such as topography and population
geography have all been hypothesized to play a potential role in this process.

A critical but understudied question in this connection is the impact of
bilingualism. If the language a person speaks influences how they represent
space cognitively, then speakers of multiple languages might think in ways that
differ from how monolinguals think. Such hypothetical effects offer an
opportunity to gain rich and detailed information about the role of language in
cognition. This project focuses on Taiwan to explore the effect of language,
culture and environment on the way monolingual and bilingual speakers represent
space in language and cognition. Due to its migration history, Taiwan can be
considered a natural linguistic laboratory with a great amount of variation
among bilingual speakers in terms of age, education and residential
neighborhoods. The test languages, Mandarin Chinese and Taiwanese Southern Min,
a distant cousin of Mandarin, exhibit very distinct features and practices of
use in spatial reference. The project will document the use of spatial
descriptions by monolingual and bilingual speakers of these languages and study
the impact of the first and second language, education, literacy, and the
environment on spatial cognition