* 1551631
* CAREER: From Grasp Quality to Hand Quality: Analysis and Optimization for Effective Robot Hands
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2022
* Matei Ciocarlie, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Juan Wachs
* 06/30/2022
* USD 546,505.00

Robotic manipulators often exhibit high precision, repeatability, and grip
strength, characteristics which have enabled many applications, primarily in
industrial settings. However, robot hands still lack versatility: once a
manipulation task implies variation, it quickly falls beyond the capabilities of
today's robots. This prevents robot manipulators from operating in many
environments, from cluttered store rooms and warehouses to typical homes and
other human settings. This project aims to develop and demonstrate more
versatile robot hands, able to manipulate a wide range of objects and to operate
in clutter. Robots equipped with such hands could perform what are otherwise
injury-prone tasks like kitting and bin picking (in manufacturing), or order
picking and packing (in logistics). In healthcare, more versatile robotic
manipulators could assist with activities of daily living, many of which involve
contact and manipulation. From an educational perspective, this project aims to
encourage interdisciplinary training by combining areas of robotics
traditionally spanning multiple engineering disciplines, and to promote
diversity in engineering education by inspiring and preparing young students for
STEM careers, at both the high school and undergraduate
levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The key research objective of this project is to
find new ways of building and using robot hands, where the high level grasp
planning algorithms, the low-level control loops, and the hardware design itself
are optimized simultaneously, in a tight loop, and taking each other into
account. This represents a departure from the "build, then program" approach,
where algorithms for performing complex tasks (such as grasping and
manipulation) are researched only after the underlying hardware (the hand) has
been designed and constructed. By combining these stages, we can jointly
optimize algorithms, sensor arrays, control strategies and mechanism structures
that fit and complement each other. Both mechanical and algorithmic complexity
can then be increased based strictly on provable performance gains.