* 1551170
* APS DPF Participant Travel Support - 68th Annual DFD Meeting in Boston, MA, November 22-24, 2015
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2016
* Ken Cole, American Physical Society
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 08/31/2016
* USD 25,000.00

1551170 (Cole)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal seeks funds to partially cover
travel expenses of graduate students, post-doctoral researchers, and junior
faculty members from institutions in the United States to participate in the
conference entitled, "American Physical Society, Division of Fluid Dynamics,
68th Annual DFD Meeting 2015" in Boson, MA, November 22-24, 2015. This is the
largest international annual meeting of fluid dynamicists in the world, with
2,500 anticipated attendees. The meeting has been successfully run for over
sixty five years.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The chief intellectual merit of this
conference lies in the exchange of scientific ideas, presentations of cutting
edge research, and exposure to a richly diverse array of topics in virtually
every sub-discipline of fluid dynamics. The conference will be attended by both
prominent and young scientists in fluid dynamics from around the world, who will
be discussing present and future directions of research and research challenges.
The conference will foster cross-fertilization of ideas among researchers in
cutting edge areas of fluid dynamics and will address challenges involved in
advancing the field in the near future. The broader impact will be to increase
participation of students and young scientists who would not otherwise be able
to afford to travel to the meeting and pay associated costs. Preference is
given: (i) to those presenting talks at the meeting, (ii) to students, (iii) to
those who have not received such an award in the past, and (iv) to no more than
one applicant from a given research adviser. The application and selection
process is under the auspices of the DFD External Affairs Committee, chaired by
Prof. Beverley McKeon of the California Institute of Technology with Vice Chair
Prof. Kenneth Christensen of Notre Dame, serving as the process coordinator.
Each member of the External Affairs Committee reads each of the applications and
ranks them according to the priorities of the travel grant program (emphasis is
given to students, young scientists, and, in general, scientists from under-
represented groups). NSF support will fund individuals from the US only.