* 1551321
* ABR: Experimental Studies of Hydrous Mantle Melting
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2016,02/28/2021
* Timothy Grove, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Dennis Geist
* 02/28/2021
* USD 439,000.00

This project focuses on understanding how the Earth?s mantle melts in subduction
zones. H2O is a key ingredient in the formation of subduction zone magmas that
erupt at arc volcanoes, volcanoes that form above subducted oceanic plates. This
study will use experimental petrology to understand how magmas are formed when
H2O is involved in the melting process. The experiments will consist of melting
rock (the Earth?s mantle) in the presence of H2O at the temperatures and
pressures equivalent to those experienced at depth below the volcanic chains.
Very little is known about how H2O influences the temperature and chemical
compositions produced by mantle melting. By understanding water?s influence on
the temperature, melt composition and chemical reactions of this magma
generation process, we will gain new fundamental knowledge of where and how the
Earth?s continental crust has been generated through geologic time. This new
knowledge will advance basic science by providing a quantitative framework for
understanding the recycling of water through the Earth over the 4.5 billion
years of our planet?s history.

This Accomplishment Based Renewal requests support for a program of
experimental petrology studies that will quantify the influence of water on
melting processes in subduction zones. The experiments will systematically
investigate (1) H2O-undersaturated mantle melting from 1.6 to 2.8 GPa and (2)
H2O-undersaturated reaction of deeper mantle melts with shallower mantle wall
rock at 1.2 GPa. Very little is known about hydrous melting in the pressure
range of 1.6-2.8 GPa, so the experiments will provide new information on the
process of hydrous melting in this pressure range. The proposed reaction
experiments between deeper mantle melt and shallower mantle wall rock will be
the first hydrous reaction experiments ever performed at pressures between 0.5
and 2 GPa. These experiments will allow a quantitative understanding of the
effects of reaction within the mantle wedge, a process that is widely
acknowledged but one that currently lacks experimental exploration. For both
sets of experiments, the goal is to assess the influence of H2O on melt
composition and to use the new data to develop quantitative models for mantle
melting as well as models of melt-rock reaction in the sub-arc mantle. The
magmatic processes that flux H2O through the mantle and crust in subduction
zones are of fundamental importance for understanding the chemical evolution of
the Earth over the last 4.5 billion years. The proposed work will provide a
quantitative basis for understanding how H2O has influenced the chemical
composition of the Earth?s mantle and crust. The experimental data will be used
to develop models for predicting temperature, H2O content and pressure of
melting for natural primitive lavas, which will be shared with the geosciences
community. The results of the experimental study will also allow development of
better geodynamic models of flow coupling between the asthenospheric mantle and
the subducting slab, as well as providing constraints on the physical process of
melt transport through the mantle wedge.