* 1551406
* EAGER: Large-Scale Bidirectional Search
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2017
* Nathan Sturtevant, University of Denver
* Standard Grant
* James Donlon
* 08/31/2017
* USD 139,966.00

A large variety of real-world problems are combinatorial in nature: doubling the
length of the best solution doesn't double the problem difficulty, it makes it
exponentially harder. A classic approach to reducing this complexity is to look
for solutions in a bidirectional manner - beginning both from the start and the
goal and meeting in the middle. In theory this approach can result in an
exponential reduction in the time required to find the best solution, because
the two searches are each half the length of the full solution. But, in
practice, bidirectional methods haven't been able to compete with the best
heuristic approaches. Our work, suggests, however, that scaling the difficulty
of problems solved will give the advantage back to bidirectional search
approaches. The proposed exploratory research could lead to a new wave of
applications of search algorithms to tasks ranging from weather prediction to
robotics.

This project studies how current computational resources can be used to scale
the performance of bidirectional search. This includes the full use of parallel
computation and external memory, such as solid state drives. Almost all current
devices support parallel computation, so high performance algorithms must
exploit parallel computation. Solid state drives have different performance
characteristics than traditional hard disk drives with lower latency reads, but
a limited number of writes before they wear out. Large-scale heuristics, stored
in external memory, can also be used to improve the performance of search. But,
in external-memory bidirectional search algorithms there is a tension in how
internal memory is allocated: Using it to store large heuristics can prune
states and improve the quality of the search, but performance is degraded if
memory is not used for other tasks like duplicate detection. Taken together,
there is significant room for new research on large-scale bidirectional search
algorithms. To improve the applicability and performance of large-scale
bidirectional search we will (1) design and implement efficient parallel and
external memory search algorithms that (2) are designed to maximize the
performance and lifetime of external memory resources and (3) efficiently use
external-memory resources such as large-scale heuristics to maximize
performance.