* 1551136
* Localization of dopamine function in gustatory memory
* BIO,IOS
* 08/09/2015,01/31/2019
* Alex Keene, Florida Atlantic University
* Standard Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 01/31/2019
* USD 397,896.00

The genes and neural processes underlying memory formation are highly conserved
across animal groups, and the powerful genetics in the fruit fly allows for a
detailed investigation of the neural basis of memory formation. A single-fly
taste memory assay has been developed that allows for interrogation of the
neurons that encode memories. Genetic approaches in the fruit fly will be
employed to precisely identify the neurons involved in taste memory. Associative
taste memory depends on dopamine, a neurotransmitter involved in reward and
memory formation in many animal phyla. Functional imaging approaches will be
used to determine the sensory cues that activate dopamine neurons, and how
activity of memory-relevant neurons changes following memory formation. This
work will allow for the generation of a cellular model of memory formation that
will be improve understanding of learning and behavioral plasticity throughout
the animal kingdom. In addition to the scientific goals, this research program
will increase accessibility to science for underrepresented scientists,
undergraduate researchers and the broader community at the University of Nevada,
Reno. This project will involve high school students, outreach work at the
Nevada Discovery Museum, and undergraduate curriculum development. Additionally,
the investigators will organize monthly hands-on events about scientific
research aimed at elementary and middle school students.

While the neurotransmitter dopamine is a conserved regulator of associative
memories, the cellular and neural principles through which it mediates memory
are not yet well understood. This work combines a novel behavioral assay for
taste memory with genetic and optogenetic tools to identify and characterize
individual neurons regulating taste memory. For the first time, a novel genetic
toolkit of GAL4 lines allows for direct manipulation individual populations of
dopamine neurons, up to level of single neurons. The aims of this research will
precisely identify the PPL1 dopamine neurons modulating aversive taste memory;
examine the connectivity of PPL1 dopamine neurons underlying aversive taste
memory; and employ physiological (GCaMP imaging) analysis of PPL1 dopamine
neurons to examine plasticity within these neurons. Taken together, this
research will identify neural circuitry required for taste memory and the
physiological changes that occur in this circuitry during memory formation.