* 1551226
* Terrestrial Applications of the Triple Oxygen Isotope Geothermometer
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2016,02/29/2020
* Zachary Sharp, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 02/29/2020
* USD 270,003.00

The oxygen isotope compositions of natural materials have been used for over 60
years as a quantitative 'thermometer' for ancient rock and mineral samples. The
difference in the oxygen isotope composition (the 18O/16O ratio) of a mineral
and the water from which it formed provides a temperature estimate that has a
precision of ~1Â°C. The problem with application of this method to ancient
samples is that the water - usually ocean water - is not preserved in the rock
and needs to be inferred. This introduces some ambiguity to the derived
paleotemperature estimate. Namely, was the oxygen isotope composition of the
ocean water at the time the mineral formed the same as it is today? Researchers
have been tackling this question for decades, and it is still unresolved. In
this proposal, the team will use a novel, previously untried, technique in which
all three naturally occurring oxygen isotopes are used for temperature
determinations. It has long been thought that the rare isotope 17O provides no
additional information to the commonly measured 18O/16O ratios. More recently,
this team and other research groups have shown that there are subtle differences
in the way temperature affects the 18O/16O and 17O/16O ratios. By accurately
measuring all three isotopes, 16O, 17O and 18O, it is proposed to eliminate the
uncertainties inherent in using the 18O/16O ratios alone. This award will help
support the graduate theses of two students, one of whom is a woman, the other a
minority. It will also include research opportunities for an undergraduate
student, allowing them hands-on access to sophisticated laboratory equipment.
Such an opportunity is invaluable for young potential scientists. Both the
investigator and the graduate students will work closely with undergraduate
students recruited over the three year time frame of this project.

This is a new research avenue and there are many outstanding questions. As part
of our research, they will calibrate the temperature dependence on the 18O/16O
and 17O/16O ratios of quartz and water by experimentally equilibrating a quartz-
water mixture at high temperatures and pressures. They will expand the
preliminary tests of the technique to the very important mineral calcite. Marine
carbonates are ubiquitous in the rock record, and if the approach works for
calcite it will vastly expand the research potential of this new technique.
Unfortunately, the analysis of calcite for 17O/16O ratios has proven to be very
difficult. This research group will initially spend time conducting analytical
tests to quantifying this measurement and reproduce it for a standard. Once the
methodology is further established, they will proceed to analyze some of the
most pristine, ancient samples in order to test the age-old question 'Is the
oxygen isotope composition of ancient seawater the same as it is today?' At the
same time, they will apply this work to high temperature systems as a way of
retrieving both temperatures and fluid compositions (sources) in hydrothermal
systems. This work will have important applications to the economic geology
community which strives to understand how mineral deposits form.