* 1551428
* Collaborative Research: Prosodic Structure: An Integrated Empirical and Modeling Investigation
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2016,02/28/2021
* Hosung Nam, Haskins Laboratories, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Tyler Kendall
* 02/28/2021
* USD 163,142.00

This project examines how the prosodic structure of language shapes the
articulation of spoken utterances. Speaking is a complex, uniquely human ability
that relies on precisely coordinated movements of the speech organs (tongue,
lips, jaw, soft palate, and larynx) and respiratory system. These movements
produce sounds that listeners perceive and that convey not only the 'dictionary'
content of the utterance, but also its prosodic content. Prosody organizes
phonological forms into successively larger units or phrases, and renders
certain syllables, words and phrases more 'prominent' (perceptually or
rhythmically important) to the listener. Understanding the processes that shape
prosodic structure and how these processes act to transmit this structure
through coordination of the speech organs has profound implications for
advancing our understanding of language processing and communication disorders,
for improving speech technology, and for providing insights regarding the more
general relationship between linguistic and cognitive
operations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The central hypothesis examined in this
collaborative project is that the control processes governing temporal and tonal
structure are intimately linked with one another. This linkage is viewed as
emerging from the underlying motor control dynamics that coordinate the motions
of the speech organs and guide speech production. In order to investigate this
hypothesis, two additional open questions are addressed concerning the nature of
the units that exist at different prosodic and prominence levels, and the
relationships among syllables, prosodic feet, words and phrases: "What are the
structural and articulatory-acoustic properties of prosodic feet?"; and "How can
the relationships among the levels be best understood?" These questions are
investigated through a series of articulatory studies--using electromagnetic
articulography--and acoustic measurements that will examine: 1) how temporal and
tonal properties interact at phrasal boundaries, 2) how temporal and tonal
properties interact within and across all levels of prominence, and 3) how motor
control dynamics shape the details of articulatory-acoustic structure at the
foot level. These studies will be complemented by a series of computational
simulations, which will serve the dual purpose of testing the project's
hypotheses and guiding further developments of the prosodic component of the
group's Task-Dynamics model of speech production.