* 1551724
* Estrogen Receptor Beta in the Developing Prefrontal Cortex
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Robert Handa, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 07/31/2019
* USD 485,927.00

The steroid estrogen regulates many functions of the brain including behavior
and cognition, while the prefrontal cortex (PFC) is a brain region that controls
aspects of cognitive function and emotional behavior. Not surprisingly the PFC
is estrogen sensitive, but there is currently little known about how it responds
to estrogen. The goal of this research is therefore to determine how estrogen
regulates the PFC. The research tests the prediction that of the two main types
of estrogen receptors, alpha and beta, that the PFC is regulated by beta (ERb).
Successful completion of these studies will provide novel information about an
important but unexplored neuronal phenotype in the PFC. Innovative approaches
are used to examine ERb neurons and the results of these studies can impact
multiple research arenas. This research project will be used for the training of
high school, undergraduate and graduate students, particularly underrepresented
minorities, in neuroscience. Results will be disseminated through peer-reviewed
publication and by student presentations at local and national meetings.

These studies explore the function of a select group of cells in the mouse PFC
that express ERb. The PFC controls many behaviors including cognition,
attention, and neuroendocrine stress responses. Estrogen can alter the
development of this brain region, yet, little is known of the neurons in the PFC
that express ERb, partly due to the absence validated reagents allowing the
detection of ERb in brain. The proposed studies will examine this group of
neurons in the PFC using a novel transgenic mouse that express a fluorescent
protein in ERb neurons. Preliminary results show that the location of ERb
expressing neurons changes across development of the PFC. Studies in this
application will address the hypothesis that these changes reflect developmental
alterations in estrogen sensitivity in different cortical layers across time.
Using anatomical approaches, these studies will determine the identity of the
cortical neurons that express ERb. Next, molecular approaches will be used to
address the reason why estrogen receptor levels change in amount and location
during cortical development and lastly, the function of identified ERb neurons
in the PFC will be examined using electrophysiology