* 1551388
* Li Isotope Behavior in Zircons, with Implications for the Hadean Earth
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2018
* Roberta Rudnick, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 12/31/2018
* USD 133,017.00

1)&lt;br/&gt;Lithium isotopes have been increasingly used to track the severity
of chemical weathering experienced by rocks exposed at the Earth's surface. A
provocative study of the lithium isotopic composition of the oldest minerals on
Earth - the &gt;4.0 billion year old zircons from ancient sedimentary rocks in
the Jack Hills, western Australia, reported highly variable isotopic
compositions. In particular, the very light Li observed in some of these zircons
was suggested to reflect intense chemical weathering of the earliest crust on
Earth, implying high surface temperatures, possibly acidic waters and intense
rainfall. This interpretation, however, rests on the assumption that Li in
zircon faithfully records the isotopic composition of the magma from which they
crystallized and has not been influenced by processes such as Li diffusion
through the zircon. In this project, the team seeks to quantify whether Li
diffuses in natural zircons and under what conditions. They will do this with a
two-pronged approach: a) in situ analyses of Li isotopes in natural zircons that
show chemically distinct cores and rims, and b) by experimental investigations
of synthetic, Li-bearing zircons that have been subjected to heating under
different conditions. The results should lead to the more general use of Li
isotopes in zircon as a speedometer for geologic processes and for tracing the
origins of magmas. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2)&lt;br/&gt;Researchers seek to
investigate under what circumstances Li diffuses in the mineral zircon.
Unusually light Li isotopes iin ancient zircons from the Hadean eon of Earth
history (&gt;4.0 billion years) have been interpreted to reflect incorporation
of highly weathered materials into the sources of the granitic magmas in which
the zircons are inferred to have crystallized. The implication is that the
Hadean Earth had continents that rose above sea level and that this crust was
exposed to intense chemical weathering due to high surface temperatures, acidic
water and intense rainfall. An alternative interpretation, supported by
experimentally determined diffusion coefficients for Li in zircon, is that the
light Li was generated via kinetic fractionation during Li diffusion. However,
most natural zircons show no evidence for Li diffusion, for example, they show
no progressive zoning in Li isotopes (within the 10-25 Âµm resolution of ion
probe spots), and they show abrupt concentration steps in Li. Unraveling which
of these interpretations is correct has important implications for understanding
the Hadean Earth. This team will undertake an investigation of both natural and
synthesized zircons in order to address the question of whether Li readily
diffuses in zircon. Natural zircons whose Li distribution has been mapped using
time of flight (ToF) SIMS will be analyzed for their isotopic compositions using
NanoSIMS to see if there is any evidence of Li diffusion across sharp Li
concentration boundaries. Zircons synthesized under a variety of pressure,
temperature and rare earth element concentrations, will be characterized for
their P and REE concentrations and distributions. These synthetic zircons will
then be exposed to variable Li concentrations, and heating experiments followed
by analyses of their isotopic compositions, as well as Si, Sc, Ti, and Y
concentrations using NanoSIMS. The results of this project will lead to a much
better understanding of Li diffusion in zircon, which, in turn, will open the
door towards using Li in zircon to trace sources of evolved igneous rocks (if Li
diffusion is found to be insignificant), the timescale of magmatic processes (if
Li diffusion commonly occurs), or possibly both if Li diffusion occurs in some
instances, but not in others. It is conceivable that both may occur, depending
on the atomic Li/REE ratios of the zircon of interest.