* 1551662
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Similarity based interference and the acquisition of adjunct control
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2016,08/31/2018
* Jeffrey Lidz, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* William Badecker
* 08/31/2018
* USD 16,781.00

Every community around the world has a language. In each community, within a few
years and with high accuracy, children learn the language of their environment.
Achieving high proficiency in at least one language is critical for learning the
culture of the community, connecting with peers, and accessing an education.
When language is delayed, other aspects of development may also be at risk.
Studying how language develops in children is therefore of great importance,
both for understanding how language interacts with other systems, and for
identifying and diagnosing language delays. Although children learn language
quickly, they continue to make some errors well after they achieve high
proficiency in their first language. These errors, because they are so rare,
provide useful insights into the mechanisms of language development. Many of the
general cognitive processes proposed to interact with language in adults are
known to develop much later than language, raising the question: to what extent
are children's linguistic errors due to extra-linguistic processes, rather than
incomplete linguistic knowledge?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research uses
children's understanding of adjunct control, as in "John bumped Mary after
tripping on the sidewalk," as a case study to investigate this question. For
this sentence, adults only access a meaning in which John tripped, while
children have been reported to exhibit a much wider range of interpretations, in
which John, Mary or anyone tripped. All accounts to date of adjunct control in
children have cited incomplete knowledge as the source of children's
interpretations; this research pursues an alternative account--that children's
knowledge is complete, but the extra-linguistic processing mechanisms are more
error-prone in children than in adults, masking children's knowledge in contexts
with a high processing load. Based on the manipulations used with similar types
of sentences in adult sentence processing, this research investigates the
effects of processing load on children's interpretations of sentences with
adjunct control. At stake is a more continuous account that relates children's
errors for adjunct control to parallel effects in adults, and presents the
opportunity for future research to investigate other sentence types, the
development of processing mechanisms, and how immature processing mechanisms
affect language development. This research also includes an outreach component
to local families and high schools, and will provide research experience to an
undergraduate research assistant.