* 1551201
* The Influence of Disease Vulnerability on Decision Making
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2021
* Sarah Hill, Texas Christian University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 05/31/2021
* USD 262,625.00

Does vulnerability to disease influence the decisions that people make? Much is
known about the effects of illness on worker absenteeism and disability, but
little is known about the effects of disease vulnerability on decision making,
which can play a key role in quality of life and the nation's economic growth.
This research examines the link between disease vulnerability due to
immunological functioning or the environmental context and decision making with
a series of studies. This research is based in a novel integration of theory and
methods from several fields including psychoneuroimmunology, experimental social
psychology, and evolutionary biology. It is easy to imagine that given a disease
vulnerability one would engage in self-protective decisions and behaviors.
However, by combining these theories the scientists arrive at an innovative and
counterintuitive prediction. That is, instead of moving us toward safe
decisions, vulnerability to disease that stems from environmental and
immunological sources may actually lead to risky decisions. The findings of this
research could be used to promote the physical health of our citizens,
benefiting their well-being and our nation's economy.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
proposed research will test the hypothesis that greater vulnerability to
pathogens and disease increase risky decision making. The research tests
decision making in the context of biologically derived, immune-based
vulnerabilities or perceived changes in the external pathogen load. To test the
link between vulnerability and risky decisions, Dr. Sarah Hill, from Texas
Christian University, and her colleagues, propose a multi-disciplinary
correlational study that measures the relationship between multiple facets of
peripheral blood-based immune function and decision-making. This first-of-its
kind study will provide important new insights into whether key measures of
immunological function predict risk-taking and its attitudinal and cognitive
antecedents. Next, the researchers propose seven laboratory experiments in which
they use an established priming procedure to experimentally induce perceived
vulnerability to disease, and measure subsequent psychological and behavioral
changes known to promote risky decision-making. The proposed research promises
to offer important new theoretical advances to numerous fields including social,
health, evolutionary, clinical, and personality psychology, decision making
science, and psychoneuroimmunology. This research will yield important new
insights into factors that promote a variety of risky decisions that lead to
risk-taking behaviors among those people who are most vulnerable to the ill
effects of these behaviors.