* 1551795
* Collaborative Research: How Recognizing Gaps in Explanations Influences Children's Interest in Learning
* EDU,DRL
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2022
* Candice Mills, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Gregg Solomon
* 05/31/2022
* USD 474,553.00

The ECR (Education and Human Resources Core Research) program emphasizes
fundamental STEM education research that will generate foundational knowledge in
the field. The complex domain of biology has causal pathways that are not always
readily apparent to young children, and their explanations often contain many
misconceptions and gaps in understanding. This project will add to a limited
body of research on how children's recognition of information gaps influence
subsequent interest in learning in formal and informal learning settings. The
project will examine to what extent, if any, receiving or producing explanations
motivates children's future learning, with three specific goals: (1) to examine
whether children who first recognize that an explanation has significant gaps
are interested in engaging in further learning of a particular topic; (2) to
explore how the source of the explanation (by self or others) relates to the
link between recognizing information gaps and future learning; and (3) to
develop instructional strategies that can be used to induce students'
recognition of explanatory gaps, measuring outcomes for these strategies,
including children's subsequent ability to critically evaluate explanations and
their interest in future learning. The conceptual framework will be guided by
the social-cognitive theory, sociocultural theory, and mechanistic reasoning.
This combined theoretical framing will promote a better assessment of which
processes drive children's explanation evaluation - a crucial part of learning
from others - and how mechanistic explanations can be useful lenses for
analyzing the interactions of domain-specific (prior knowledge) and domain-
general knowledge about learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will use
laboratory-based quantitative methods and classroom-based teaching experiments.
The quantitative methods include ANCOVAs of multiple covariates about a model
that will be developed and implemented to explain developmental, individual, and
task differences in responses to information gaps in scientific explanations.
Behavioral measures will include ratings of explanation quality and individual
difference measures, such as self-reported interest, biological knowledge, and
interest in acquiring new information. Based on results from laboratory studies,
scaffolds will be developed for classroom contexts to support children's
productive engagement in critically evaluating biological explanations. A subset
of the above measures will be use to collect pre-post data from classroom
participants. Conjecture mapping will be used to conceptualize specific links
between scaffolds, mediating processes, and outcomes. Classroom video and
observations will be used to determine the extent to which the design scaffolds
lead to the hypothesized mediating processes and ultimately the desired learning
outcomes of effective evaluation and generation of mechanistic explanations of
biological phenomena. Outcomes from these studies will advance scientific
understanding of young children's explanation evaluation and construction, as
well as provide a suite of scaffolds to support effective education practice.
Combining lab and classroom-based research will lead to the development of more
ecologically-valid methodologies for studying, and impacting, learning behaviors
in ways that are beneficial to interdisciplinary research and education.
Insights from the research will be beneficial to parents, children and teachers
in both formal and informal settings. Finally, the project will provide insight
into creating developmentally-appropriate interventions to help determine
whether children of a certain age might benefit from instruction focused on
recognizing explanatory gaps in order to motivate them to seek out better
answers.