* 1551871
* Collaborative Research: The Efficacy of Support Structures for Legal Mobilization
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2021
* Amanda Hollis-Brusky, Pomona College
* Continuing Grant
* Reggie Sheehan
* 03/31/2021
* USD 156,824.00

Sociolegal scholarship has shown how law schools and training programs can serve
as support structures that provide critical intellectual, social, and material
resources for movements seeking to influence the law. While this scholarship
establishes that these institutions are a necessary precondition for change, it
leaves open an important question. Namely, are there types of support structures
that are more or less effective at producing and facilitating the transfer of
these valuable resources to and within movements? Contemporary legal movements
provide a unique opportunity to address this question, as their patrons have,
since the late-1990s, invested in support institutions representative of three
different types - Leveraging, Supplemental, and Parallel Alternative Structures.

This study uses this variation to help forward two models for understanding and
assessing the efficacy of different support structure strategies. It does this
by collecting and aggregating institutional data from three law schools and one
legal training program at the heart of these contemporary legal movements. PIs
will supplement these data with evidence gathered from personal interviews,
participant observation, and an original survey. PIs will analyze these data
both qualitatively and quantitatively, with the primary methods involving
interpretive data analysis and network mapping. This project will provide
important insights for scholars and practitioners and will have at least two
significant impacts. First, through the development of new models for
understanding movements, this project will make a theoretical contribution to
the scholarly literature on support structures, legal mobilization, and social
movements. Secondly, policy activists who have learned that a support structure
is necessary for legal change have little guidance from the literature as to
what kinds of support structures will best facilitate the transfer of resources
between their movement and policy demanders. This project will help inform this
important policy and scholarly conversation.