* 1551052
* Collaborative Research: Thermodynamics of Magma Mixing
* GEO,EAR
* 02/15/2016,01/31/2020
* Wendy Bohrson, Central Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 01/31/2020
* USD 210,985.00

Molten rock (magma) forms at tens to hundreds of kilometers below Earth's
surface. These magmas can ascend, and each year on Earth, about 30 cubic
kilometers erupts or stalls, much of it within a few thousand meters of the
surface. Transport and storage of magma in the crust (uppermost layer of the
solid Earth) is associated with the formation of many strategically- and
economically-important mineral resources including gold, platinum, chromium,
diamonds and other gemstones and represents a source of untapped green energy
called geothermal heat. The research carried out in this study advances
infrastructural knowledge of how magmas evolve chemically and thermally through
interactions with crust and as they cool, mix, and eventually solidify. Because
all magmas initially contain small amounts of dissolved water and carbon
dioxide, as magma cools and crystallizes, it often becomes a bubbly mixture
containing high-pressure fugitive gas that can produce explosive eruptions,
thereby posing risks to humans, property and ecosystems. This research seeks to
better understand these phenomena based on the latest results from condensed
matter physics, fluid mechanics, and chemical thermodynamics, all in the context
of complex system behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Magma emplaced in the crust is
a classic example of a complex, open system where magmas and crustal host rock
exchange material and energy. The thermochemical evolution of magma subject to
this exchange is responsible for much of the compositional diversity observed on
Earth. This research applies chemical thermodynamics to predict from first-
principles the products of magma crystallization and to relate these products to
the amount of geothermal energy that flows to the environment. Open system
magmatic behavior that emphasizes the consequences of complete blending of two
distinct magma batches (a process called magma mixing) is modeled using two mass
and energy constrained computational tools: an exploratory model that utilizes
simplified mixing thermodynamics and a more complex model, called the Magma
Chamber Simulator, that employs state of the art thermodynamics. Simulations
using these codes will generate a theoretical magma mixing taxonomy that will
classify thermal and chemical characteristics of mixing end-members and
products. This taxonomy will be tested by applying it to carefully chosen
volcanic and plutonic rock suites that show clear evidence of magma mixing.
Analysis of mixed magma products will define mass and thermal consequences of
mixing that can be used to refine models of eruption, magma emplacement, and
mass and energy exchange from deeper to shallower levels in Earth. Both computer
codes will be enhanced to better capture the open-system characteristics
identified by these studies, and public distribution of these computer resources
to the earth and planetary sciences community will augment computational
analysis of magma formation and evolution. The ultimate end product of this
research will be enhanced understanding of the transport, storage, and eruption
of molten rock, an integral part of the planetary plate tectonic recycling
process.