* 1551807
* Final stages of breakup and early spreading history of the Eastern North America passive margin from multichannel seismic data
* GEO,OCE
* 03/15/2016,02/28/2019
* Anne Becel, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah K. Smith
* 02/28/2019
* USD 199,992.00

Rifted passive margins record the full geologic history of rifting, from rift
onset to continental breakup to the initiation of seafloor spreading and post-
rift evolution of the margin. This project focuses on the Eastern North America
continental margin offshore Cape Hatteras that was formed after the breakup of
supercontinent Pangaea. A large suite of data has been collected across the
transition from continental crust to oceanic crust in this region. These data
will be analyzed and interpreted to obtain an improved understanding of events
surrounding the final stage of continental breakup including the relationship
between the timing of rifting and the occurrence of offshore magmatism and early
opening of the Central Atlantic Ocean. The project will also provide new
information on landslides that have occurred along the margin of the U.S. and an
estimate of the number of landslides that might have produced tsunamis. A
postdoctoral researcher will be trained in geophysical data analysis and
interpretation, and the results of the proposed work will be incorporated into
outreach programs for high school and middle school students.

This project consists of the processing and interpretation of offshore, long-
offset multichannel seismic (MCS) data from the Eastern North American Margin.
The long-offset MCS data analysis will provide critical new information about
the along-strike variations of the complex transitional crust between
unambiguous continental and oceanic crust at a smaller-scale than previous
studies. The crustal-scale closely-spaced MCS profiles will be essential to
image the small-scale heterogeneities of the volcanic products along the margin,
spatial patterns in basement topography, thickness of sediment and rift
unconformities within the sediments and features within the crust and
lithosphere (e.g., faults and crustal thickness variations). MCS imaging of
those features are needed to assess the late-stage rifting processes and
variations in time and space of these processes. Different kinematic plate
models for the earliest stage of evolution of the Central Atlantic Ocean make
very different predictions for the half spreading rate. In addition, large-scale
segmentation at the modern Mid-Atlantic ridge has also been proposed to be
inherited from the geometry of the adjacent continental margin. MCS data from
this project will constrain variations in basement roughness, crustal thickness
and crustal structure and reflectivity along and across new oceanic crust that
will provide important constraints on the early seafloor spreading history and
will help to distinguish between competing models.