* 1551190
* Inuit Collaborative Workshop in Preparation for the Smithsonian Exhibit, Narwhal, Inuit and Ice in a Changing Artic, 2017
* GEO,OPP
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2016
* Martin Nweeia, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Anna M. Kerttula
* 08/31/2016
* USD 10,584.00

This award supports a workshop and community meetings in Pond Inlet, Nunavut,
Canada Fall 2015 to solicit ideas and advice from Inuit community members for a
planned "Narwhal: Inuit and Ice in a Changing Arctic" exhibit at the Smithsonian
Museum of Natural History planned for July 2017. The exhibit was envisioned as
the capstone of the community outreach plan for a previously funded Arctic
Social Science research award "Using Inuit Qaujimajatuqangit, Traditional
Knowledge, To Guide The Development Of Hypotheses On Narwhal Tusk Function."

The Fall 2015 workshop includes elders and hunters (some of whom collaborated on
the science project), community leaders, Inuit organizations, educators,
scientists, and Smithsonian support staff to discuss a variety of themes for the
proposed exhibit. In addition, meetings will be held with Hamlet Assembly
representatives and the Hunters and Trappers Organization of Pond Inlet. The
proposed Themes for the exhibit to be discussed include how natural scientists
and Inuit community members collaborate to expand their knowledge of narwhal
anatomy, physiology, behavior, and the Arctic; how narwhals are changing and
adapting as their environment changes and how these changes are affecting local
people who depend on the narwhal for food and folklore; and a final theme that
would examine how people from Inuit, European, and Asian cultures have created
artwork, legends, and folklore representing how they have understood narwhals
through time, including up to the present.

To ensure that Inuit voices are an integral part of the construction of the
exhibit, members of the Pond Inlet community will be approached to participate
on a review panel of Inuit representatives to work with the exhibit team in
order to ensure accuracy and Inuit perspectives Members of the Pond Inlet
Hunters and Trappers Organization will also be invited to participate as
reviewers for the traditional knowledge of the narwhal and its presentation in
the exhibit. In addition, their will be meetings between scientists and local
artists, who will be contracted to represent pictorial and art renderings of
indigenous hunting, narwhal behavior, and the Inuit legend of the narwhal to be
included in the exhibit. The final part of the workshop will be youth-focused in
order to elicit information and ideas that will appeal to indigenous children in
the Arctic, as well as extend to other indigenous cultures around the world.