* 1551452
* EAGER: Engineering Decoys to Detect Pathogen Proteases and Activate Host Resistance
* BIO,IOS
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2018
* Steven Whitham, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Ann Powell
* 12/31/2018
* USD 299,811.00

This project is focused on using endogenous plant genes to engineer resistance
to important crop pathogens. This will be accomplished by enabling plants to
detect the presence of specific pathogen proteases, which are enzymes that act
like molecular scissors to cut specific target proteins in the host.
Specifically, a single soybean gene will be modified, which should then enable
soybean to detect the activity of pathogen proteases, and then activate defense
responses. This protease recognition system does not require transfer of genes
between species, thus such modified soybeans should not be considered GMOs,
which should simplify regulatory approval, as well as consumer acceptance. If
this approach is successful in soybean, it should be applicable to all crop
plants, which would decrease our dependence on environmentally harmful
pesticides, while boosting crop yields and increasing world food
security.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many important plant pathogens depend on
proteases to infect host plants. The Innes laboratory is developing a novel
method for engineering resistance to such pathogens based on detecting these
specific proteases. This system arises from their work on the AvrPphB protease
from the bacterium Pseudomonas syringae. AvrPphB is injected into host cells,
where it targets a family of protein kinases that regulate basal defense
responses, cleaving them in a single position. In Arabidopsis, this cleavage
event is detected by the disease resistance (R) protein RPS5, which then
activates defense responses. Specifically, cleavage of the host kinase PBS1 by
AvrPphB activates RPS5-mediated resistance. The Innes laboratory has recently
shown that the AvrPphB recognition sequence within PBS1 (seven amino acids) can
be replaced by the recognition sequence for other pathogen proteases. These
'decoy' kinases can then be cleaved by the matching protease and activate RPS5.
Thus, by manipulating the PBS1 amino acid sequence, it is possible to engineer
RPS5 to recognize just about any pathogen protease. This project seeks to extend
this discovery to crop plants. As a proof of concept, a soybean PBS1 ortholog
will be modified, in separate constructs, to detect proteases from Soybean
mosaic virus and Asian Soybean Rust. Because most soybean varieties carry an
endogenous disease resistance gene that detects AvrPphB protease activity, it is
expected that modification of an endogenous soybean PBS1 protein, which is
highly conserved among flowering plants, will enable detection of corresponding
proteases. This project will provide underrepresented minorities at the high
school and undergraduate levels with opportunities to participate in hands-on
research, and to engage in the topic of sustainable agriculture.