* 1551448
* EAGER/Cybermanufacturing: Architecture and Protocols for Scalable Cyber-Physical Manufacturing Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,12/31/2017
* Ming Leu, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 12/31/2017
* USD 300,000.00

Cyber-physical manufacturing systems have potential to transform manufacturing
industry in a significant fashion by sharing manufacturing resources, operating
manufacturing machines, and connecting customers with manufacturing resources
over the Internet. It integrates networking, embedded computing, control,
manufacturing, service and cloud computing technologies to increase
manufacturing efficiency and resource utilization. Despite its promising future,
there are many significant and challenging issues in realizing the full
potential of and wide adoption cyber-physical manufacturing in industry. One of
them is the scalability of cyber-physical manufacturing systems. Cyber-physical
manufacturing systems must be highly scalable to integrate the capabilities and
services of a large number of manufacturing machines and other resources,
operate and control them, and make them available to customers worldwide over
the Internet. Another issue is network protocols for communicating manufacturing
services and controlling manufacturing machines in factory floors over the
Internet. In this EArly-concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) project,
new architectures and protocols for scalable cyber-physical manufacturing
systems will be explored. The expected innovations will improve connections
between manufacturers and consumers, ease the exchange of manufacturing services
across organizational boundaries, and increase utilization of manufacturing
resources and reduce their idle time. The research will be integrated into the
instruction of several classes on computer science and advanced manufacturing in
two institutions. The cyber-enabled manufacturing research will expand the reach
of manufacturing facilities and tools and help broaden participation of
underrepresented groups in research.

Cyber-physical manufacturing systems are still in an early phase of their
research and development. Several exploratory research tasks on the architecture
and network protocols of scalable cyber-physical manufacturing systems will be
carried out in this project. First, a service oriented architecture of scalable
cyber-physical manufacturing systems, which links services of a large number of
manufacturing machines from a variety of manufacturing service providers with
customers over the Internet, will be investigated. Second, an Internet-scale
manufacturing service protocol, which allows communication of manufacturing
services across organizational boundaries over the Internet and enables plug-
and-play of manufacturing machines in cyber-physical manufacturing systems, will
be investigated. Third, a real-time Ethernet protocol, which enables real-time
communication for monitoring and controlling manufacturing operations over the
Internet, will be created. Fourth, a method of virtualization of manufacturing
machines, which makes it easy to incorporate manufacturing resources in
cyberspace for cyber-physical manufacturing systems, will be researched.
Finally, a test bed will be developed for evaluation of the above techniques and
methods.