* 1551437
* Insights into the Earliest Magmas from Inclusions and Trace Elements in Zircon
* GEO,EAR
* 02/15/2016,06/30/2019
* Elizabeth Bell, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 06/30/2019
* USD 280,560.00

Earth's first few hundred million years remains one of the last frontiers for
fundamental discovery in the earth sciences but lacks a rock record. Grains of
the mineral zircon deposited in younger sediments are the best known resource
for investigating this period. Zircons from the Jack Hills locality in Western
Australia have yielded great insights into the character of Hadean (i.e., >4
billion years ago, or Ga) magmas through investigation of both their trace
chemistry and exotic phases trapped within the zircons as they grew (i.e.,
mineral inclusions). However, fully exploiting the information recorded in these
zircons and their inclusions has been hampered by a lack of foundational
studies. This project constitutes a series of investigations into various
aspects of zircon trace element chemistry and inclusion character, which will
allow for better understanding of the geologic processes acting on Hadean Earth.

Fundamental observations on the trace element chemistry and mineral inclusion
character of the Hadean Jack Hills zircons have revealed several aspects of the
chemistry and mineralogy of the magmas from which they grew. Quartz and
muscovite dominate thelikely primary inclusion assemblages of the zircons,
suggesting shale-like precursors. The zircons also contain rare oxide, sulfide,
and carbonaceous phases relevant to various under-explored aspects of their host
magma chemistry, especially volatiles. However, questions remain as to how to
distinguish primary inclusion assemblages, their relationship to magma
chemistry, and the relevance of various aspects of host zircon trace chemistry
to magmatic volatile contents.This project constitutes several allied
investigations of Hadean zircon trace chemistry and inclusion character which
can reveal important aspects of source melt chemistry and define objective
criteria for distinguishing primary versus altered mineral inclusions. The
discovery of carbonaceous inclusions in Hadean zircons allows for the
documentation of carbon isotopic variations during the Hadean and early Archean.
In addition, the relationship of source magma trace element content and redox
conditions with zircon chemistry and inclusion assemblages will be investigated
using a suite of ~400 million year old granitoids of known composition and
origin, and the results applied to better understand the last dark age of Earth
history.