* 1551948
* CAREER: Rare-Earth-Free All Ferrous Nanomagnets Towards High Energy Density
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2015,05/31/2018
* Shenqiang Ren, Temple University
* Continuing Grant
* Gary Shiflet
* 05/31/2018
* USD 462,764.00

Non-Technical Summary: Increases in energy density of permanent magnets are
currently achieved through the incorporation of rare earth elements into the
metal alloys. Replacing non-sustainable and strategically undesirable rare-earth
elements is one of the most critical challenges. This CAREER project
investigates rare-earth-free alloy nanomagnets for high energy density, based
exclusively on traditional elements Fe, Co and Ni. The success of this project
removes environmentally non-sustainable rare-earth implementations, promotes
emerging green energy technologies, and establishes U.S. leadership in rare-
earth-free magnet development. The project integrates energy-critical nanometal
research with education and outreach at the exciting interface of materials
science and sustainable nanotechnologies, which encourage underrepresented
minorities to pursue unique cutting-edge magnetic material training, and fosters
the public awareness of transformative magnetic nanotechnology in sustainability
and green energy. Similar opportunities are designed for high-school science
teachers, in part to help them be better equipped for advising high school
students about science-based careers.

Technical Summary: This CAREER project aims to address a key challenge of
sustainable rare-earth-free metallic nanostructures: the energy density of all
ferrous alloy nanomagnets is dictated chiefly by the precise control of their
metastable tetragonal structural properties and dopant distribution on the
atomic scale. The research objective of this project is to understand basic
parameters that govern synthesis, doping and self-assembly of tetragonal ferrous
alloys and to explore their unique exchange-coupling properties for high energy
density nanomagnets. The project is comprised of the following interrelated
activities: (1) synthesis of tetragonal iron-cobalt nanostructures using phase
transformations, (2) exploring the doping and order-disorder transition of
single domain iron-nickel using chemical transformation and interfacial
diffusion alloying, and (3) exchange-coupling of magnetically hard and soft
ferrous nanocomposites to achieve high energy density rare-earth-free
nanomagnets. Beyond the local and regional educational benefits, the research
entails a major benefit to society in that successful results could lead to the
revolution of rare-earth-free permanent magnets and contribute to green energy
technologies.