* 1551708
* SCH: EAGER: Improving Nutritional Literacy and Decision Making with Learner-Centered Crowdsourcing
* CSE,IIS
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2017
* Lena Mamykina, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 12/31/2017
* USD 202,949.00

This EAGER project is funded from the Smart and Connected Health portfolio which
aims to support a varied set of health and healthcare related research projects
focusing on fundamental work in these multi-disciplinary fields. This project
carries out basic research in the nutritional habits of certain segments of the
population. There exist robust empirical evidence suggesting the benefits of
healthy diet for prevention and management of a variety of health conditions. At
the same time, adopting a healthy diet and making daily healthy nutritional
choices is an uphill battle for many individuals, particularly those residing in
economically disadvantaged communities and among ethnic minorities. Many factors
contribute to the poor eating habits of adult Americans; among them are poor
nutritional literacy, limited ability to critically appraise nutritional value
of meals, and limited ability to apply these skills to personal dietary choices.
While there exist computing technologies for facilitating healthy nutrition, no
solution developed to date addresses all of these challenges.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research is to investigate a new breed of
social computing mechanism that blend together the benefits of online health
communities, crowdsourcing, and online learning environments. Specifically it
develops new learner-centered nutrition crowdsourcing tools that are grounded in
the theory of self-regulated learning and that 1) help individuals to develop
better nutritional judgment by assessing nutritional value of each otherÕs meals
and receiving tailored feedback; 2) provide in-the-moment nutritional decision
support through community-generated feedback on prospective meals; 3) encourage
long-term engagement using reciprocity principle and simple award structure. The
proposed technologies are evaluated in a pilot study with individuals with
diabetes recruited from an online diabetes community TuDiabetes.