* 1551420
* Workshops on Research in the Lower Mekong Basin; September 25-26, 2015-USGS, Laural, MD and November, 2015-Can Tho, Vietnam
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2016
* Herbert Covert, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 08/31/2016
* USD 99,837.00

An award is made to the University of Colorado Boulder to support a workshop
series to convene U.S. researchers who are already engaged in, or interested in
developing research partnerships in Lower Mekong Basin (LMB), a region that
includes parts of Vietnam, Laos, Cambodia, Thailand, and Myanmar. The objective
of this workshop series is to facilitate mechanisms and networking strategies
for research partnerships between U.S. scientists and LMB scientists that
advance U.S. and global scientific knowledge, improve data sharing and
accessibility, and identify best practices. For these workshops, priority topics
include documenting biodiversity through scientific collections, leveraging
engineering and computing applications for improved data accessibility, and
promoting opportunities for training and education exchange. Due to rapid human
population growth, habitat conversion related to rapid economic growth, planned
damming of the Mekong and other rivers in this area; and of regional and global
environmental change, scientists and resource managers are concerned that the
biodiversity of this area is threatened. In addition, environmental changes
affecting the health of this biodiversity are also creating a series of
challenges for local human populations that relate directly to issues of
environment, water quality, and food security.

U.S. researchers have already been developing fruitful research partnerships
with LMB scientists. Recognizing the value of these collaborations, these
workshops are designed to engage the U.S. and international research community
to stimulate further collaboration, share insights, results, and recommendations
for developing new scientific infrastructure, including a possible new natural
history collection that will support physical and digital documentation of
biodiversity for the research community, educators, policy makers, and the
public. The Lower Mekong Basin (LMB) is part of the Indo-Burma hotspot, an area
of extraordinary diversity of plant and animal life. Its complex topography and
major river systems have yielded intriguing biogeographic patterns, ongoing
discovery over the past two decades of many new species, and even a number of
new and distinctive mammalian species. These workshops will provide a forum to
discuss issues related to research and education network management,
organization, sustainability, and data and knowledge sharing and dissemination.
The planning committee will issue an open call for participation, and the
selection process will ensure diverse participation of women and other under-
represented groups in science. In particular, these face-to-face meeting are
important to current and future projects in order to sustain successful
components of existing projects, initiate and cultivate networks of
international collaborators, and how to promote maximum participation from a
diversity of scientists.