* 1551900
* Doctoral Consortium at the 2015 International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2016
* Jing Xiao, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* jeffrey trinkle
* 08/31/2016
* USD 25,000.00

This proposal is to support US-based Ph.D. students to attend one of the most
prestigious conferences of the IEEE Robotics and Automation Society and a
doctoral consortium to be held concurrently. The conference is the 2015
International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), which will be
in Hamburg Germany from September 28 to October 2, 2015, in Hamburg, Germany. At
the conference, they will be able to attend presentations of technical papers,
attend workshops and tutorials on the latest advances, visit booths in which
robotics companies are displaying their latest products, and attend special
events designed for young researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal
focuses on expanding the US capacity to advance robotics science and
technologies by increasing the number of US-based PhD students who will attend
IROS and participate in career-advancing activities. As part of attending this
high-quality international robotics conference, the doctoral consortium offers a
collection of events designed to help young researchers achieve high-quality
research results more quickly. An impact of this is that they will more quickly
become contributing members of the international research community and the US
technology generation engine. The main special events offered to young US-based
researcher through the doctoral consortium are networking luncheons and a
tutorial on how to properly review scientific papers.