* 1551518
* Assessment of the National Science Foundation's 2015 Geospace Portfolio Review
* GEO,AGS
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2018
* Michael Moloney, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Carrie E. Black
* 08/31/2018
* USD 343,000.00

The National Science Foundation is conducting a portfolio review for the
facilities, science programs, and other activities of the Geospace Sciences (GS)
section in the Division of Atmospheric and Geospace Sciences (AGS). The
portfolio review is, in part, a response by the NSF to the recommendations
highlighted for the Geospace scientific community in the National Research
Council's (NRC) 2013 Decadal Survey, "Solar and Space Physics: A Science for a
Technological Society". The review is being carried out by a Portfolio Review
Committee (PRC), organized by NSF under its Advisory Committee for Geosciences.
NSF has stated that the primary goal of the review, and of any resulting
adjustments of the Geospace Section's portfolio, is to ensure that investments
in the Geospace science disciplines and respective facilities are properly
aligned, both now and in the future, with the needs and priorities of the
Geospace scientific community and with the interests of the nation in funding
cutting edge scientific research of relevance to national priorities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project, under the auspices of the National Research
Council, will examine the portfolio review (PR) and undertake the following
tasks: (1) determine how well the PR's findings, conclusions and recommendation
align with the issues and priorities highlighted in the NRC decadal survey, (2)
examine actions already taken by the GS section in response to the decadal
survey, (3) provide a forward-looking focus on the potential of all GS funded
facilities, programs and activities for delivering the desired science outcomes,
and (4) provide a clear set of recommendations on how the GS section should
implement the decadal survey's priorities within the context of the
NSF/Geosciences strategic planning process. The activities covered by this award
will be done by a committee of up to 12 members who will be appointed under the
auspices of the Space Studies Board and its Standing Committee on Solar and
Space Physics (CSSP). The committee will meet up to three times over a five-
month period. The committee's analysis and evaluation of the GS portfolio review
will be based on its collective expertise supplemented by information and data
gathered independently during the course of the study.