* 1551003
* Symposium: Tapping the Power of Crustacean Transcriptomes to Address Grand Challenges in Comparative Biology, Portland, Oregon, January 3-7, 2016
* BIO,IOS
* 12/01/2015,11/30/2016
* Jonathon Stillman, Society for Integrative and Comparative Biology
* Standard Grant
* Emily Carrington
* 11/30/2016
* USD 10,600.00

Transcriptomic research approaches allow investigators to comprehensively
analyze the profile of messenger RNA used to produce protein in cells or tissue
samples. The most popular such approach, called "RNA-seq" (for RNA-sequencing)
is finding its way into all areas of comparative and integrative biology,
yielding insights that are difficult or impossible to attain with the
traditional protein-by-protein or gene-by-gene approach. But, there are
impediments to using the technology, especially for novel or so-called "non-
model" organisms. This award will support a symposium, "Tapping the Power of
Crustacean Transcriptomes to Address Grand Challenges in Comparative Biology,"
and associated activities that will be held at the Society for Comparative &amp;
Integrative Biology (SICB) meeting in Portland, Oregon Jan. 3-7, 2016. The
symposium will help researchers both identify, and move past such impediments.
The symposium is co-sponsored by The Crustacean Society and five SICB Divisions.
In addition, the PI and symposium organizers are Executive Committee members of
the Animal Genome to Phenome Research Coordination Network (AG2P RCN). The
program consists of 11 presentations representing six research areas using
transcriptomics to a variety of research questions in crustacean biology. There
will be a complementary session with speakers selected from submitted abstracts.
The accompanying luncheon, feedback booth, Twitter feed, and workshop will
further broaden participation across disciplines, gender, ethnicity, and
professional rank. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The activities supported by this award
will include: (1) a lunch scheduled early in the meeting to introduce the AG2P
RCN; (2) an RNA-seq feedback booth in the exhibition hall and Twitter feed to
gather comments and identify needs from SICB members; and (3) a transcriptomics
workshop to review pipelines and best practices that include responses from the
feedback booth. Expected outcomes of the workshop include a policy paper on
creating an interface and pipeline for the analysis of RNA-seq data, and
recruitment of participants in the AG2P RCN. Conference papers planned for
publication in the SICB journal, Integrative and Comparative Biology (ICB) will
serve as a valuable resource for future researchers.