* 1551299
* American Geophysical Union (AGU) Chapman Conference on Currents in Geospace and Beyond; Dubrovnik, Croatia; May 22-27, 2016
* GEO,AGS
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2017
* Pranoti Asher, American Geophysical Union
* Standard Grant
* Michael Wiltberger
* 03/31/2017
* USD 30,000.00

This proposal requests travel funds for participants to attend the AGU Chapman
Conference on Currents in Geospace and Beyond, which will be held 22-27 May 2016
in Dubrovnik, Croatia. Chapman Conferences are topical meetings sponsored by the
American Geophysical Union that are designed to provide opportunities for
detailed scientific discussion that is not possible at large meetings such as
the Fall AGU meeting. This funding will be used mainly for U.S. students and
young researchers but may be used for invited speakers if necessary. New
knowledge has been accumulating over the sixteen years since the last Chapman
conference on this topic due to progress in observations and global models. The
timing is appropriate to bring together researchers to develop a clearer
understanding of the state of the field, the open questions, the needed new
observations and the capabilities in global models. This conference will enable
U.S. students and early career scientists to meet and network with international
experts. The conference monograph will provide an up-date look at the state of
the research and at the outstanding unsolved questions, which is valuable for
both research and education purposes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Electric currents in
space, the focus of the conference, are key to the plasma and magnetic field
structures that develop in near-Earth space, at the Sun, at other planets, and
in astrophysical objects. The conference has three objectives, namely: (1) to
deepen understanding of electric currents in space plasmas, (2) to leverage new
multi-satellite data sets, new and expanded ground-based facilities and next-
generation global models that were not available during the previous conference
on this topic in 1999, and (3) to enrich the discussion by fostering an
interaction between researchers who study currents in vastly different space
environments (i.e., the Sun, planets and Earth). The observations, models and
researchers are inherently international. Attendance is anticipated to be
120-140 scientists.