* 1551038
* Continuing the Conversation in Discipline-Based Education Research: The Transforming Research in Undergraduate STEM Education Conference
* EHR,DUE
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2019
* Chris Rasmussen, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Standard Grant
* Dawn Rickey
* 03/31/2019
* USD 37,342.00

Studies of teaching and learning of mathematics and science at the undergraduate
level have been rapidly increasing over the past several decades. Much of this
work is being conducted by faculty members within departments of physics,
biology, chemistry and mathematics, and is the basis for funded research
proposals and peer-reviewed publications. This research can be particularly
impactful when researchers across these mathematics and sciences disciplines
collaborate. However, partnerships between education researchers from different
science and mathematics disciplines have only recently emerged. This Improving
Undergraduate STEM Education (IUSE:EHR) project will organize, implement, and
assess the success of the Transforming Research in Undergraduate STEM Education
(TRUSE) Conference for bringing together discipline-based education researchers
(DBERs) to share knowledge and build
collaborations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through presentations from outstanding
plenary speakers and contributed posters, as well as working group sessions, the
TRUSE conference will provide a venue for researchers to gain exposure to new
ways of investigating teaching and learning that would not be readily available
to them within a conference that is specific to only one discipline. In addition
to bringing DBERs together to share theoretical frameworks, methodologies, and
findings, the TRUSE conference will create collaborative research programs and
build capacity for such integrative work by involving a significant number of
graduate students and postdoctoral researchers in mathematics and science
education. This project will fund conference travel for speakers and organizers,
as well as some graduate students and postdoctoral researchers, and will include
a competition for mini-grant funding to seed a new, cross-disciplinary research
project developed by conference participants.