* 1551584
* Fostering Community-Based Technological Innovation
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Brian Butler, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 08/31/2018
* USD 47,623.00

US Ignite (NSF 15-508) lays a foundation for the rapid deployment of next
generation networking to all Americans. It originated with the recognition that
next generation networking is a fundamental tool for addressing both US societal
problems and continued US economic growth. The primary goal of US Ignite is to
break a fundamental deadlock: there is insufficient investment in gigabit
applications that can take advantage of advanced network infrastructure because
such infrastructure is rare and dispersed. Both well-established research
literatures and recent efforts to promote development of gigabit applications
suggest that individuals, organizations and groups within local communities are
a potentially important source of innovative activity that may be harnessed to
address this challenge. A key lesson learned from previous efforts to build
effective technology infrastructures is that, while centralized investment in
standards and core infrastructure technologies is valuable, much of the
innovation with respect to application and use of the infrastructure arises from
individuals and groups embedded in the local environments. There is already a
long-tradition of studying and encouraging local innovation in a diverse
collection of disciplines,including: Technology and innovation management,
entrepreneurship, information systems and many other fields of knowledge. In
order to broadly replicate successes, the US Ignite projects need to be studied
by experts in relevant fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project funds a
workshop to be held at the University of Maryland on understanding, managing,
learning from, and evaluating efforts to foster local communities as sources of
technology innovation regarding next-generation broadband infrastructure. The
workshop's purpose is to: (1) assess the state of current knowledge, (2)
articulate a research agenda for critical future work; and (3) begin the process
of forming cross-disciplinary, collaboration networks in this multi-disciplinary
area. A more systematic understanding of efforts to promote community-based
technology innovation will allow us to better design, evaluate, and learn from
the ongoing investments. This will ultimately break the deadlock that hinders
large-scale development of advanced network infrastructures and allow the
potential economic and social benefits for these foundational technologies to be
realized at the individual, local, and national levels.