* 1551502
* Exploring Ways to Transform Teaching Practices to Increase Native Hawaiian Students' Interest in STEM
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Steven Businger, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Celestine Pea
* 08/31/2018
* USD 299,977.00

The Discovery Research K-12 program seeks to significantly enhance the learning
and teaching of science, technology, engineering and mathematics by preK-12
students and teachers, through research and development of innovative resources,
models and tools. The project will integrate Native Hawaiian cross-cultural
practices to explore ways to help teachers know about and know how to connect
resources of students' familiar worlds to their science teaching. This research
is needed since Native Hawaiians are often stereotyped as poor learners; the
available STEM workforce falls short of meeting the demands of STEM employers in
the state; and as the largest group of public school enrollees, data show a
greater decline in percent of students meeting or exceeding proficiency in
science at higher grade levels. This project will address these issues by
transforming the ways teachers orient their teaching at the upper elementary and
middle grades through professional development courses offered at the University
of Hawaii at Manoa. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The professional development model for
teachers will be situated in the larger national and global contexts of an
increasingly technology oriented, urbanized society with associated
marginalization of indigenous people whose traditional ecological knowledge and
indigenous languages are often overlooked. Guided by the cultural mental model
theory and a mixed methods approach, data will be collected through document
analysis, surveys, individual and focus group interviews, and pre-post
assessments. This approach will capture initials findings about the influence of
the professional development model on teaching and learning in science. The end
products from this project will be an improved professional development model
that is more sensitive to contexts that promote learning by Native Hawaiian
students. It will also produce a survey instrument to assess student interest
and engagement in science learning whose teachers will have participated in the
professional development model being explored. Both outcomes will potentially be
instrumental in changing the way approximately 2000 Native Hawaiian students
learn about and become more interested in STEM fields through their natural
world.