* 1551326
* WORKSHOP:  Doctoral Consortium at ASSETS 2015
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2015,02/28/2018
* Eelke Folmer, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 02/28/2018
* USD 22,854.00

This is funding to support a Doctoral Consortium (workshop) of approximately 10
promising graduate students from the United States and abroad along with 5
distinguished research faculty. The event will take place on Sunday, October 25,
immediately preceding and in conjunction with the 17th International ACM
SIGACCESS Conference on Computers and Accessibility (ASSETS 2015), to be held
October 26-28, in Lisbon, Portugal. The ASSETS conferences are the premier forum
for presenting innovative research on the design and use of both mainstream and
specialized assistive technologies. This includes the use of technology by and
in support of: individuals with hearing, sight and other sensory impairments;
individuals with motor impairments; individuals with memory, learning and
cognitive impairments; individuals with multiple impairments; older adults; and
professionals who work with these populations. Researchers and developers from
around the world, in both academia and industry, will meet at ASSETS 2015 to
exchange ideas and present their latest work. More information about the
conference may be found online at http://www.sigaccess.org/assets15. A key
component of building any community is through its youth. The Doctoral
Consortium will help expand the participation of young researchers pursuing
graduate studies in this field, by providing them an opportunity to gain wider
exposure in the community for their innovative work and to obtain feedback and
guidance from senior members of the research community. It will further help
foster a sense of community among these young researchers, by allowing them to
create a social network both among themselves and with senior researchers at a
critical stage in their professional development. Because the students and
faculty constitute a diverse group across a variety of dimensions, including
nationality/cultural and scientific discipline, the students' horizons are
broadened to the future benefit of the field. The organizers will take steps to
promote participation from institutions with relatively large numbers of
students from under-represented groups; to further increase diversity, they will
aim for equal participation of females and males in the consortium. In
accordance with CISE policy relating to conferences held abroad, NSF funds will
be used only to support the up to 8 students from U.S. educational
institutions).

The ASSETS 2015 Doctoral Consortium will be a research-focused meeting of an
international group of selected Ph.D. candidates and a panel of distinguished
research faculty (the latter yet to be named). It will provide an opportunity
for graduate students from diverse backgrounds (computing, engineering,
psychology, architecture, etc.) to come together and explore their research
interests in an interdisciplinary workshop, under the guidance of the PI and the
panel of experts, so that they can appreciate the broader spectrum of research
and development approaches to assistive technologies and universal usability,
and also experience the community in which they can pursue their endeavors.
Student participants will make formal presentations of their work during the
consortium, and will receive constructive feedback from the faculty panel. The
feedback is designed to help students understand and articulate how their work
is positioned relative to related research, whether their topics are adequately
focused for thesis research projects, whether their methods are correctly chosen
and applied, and whether their results are appropriately analyzed and presented.
Thus, the consortium will help shape ongoing and future research projects aimed
at assistive technologies and universal access, will promote scholarship and
networking among new researchers in this emerging interdisciplinary area, and
will also expose these promising young researchers to a larger community. In an
effort to integrate Doctoral Consortium participants into the conference itself,
a poster session has been set aside in the technical program to allow all
Doctoral Consortium participants to present their research to the full
conference. In addition, for the first time this year the international panel of
faculty will give a presentation on job opportunities for researchers in both
academia and industry; such a discussion has taken place in doctoral symposia at
other conferences, and has been considered extremely valuable by the students
when considering career options. An evaluation of the consortium will be
conducted and the results made available to the organizers of future such
events.