* 1551399
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Comparative Utilization Of Animal Resources In Long Term Perspective
* SBE,BCS
* 12/01/2015,11/30/2016
* Anna Goldfield, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 11/30/2016
* USD 17,716.00

Under the supervision of Dr. John Marston, Anna Goldfield will undertake
research to study how Neanderthals and anatomically modern humans (AMH)
butchered prey carcasses to extract bone marrow and bone grease during the
Middle and Upper Paleolithic (~300-12 thousand years ago) in southwest France.
There is currently little academic consensus regarding the biological,
cognitive, and cultural nature of Neanderthals and their replacement by AMH in
Europe approximately 40,000-35,000 years ago. Differences in diet, hunting
behavior, and resource use are among the major factors discussed as components
of AMH success in Europe. Human diet is a crucial element of archaeological
research into human prehistory and evolution, because it is a representation of
cognition and behavior for which there is the most physical evidence, including
the skeletal remains of animals hunted as prey. Animal bones are an excellent
source of data for subsistence strategies in the Paleolithic because they are
abundant and well preserved in many Middle and Upper Paleolithic archaeological
sites. The research has contemporary significance because through comparison
with the Neanderthals, human's nearest relatives, it is possible to gain insight
into fundamental behaviorial aspects of our species.

This study addresses Neanderthal and AMH exploitation of bone marrow and bone
fat, crucial nutritional resources during glacial periods in Paleolithic Europe.
Goldfield will analyze animal bones from two Middle Paleolithic Neanderthal
faunal assemblages (c. 70,000-50,000 years ago), two early Upper Paleolithic AMH
assemblages (c. 35,000-40,000 years ago), and one later Upper Paleolithic AMH
assemblage (c. 18,000-12,000 years ago). She will address questions of how
Neanderthals and AMH prioritized and obtained important food resources such as
meat, bone marrow, and bone grease from the carcasses of their prey. This study
will combine traditional zooarchaeological analysis with a new coding system to
characterize and quantify bone processing within each assemblage.

The focus of this research is the Perigord region of southwest France, which has
a rich and well-documented Middle and Upper Paleolithic archaeological record,
with abundant and well-preserved animal bone assemblages. The types of animal
body parts in each assemblage included in the study and the fragmentation of
these bones will highlight differences and patterning in the ways in which
Neanderthals and AMH processed their prey. These differences will indicate
whether AMH spent more time and effort extracting bone fats from individual
carcasses than Neanderthals, a behavior which may have provided AMH with an
evolutionary advantage. The study's use of consistent coding methods will allow
important inter-site comparisons that will expand the applicability of this
research into other geographical regions where Neanderthals and AMH are known to
have overlapped. This will provide the opportunity to explore whether
differences in Neanderthal and AMH resource use are universal, or are driven by
other factors such as climate or geography. All primary data obtained during
analysis will be stored permanently and made publicly accessible. Results will
be disseminated through peer-review journals, conference papers, and field
reports. Finally, Goldfield will incorporate the framework of this study into an
illustrated handbook of archaeological field methods, with the aim of engaging
students aged 12-18.