* 1551172
* CAREER: A Rational Analysis of How Teachers' Examples Constrain Learning and Inference
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/2015,05/31/2017
* Patrick Shafto, Rutgers University Newark
* Continuing Grant
* Finbarr Sloane
* 05/31/2017
* USD 301,062.00

Research has shown that both children and adults differentiate between
pedagogical and non-pedagogical situations, that pedagogical inferences override
factual information and impede discovery learning in children, and that
pedagogical demonstrations lead to predictable patterns of inferences in
undergraduates. The purpose of this CAREER project is to explore the extent to
which social-pedagogical context affects learning with preschool students and
undergraduates. The project will contrast learning from a knowledgeable teacher
with learning from a naive teacher, to explore how different inferences result
from these situations, even when the exact same examples are
provided.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The principal investigator proposes to use a
Bayesian model of social-pedagogical learning across six laboratory-based
studies to test the main hypothesis that pedagogical situations affect the
inferences that learners draw from data in ways that are manipulable and
predictable. For each of the six experimental studies the researcher will
recruit approximately 50 preschoolers or undergraduates and randomly assign them
to one of two conditions in a laboratory setting. The research will explore how
inferences are drawn from a set of examples while manipulating how those
examples are generated (e.g., from a knowledgeable teacher vs. at random). The
goal of the project is to learn more about when, why, and how social-pedagogical
context affects learning to inform a theoretical framework for understanding
children and adult abilities to transmit and accumulate knowledge.