* 1551968
* Conference: GALANA 2016 - Input Variation and Language Acquisition
* SBE,BCS
* 02/15/2016,01/31/2018
* Silvina Montrul, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* William Badecker
* 01/31/2018
* USD 24,910.00

Language is a unique property of human beings. Children are capable of acquiring
one, two, or multiple languages, depending on the input that they receive; in
the U.S. and around the world, many people continue to learn new languages
throughout their lives. Linguists whose work on language acquisition is guided
by generative linguistic theory examine how languages are represented in the
human mind, how these mental representations are acquired by children, how the
different languages of a bilingual or a second language learner influence each
other, and how language acquisition proceeds in the presence of developmental
disabilities. In addition to advancing our understanding of how the human mind
works and how learning proceeds, research on language acquisition has practical
implications for such fields as literacy development, foreign language
instruction, and the identification and treatment of language
disorders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The 7th Generative Approaches to Language
Acquisition--North America conference, to be held at the University of Illinois
at Urbana-Champaign on September 8-10, 2016, brings together established
researchers and junior scholars who work on language acquisition from the
generative prospective. The conference will address core questions on how first
and second language acquisition proceeds, and will feature a special session
focusing on the role of input variation. The special session will examine how
language acquisition is affected by differences in language input across
individual children and families, as well as across dialects. Children who speak
non-standard dialects are at risk for being misidentified as having a language
disorder, and theoretically informed study of dialectal variation in the input
has strong practical value in identifying language disorders. The conference
will feature five invited talks by prominent researchers with expertise in first
and second language acquisition of grammatical phenomena, and, in the case of
the two special session speakers, language disorders and dialectal variation.
The conference encourages broad participation: all five invited speakers are
women, and the conference provides travel awards to graduate student and post-
doctoral scholar presenters. Selected papers from the conference will be
published in a proceedings volume.