* 1551964
* CAREER: SusChEM: Electron Transfer Mechanisms in Metal Organic Framework Thin Films
* MPS,CHE
* 02/15/2016,01/31/2022
* Amanda Morris, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 01/31/2022
* USD 605,000.00

In this CAREER project funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamic &amp; Mechanism
B Program of the Chemistry Division and the Solid State and Materials Chemistry
Program in the Division of Materials Research, Professor Amanda Morris of the
Department of Chemistry at Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
is exploring the optical and electronic properties of metal organic framework
thin films arrays. The goal of the project is to learn how to control these
properties and aid in the development of artificial photosynthetic assemblies
capable of converting solar energy into chemical fuels for long-term storage and
use. The project addresses critical, present-day environmental and energy
technology challenges at the interface of many scientific disciplines
(chemistry, physics, and biology). At the high school level, four laboratory
modules are being developed to complement the Virginia Standards of Learning
through the full sequence and scope of the high school science program. These
modules provide laboratory experiences with real-world applications to a diverse
population of students and afford the opportunity for teachers to apply the
curriculum to one of today's most active research fields. This component feeds
into a new undergraduate course entitled "Energy Sources of the Future," which
promotes undergraduate research experiences, emphasizes the cross-disciplinary
nature of energy science, and involves literature studies, guest lectures, and
laboratory experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Metal organic frameworks (MOF) are
a class of solid-state inorganic-organic hybrid materials that combine the
stability of heterogeneous materials with the synthetic diversity of molecular
complexes. The research aims to discover the relationship between the molecular
and three-dimensional structure of metal organic frameworks and observed
electron transport properties. In this project, a series of systematically
varied metal organic framework structures are explored to: (1) Elucidate the
mechanism of electrochemical electron transport through MOF thin films; (2)
Determine the contributions of electronic and ionic diffusion to apparent
ambipolar diffusion coefficients; (3) Uncover the guiding principles to
efficient photo-induced charge transport in MOF arrays. These objectives are
accomplished through the correlation of structure, as determined by
crystallography, to efficiency and mechanism, as measured by electrochemistry
and pulsed-laser spectroscopy. As part of the proposal, a hands-on educational
program capitalizes on the breadth and appeal of the research area to educate
future scientists and teachers at the high school level