* 1551842
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award: Mechanisms Of Integration In Early States
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2016
* Arthur Joyce, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 12/31/2016
* USD 25,195.00

Examining the ways in which large-scale, politically integrated societies
develop, operate, and change forms an essential area of research for social
scientists today. Archaeology is particularly well suited to make significant
contributions to this effort because it can study complex societies over
extended periods through the analysis of material remains. However,
archaeologists have tended to emphasize coercion over cooperation in
reconstructing early states, despite evidence that leaders and their subjects
tend to negotiate the terms of institutionalized political authority. With these
ideas in mind, this project will examine the processes through which people
living in rural communities cooperated with, acted independently of, or
contested the mechanisms of social control instituted by leaders at political
centers. The research is significant because it moves beyond simply identifying
social complexity in the past by addressing why different states followed
historical paths, thereby contributing to models that describe how leaders and
followers participated in developing, maintaining, reproducing and reworking
complex polities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Traditionally, research in Pre-Columbian
Mesoamerica, an area that extends from central Mexico to El Salvador, examines
political integration in early states from a "top-down" perspective that focuses
on the strategies leaders employed to centralize and sustain their authority.
Implicit in these models is the assumption that rural communities were populated
by commoners whose sole purpose was to provision urban consumption at the behest
of polity rulers. An alternative, "bottom-up" perspective that examines
political integration from the view of rural communities is needed to rigorously
test what causes centralized polities to form, persist, and collapse. This
project addresses the problem by examining the organization of a complex polity
that emerged in the lower Río Verde Valley of coastal Oaxaca, Mexico during the
Terminal Formative period (150 BCE-CE 250). The lower Verde's first state
developed by CE 100, with its primary center located at the site of Rio Viejo.
Current evidence suggests that the Rio Viejo state was unstable, as the polity
collapsed by CE 250, and the region's population dispersed into small
settlements. This study explores the degree to which rulers at Rio Viejo
maintained control over outlying areas by conducting field research at Cerro de
la Virgen, a rural community located in the valley's hinterland. Cerro de la
Virgen is ideal for examining negotiations between outlying communities and Rio
Viejo because the site persisted through the social upheaval at the end of the
Formative period. The project involves four months of excavation and laboratory
analyses aimed at determining whether political, economic, and religious
resources were controlled at the local or the regional level. Excavations will
target public and domestic architecture to examine resource control within
communal and household settings, and archaeometric analyses will provide
multiple tests of the hypothesis that the Río Viejo state collapsed because its
leaders failed to integrate rural populations into the broader political system.