* 1551143
* Developing Integrated Elementary Science, Engineering, and Language Arts Curricula Aligned with Next Generation Science Standards
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Hasan Deniz, University of Nevada Las Vegas
* Standard Grant
* Julia Clark
* 08/31/2019
* USD 299,986.00

The Discovery Research K-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the
learning and teaching of science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM)
by preK-12 students and teachers, through research and development of innovative
resources, models and tools (RMTs). Projects in the DRK-12 program build on
fundamental research in STEM education and prior research and development
efforts that provide theoretical and empirical justification for proposed
projects. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Developing Integrated Elementary Science,
Engineering, and Language Arts Curricula Aligned with Next Generation Science
Standards is an exploratory project to conduct a study to develop and field-test
curricula integrating science, engineering, and language arts at the elementary
level. Research and Curriculum Development team consisting of master elementary
science teachers, university professors including science, engineering, and
science teacher education faculty, and a science education post doc or graduate
student will engage in developing the Next Generation Science Standards (NGSS)
aligned curricula integrating science, engineering, and language arts, and
publishing STEM education research. The importance of this project will be the
development of curricula integrating science, engineering, and language arts at
the elementary level. Lesson plans or teaching activities in the integrated
curricula will be written in practitioner article format. In the NGSS the
engineering design is raised to the same level as scientific inquiry and
included as a vital element of science education. This integrated approach aims
to provide three-dimensional learning experience as specified in the NGSS to
elementary students while meaningfully integrating engineering, science,
reading, and writing through real life engineering design problems. The NGSS
aligned curricula that will be developed in this project can also be used in
other states that adopted the NGSS.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An Integrated
curriculum for grades 1-2 will be developed in year 1. In year 2, the project
will develop a curriculum for grades 3-5. Each year, the project will develop
and field-test a new curriculum, and provide professional development organized
around the integrated curriculum to 20 elementary teachers at the Clark County
School District in Las Vegas, Nevada.