* 1551770
* How poverty impacts brain and language development:  Understanding the vocabulary gap
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2020
* Mandy Maguire, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Peter Vishton
* 03/31/2020
* USD 515,000.00

In the US, over 31 million children (42%) are from low socioeconomic status
(SES) homes. On average these children have significantly smaller vocabularies
than their middle SES peers. This vocabulary gap appears early in development,
increases during the school years and has life-long academic and economic
implications. Although research has identified some possible reasons for lower
vocabulary in low SES toddlers, it is not clear how or why the deficit continues
to increase during the school years. The present project will study how well-
documented SES differences in semantic knowledge, reading abilities and working
memory may contribute to word learning deficits at the behavioral and brain
levels in school-aged children. The outcomes of this research will help to
identify directions for intervention to increase the likelihood of academic
success within this at-risk population.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
use a relatively new analysis technique, Time Frequency Analysis, to study
changes in electrophysiological processes of school-aged children (8-15 years)
as they learn new words. These neuronal responses will be studied in relation to
children's word learning abilities, family background (mother's level of
education and needs-to-income ratio) and cognitive abilities (reading abilities,
vocabulary and working memory). In this way, the proposed work will clarify the
mechanisms by which SES influences the behavioral and neural processes
contributing to children's word learning during the school years.