* 1551043
* Collaborative Research: Investigations into tone and stress in a complex prosodic system
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2016,06/30/2018
* Ryan Bennett, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 06/30/2018
* USD 208,375.00

The sound systems of human languages differ widely, as any student of foreign
languages knows. One way in which languages differ is their use of stress and
tone. English is a language which uses stress to distinguish word meanings:
compare the word "record" when used as a verb ("to recórd") and as a noun ("the
récord"). Other languages use stress to mark the edges of words. Similar
patterns are found with tone: in Tokyo Japanese, for instance, the meaning of
the word "hashi" depends on the pitch melody with which it is spoken (with a
high-low melody it means "chopsticks", and with a low-high melody it means
"bridge"). Languages which use just one of these features are very common. Less
common, and less studied, are languages which use stress and tone together.
Until such languages are studied in greater detail, we will not have a complete
picture of the sound systems of human languages and the ways in which they can
vary.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project investigates stress and tone in
Uspanteko, a highly endangered Mayan language spoken by approximately 1000-3000
people in the central highlands of Guatemala. Uspanteko uses tone to distinguish
word meanings, as in "síip" (high tone, means "tick") vs. "siip" (no high tone,
means "gift"). Alongside tone, stress is used in Uspanteko to mark the edges of
words. The primary aim of this project is to document and analyze the acoustic
structure of stress and tone in Uspanteko. As the sound system of Uspanteko is
typologically unusual, this project has the potential to contribute
substantially to our understanding of cross-linguistic variation in the areas of
stress and tone. One product of this research will be a large, annotated corpus
of spontaneous speech in Uspanteko. The project also involves a substantial
training component for linguistics students in the U.S. and Guatemala.