* 1551677
* CAREER:  Hodge Theory and D-Modules in Algebraic Geometry
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2022
* Christian Schnell, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 08/31/2022
* USD 400,000.00

This project involves both research in pure mathematics and the mathematics
training of science majors. Broadly speaking, the research component of the
project is research is algebraic geometry, which is the study of study of
solution sets of systems of polynomial equations. More specifically, the PI will
use methods from the theory of mixed Hodge modules to solve problems in Hodge
theory and algebraic geometry. The cohomology groups of a complex algebraic
variety carry mixed Hodge structures, and Hodge theory studies these structures
and their interaction with the geometry of the variety. The theory of mixed
Hodge modules provides a modern framework for this, using the language of
perverse sheaves and D-modules. The main educational component of the project is
to improve the teaching of mathematics to undergraduate students pursuing a
major in a non-mathematics STEM field. The PI will design and teach, in
consultation with faculty from another department, a new two-semester course
that meets the current mathematical needs of their students. The course will
have a non-traditional format, based on an "active learning" model of
instruction. In addition, the PI and co-authors will complete a book about mixed
Hodge modules, that will make this powerful theory accessible to non-
experts.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;In more technical language, this project has the
following research objectives: (1) to construct compactifications for images of
period mappings by using the theory of limit Hodge classes; (2) to prove several
instances of a conjecture about the structure of Fourier-Mukai transforms of
holonomic D-modules on complex abelian varieties; (3) to simplify the
construction of singular hermitian metrics on direct images of pluricanonical
bundles, due to Paun and Takayama, as well as the recent proof of Ueno's
conjecture by Cao and Paun.