* 1551970
* International Business, Economic Geography and Innovation (IBEGIN) Conference
* SBE,SMA
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2016
* Ram Mudambi, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Maryann Feldman
* 07/31/2016
* USD 27,436.00

Scientific advance unleashes the forces of creative destruction through
innovation, which has significant economic implications for industries, workers
and places. Yet in the modern globally networked economy, local innovation
systems alone are not sufficient to sustain economic vitality. The best ideas
and resources may reside in distant locales. This conference explores knowledge
connectivity -- collaborative R&D across geographic, organizational, and
technological space -- as a global division of labor. This conference brings
together scholars from international business, economic geography, and
innovation studies to consider the co-evolution of firms and locations and to
define a research agenda to better inform policy in a changing global system of
innovation.

This conference will encourage cross- and inter-disciplinary dialog with the
view of building a holistic view of the spatial organization of economic
activity. Over a two-day period (Nov. 13-14th, 2015), Temple University will
host scholars from all over the world, with keynote addresses, paper
presentations, and workshops. A call for submissions will invite papers for all
relevant disciplines, favoring integrative approaches and novel data. Combining
prominent disciplinary scholars with leading edge integrative work will give
legitimacy and direction to this nascent area of study.