* 1551537
* 15th International Conference on Approximation Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 03/01/2016,02/28/2017
* Gregory Fasshauer, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 02/28/2017
* USD 30,000.00

The Principal Investigators will organize the "15th International Conference on
Approximation Theory", to be held in San Antonio, Texas on May 22-25, 2016.
Participants in this conference will present recent advances in approximation
theory, a field of mathematics that has had a major impact on science and
engineering for well over 100 years and that has enabled concrete technological
advances in the United States. For example, the mathematics in this area has had
significant impact on computer-aided design and manufacturing (a key tool in the
aircraft and automotive industries), animation and computer graphics (major
tools in the video gaming and movie industries), data compression and processing
(critical to information technology applications, such as HDTV or medical
imaging), geophysical problems (such as weather modeling and oil exploration),
uncertainty quantification (which plays an important role in environmental and
climate modeling as well as nanotechnology), and modeling in the business world.
This conference will bring together students, junior researchers, and leaders in
the field from around the world, aid young researchers in advancing their
careers, and attract PhD students to work in the subject. In addition to
providing a forum for the exchange of ideas, the meeting will also help identify
trends and areas for future research. More than 80% of the grant funding will be
devoted to supporting the participation of students and young researchers,
especially women and underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The meeting
will engage approximately 150 mathematical scientists from academia, industry,
and government laboratories from around the world. It will continue the
tradition of triennial meetings in the subject which began in 1973 and which
have been the premier comprehensive meetings in the area. The meeting will
feature eight one-hour survey lectures on topics of current interest (including
quasi-Monte Carlo methods and high-dimensional approximation, compressive
sensing, applications of radial basis functions in partial differential
equations and finance, multivariate orthogonal polynomials, isogeometric
analysis, rational geometric splines, and multivariate polynomial and spline
approximation). The Eighth Vasil A. Popov Prize in Approximation Theory will be
awarded at the meeting, with the winner giving one of the plenary lectures. The
conference will run for four days and include about 130 additional invited and
contributed presentations. As with all of the previous meetings, a carefully
reviewed and edited conference proceedings is planned. The web site for the
conference is http://www.math.vanderbilt.edu/~AT15/