* 1551534
* EAGER:  UVC microbial inactivation within model water treatment membrane modules via X-ray-driven radioluminescence
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2016
* David Ladner, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* William Cooper
* 08/31/2016
* USD 64,214.00

1551534&lt;br/&gt;Cates&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Membrane processes are now being
used for many environmental applications such as drinking water and wastewater
treatment. They are also used in indirect potable reuse and desalination plants.
One of the single biggest issues is membrane fouling which increases the
operational and maintenance cost. This project uses ultraviolet
radioluminescence, a potentially transformative tool for membrane biofouling
prevention, with many theoretical advantages over chemical antimicrobial
strategies currently being researched. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The concept,
conceived by the PI, involves incorporation of inorganic phosphor materials
within reverse osmosis or nanofiltration membrane module feed channels, which
emit germicidal ultraviolet radiation when excited by X-rays. The penetrating
ability of high-energy X-rays could thus allow controllable ultraviolet
treatment within the typically inaccessible confines of spiral-wound modules by
employing externally-situated X-ray sources to excite the phosphors within. This
approach is attractive in theory, but its predicted feasibility currently relies
on cursory simulations involving simplified scenarios and approximate values of
X-ray attenuation, phosphor efficiency, and microbial UVC dose response from the
literature. In order to predict if RL membrane biofouling control (RMBC) can
become a viable technology in the future, the PI proposes to conduct exploratory
research involving simplified proof-of-concept experiments to probe internal
microbial inactivation rates. This data will then be assessed with regards to
conventional X-ray sources and emerging high-efficiency flat panel sources.
Before full-scale research efforts are expended, it should also be demonstrated
that the expected X-ray and UVC doses required to adequately curtail fouling are
not high enough to significantly impact the working lifetimes of membranes. The
PIs propose 10 months of experiments to explore these factors and reveal the
feasibility of RMBC without requiring intensive prototype development. The
approach being proposed is; (1) the first known method of achieving UV
inactivation of bacteria within small spaces confined by UV-opaque materials,
and, (2) the first use of UV radiation in directly deterring biofouling within
modules. While the individual phenomena of X-ray transmission, RL, and UVC
microbial inactivation are qualitatively well-understood - though in disparate
contexts - this project will be the first to demonstrate how they perform in
succession and to quantify the outcome. The research will thus support the PI's
goals of instilling greater interaction between students in these two fields in
order to encourage advancement of transformative sustainable technologies. The
PIs have also developed a plan to include undergraduate summer interns of
underrepresented minorities in future embodiments of this research.