* 1551200
* Collaborative Research: Experimental Investigation of the Electrical Properties  of Hydrous Silicate Melts in Subduction Context
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2019
* Anne Pommier, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 07/31/2019
* USD 149,607.00

The dynamics and time-evolution of subduction are driven by mechanical and
chemical processes that influence buoyancy forces, slab motion, contrasting
thermal fields, phase equilibria, and volatile transport. By enhancing mass
transfer and energy release, the cycle of fluids (and in particular, hydrous
silicate melts) in subduction zones is a major component of slab recycling, arc
volcanism, and continent-building processes. A better understanding of the role
of melt and volatiles in subduction is therefore key to improving our knowledge
of the structure and composition of subduction zones as well as geodynamic
processes at work. It can also help us better assess volcanic and earthquake
hazards in these contexts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is a multi-
disciplinary and multi-scale investigation of the electrical conductivity of
hydrous silicate melts in subduction context, at the depth of the mantle wedge
and shallower, in order to characterize and model the electrical response of
hydrous melts in subduction zones. In situ electrical measurements will be
performed at pressure and temperature conditions relevant to subduction zones on
dry and hydrous silicate melts. The major objective is to understand better the
transport properties of melts and volatiles in subduction zones as imaged by
geophysical (electromagnetic) surveys.