* 1551561
* Developing Civic Engagement: Social, Cognitive, Cultural, and Contextual Contributors across Childhood and Adolescence
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2022
* Amy Syvertsen, Search Institute
* Standard Grant
* Pamela Davis-Kean
* 08/31/2022
* USD 177,492.00

Civic engagement, active involvement in issues of public concern, is vital for
democracy and helps promote healthy and vibrant communities. However, how
children and youth acquire a sense of civic engagement is not well understood.
The goal of this project is to investigate how multiple types of civic
engagement develop from childhood through adolescence. The study will track
whether and how youth become civically engaged over time. The project will
explore how civic engagement relates to other developing capacities and to the
family, school, and geographical contexts in which youth are developing. Greater
understanding of the developmental foundations underlying civic engagement may
contribute to better informed and more involved citizens, and has the potential
to directly impact public policy and educational practice.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Drawing on relational developmental systems theory, this
project will: (i) document distinct patterns of change in different types of
civic engagement across childhood and adolescence, (ii) investigate associations
between developmental change in youth cognitive, emotional, and social
developmental competencies and trajectories of youth civic engagement, (iii)
test associations between youths' family, school, and organized activity
ecological assets and youth civic engagement, and (iv) examine sequential
pathways among ecological assets, developmental competencies, and youth civic
engagement to better understand how they unfold over time. This project will add
two longitudinal follow-ups to an ongoing study of 2,500 ethnically and
socioeconomically diverse youth in grades 4-12 from three geographic areas of
the United States. Youth will complete comprehensive surveys assessing
ecological assets (parents, school, organized activities), developmental
competencies (cognitive, emotional, social), and civic engagement (volunteering,
political behavior, political beliefs, social responsibility values, informal
helping, civic skills, environmental behavior). Statistical models will test
longitudinal and bidirectional associations using latent growth curve and
longitudinal structural models. Findings will contribute to a comprehensive
theory of youth civic development that describes how and why civic engagement
changes across childhood and adolescence.