* 1551239
* EAGER:  Neural dust stimulation for closed loop neuromodulation
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2017
* Jose Carmena, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 08/31/2017
* USD 300,000.00

Proposal No:1551239, EAGER-Neural dust stimulation for closed loop
neuromodulation&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the most important challenges that
remains in neuroengineering is the development and demonstration of a clinically
viable neural interface which can both record from and stimulate many individual
neurons and lasts a lifetime. These chronic or long-term neural interfaces are
of increasing interest for both central (CNS) and peripheral nervous system
(PNS) interventions. Creating lasting, durable, untethered interfaces raises a
variety of issues, ranging from the nature of the physical substrate (avoiding
the biotic and abiotic effects that presumably lead to performance degradation
at the electrode-tissue interface, the density and spatial coverage of the
sensing sites), the type of signals measured, and the computation and
communication capabilities (how much signal processing on-chip data to transmit
wirelessly) under the power budget of the whole system. This proposal seeks to
extend our recently published Neural Dust platform to allow for stimulation of
nerves via neural dust motes. We believe this to be an aggressive vision which
would open the door to a vast array of interventions, including untethered
neural recording of human nerves and neurons, untethered stimulation of these
processes and record-and-stimulate closed loop systems. Such a vision will
require a number of fundamental technological innovations that will have impact
across domains including basic neuroscience, clinical interventions of
neurological disorders, and prosthetics. For example, the ability to precisely
monitor and modulate peripheral nerve activity with a minimally invasive medical
device would enable a wide-range of therapeutic opportunities. This closed-loop
neuromodulation cannot be done with existing technologies because they suffer
from one of two major drawbacks: lack of spatial resolution or high degree of
invasiveness. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We recently proposed an ultra-miniature as
well as extremely compliant system that could enable massive scaling in the
number of recordings from the brain or the peripheral nervous system, providing
a path towards truly chronic BMI. At the core of this vision is a platform for
powering, receiving and transmitting information from inside a peripheral nerve
to outside the body using aggressive, state-of-the-art circuit design and the
recent demonstration of ultrasonic, piezocrystal "neural dust? motes. The work
envisioned in this proposal will leverage recent application specific integrated
circuit (ASIC) technology to build stimulating motes that can address individual
neurons (or peripheral fibers) and will demonstrate untethered stimulation of
nerve fibers, paving the way to closed-loop record-and-stim technology using
neural dust. This is a very aggressive, high risk direction which leverages
existing neural dust developments with a very high potential payoff (as it
enables untethered closed-loop neuromodulation systems). Our long term vision is
a system capable of recording and stimulation in closed-loop.