* 1551903
* Determinants of Quantifier Interpretation in Typical and Atypical Child Language
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2016,01/31/2020
* John Grinstead, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Tyler Kendall
* 01/31/2020
* USD 349,474.00

This is a project to study information that speakers convey by exploiting
pragmatic inferences. To understand what people say, one listens both to what is
said and what is "unsaid". If there is a plate of 5 cookies on the table and a
child eats them all and then tells her sister who made them, "I ate some of the
cookies." the child is not strictly speaking lying. Notice that if one eats all
of the cookies on a plate, it is also true that one has eaten some of the
cookies on that plate. This "some, and possibly all" interpretation is given by
the logic of what is said, while the "some, but not all" interpretation is
considered to be a part of meaning that is unsaid and is appropriate in some
contexts, but not others. Understanding when each of these two interpretations
is called for is thought to be a question of which part of the mind is being put
to use. The part of the mind that is dedicated to language only is thought to be
responsible for the "some, and possibly all" interpretation, while higher order
reasoning--not specific to language--is thought to be responsible for the "some,
but not all" interpretation. When are children able to grasp this relatively
subtle difference in language use? If science could find a moment in their
mental developmental when they understand one, but not the other, it would
constitute evidence of which parts of the mind develop more quickly than others.
Further, do children who are known to have severe language problems show
evidence of understanding one kind of interpretation and not the other? If so,
not only would there be evidence of distinct developmental timelines for
distinct parts of the mind, there might also be a way of identifying children
with these disorders early so that they could receive therapeutic services to
help them learn to cope with their language problem.

This study tests a sample of children who speak Spanish as a first language,
because the difference between the types of meaning is clearer in Spanish than
in many languages, as a result of there being a word with only the "some and
possibly all" meaning ("unos") and another word for that can have either meaning
("algunos"). This project will examine what both typically-developing children
and children with the developmental language deficit labeled Specific Language
Impairment know about these constructions. Preschool-aged children with this
language disorder are very likely to receive a dyslexia diagnosis once they
reach school age. Consequently, one aim of this study is to identify differences
--in terms of their knowledge of this aspect of language--between children who
have language problems and those who do not, as a means for diagnosing language
problems early in child development.