* 1551691
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Documentation of a Peruvian home sign system
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2019
* Grace Neveu, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 05/31/2019
* USD 13,939.00

Throughout history, scholars have contemplated the origins of language. In 460
BCE, Herodotus reported that two children, isolated from language and raised in
a cabin, began to speak Phrygian. His conclusion was that Phrygian must be the
first human language. In modern linguistics, the idea of an innate Universal
Grammar that is hardwired in the human brain has had a major impact on the
field. If the Forbidden Experiment, as described by Herodotus, were performed
now, what might we learn about the origins of language or about language
universals? What structures would emerge as resilient properties of human
communication that require little or no input? We cannot perform this
experiment, but we can look to situations in which children are deprived of
natural language. Deaf children with no access to spoken or signed language
often develop 'home sign systems'. By documenting these systems we gain a unique
perspective on processes of language development and language genesis.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The subjects of this research are two adult home signers
living in separate Máíjùnà villages in Peruvian Amazonia. RCM is 30 years old;
ST is 65. Neither has ever been exposed to a conventional sign language.
Nevertheless, these two men communicate with those around them through gestures
and signs. This research project investigates the grammatical structures present
in their home sign systems and how those systems compare to one another. The PIs
explore the question of whether attitudes toward deafness and sign language have
allowed more complex features to develop in these two home sign systems than in
previously reported home sign systems. Primary research goals are to establish
the level of conventionalization that has taken place within the home sign
systems of RCM and ST, to identify any linguistic relationship between their two
systems, and to probe the degree to which hearing community members adhere to
their systems of communication.