* 1551826
* Psychological mechanisms through which economic scarcity propels racial prejudice
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2020
* David Amodio, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 06/30/2020
* USD 425,249.00

When the U.S. economy experiences significant setbacks, its impact is not
limited to the financial realm, nor are the detrimental effects evenly shared
across all segments of society. For example, in the recent recession, Black
Americans had a decrease in household wealth that was much greater than that of
Whites. Although widening disparities that occur during recessions are
frequently explained in terms of existing structural inequalities, recent
findings by Amy R. Krosch, in collaboration with the investigator David M.
Amodio, suggests a psychological basis for disparities. Their work indicates
that perception of economic scarcity affects visual perception processes such
that those from minority racial groups are perceived as more stereotypical in
appearance, and in turn, as less deserving of resources. Such findings suggest
that economic events can threaten intergroup relations and increase
discrimination, putting particular groups at acute risk. However, the
psychological mechanisms by which these macroeconomic factors affect racial
perceptions is not understood. Understanding such mechanisms is essential for
developing ways to reduce the effects of economic scarcity on prejudice and
discrimination.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The current project focuses on key
sociocognitive mechanisms through which perceptions of economic scarcity cause
biased visual perceptions of individuals from racial minority groups. In a
series of eight experiments, the investigator tests the hypothesis that
perceived scarcity induces not only stereotyping, but dehumanization processes
as well: reduced tendency to infer uniquely human-like traits and emotions from
a face and to neurally encode it as a human face. Experiments test whether these
processes directly bias perceivers' visual representations of individuals from
racial minority groups, which, in turn, propagates behavioral discrimination.
This research builds on both classic and novel theories of how economic factors
influence intergroup relations, and it makes innovative use of behavioral,
neuroscientific, and psychophysical methodologies to examine the visual
processing of race. This research aims to gain crucial knowledge of how economic
factors contribute to persisting disparities and provide some direction for how
these effects may be mitigated.