* 1551913
* A multivariate model of subadult age estimation
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Kyra Stull, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 08/31/2019
* USD 35,678.00

This project will explore the relationships among chronological age and dental
formation, long bone growth and epiphyseal fusion in modern US children, using
full body CT scans and sophisticated statistical models. A better understanding
of these relationships is important not only for human biologists interested in
childhood growth and life history patterns, but for bioarchaeologists and
forensic anthropologists who want more accurate estimates of age at death in
skeletal samples. NSF funds will support data collection and statistical
consulting for the dental portion of the larger project. The project will result
in freely accessible dental and skeletal data for a large, cross-sectional
sample of modern children. An age estimation software program, and workshops to
introduce the software, will also be developed and will be of interest across a
range of research areas within and beyond anthropology.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Subadult age estimations are based on documented patterns
of growth and development and are considered the most accurate estimation in the
subadult biological profile. However, the major limitations of subadult age
estimation are the lack of large, modern skeletal reference samples and the
reliance on historical, primarily univariate methodological approaches. Most
methods utilize a bone-by-bone or tooth-by-tooth approach and do not provide a
means to incorporate markers from the entire subadult skeleton. In this project,
the investigators will have access to de-identified medical examiner data. They
will collect information on dental formation, epiphyseal fusion and long bone
growth from multi-slice computed tomography (MSCT) and Lodox Statscan
radiographic images for individuals between birth and 15 years (n = 1500), to
develop a multivariate age estimation technique. Univariate and multivariate
models will be compared in terms of accuracy, bias, and predictive ability, and
the data will be incorporated into KidStats software with the goal of providing
more accurate, precise, and unbiased age estimates for subadults. The freely
accessible data will offer a range of research and collaborative opportunities
for undergraduate and postgraduate students as well as researchers in
anthropology and allied fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly
supported by NSF and the National Institute of Justice.