* 1551004
* EAGER: Can You Trust Apps Age Recommendations? Inconsistent and Unreliable Maturity Ratings on Mobile Platforms
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Yilu Zhou, Fordham University
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 08/31/2020
* USD 245,042.00

While smart phones provide an excellent way for communication, entertaining and
education, they also raise many privacy and security concerns. Children are
facing the risks of being exposed to inappropriate content due to mis-rated
Apps. Both Android and iOS apps come with maturity ratings that examine the
existence and intensity of mature themes within each app. However, each mobile
platform adopts its own rating policy and rating strategy which creates
inconsistency and inaccurate ratings. The maturity ratings for Android apps are
purely a result of app developers' self-report. Many claim that the Android
rating policy is unclear, and it is difficult for developers to understand. A
more critical risk resides in in-app advertisements. Many apps, especially the
free ones, are connected to third party advertisements. Neither mobile platforms
nor advertising networks apply these maturity policies to restrict the contents
of in-app advertisements. However, this phenomenon has not been studied, nor
have the factors that may lead to untruthful maturity ratings been explored.
Thus, the risks associated with content inappropriateness are unknown. This
project develops mechanisms to compare, analyze and verify the maturity ratings
of mobile apps and in-app advertisements, and investigates possible reasons
behind the inaccurate ratings. A variety of data will be collected to support
the analysis including Web data crawled from the Web, App data from decompiled
app code, and advertisement data collected in a number of "demo
apps."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project adopts a multi-disciplinary
approach to compare and understand the maturity rating policy difference among
different platforms. It plans to investigate the current maturity rating
framework on Android, iOS and other third-party authorities such as ESRB. By
comparing the same app that appears on both Android and iOS app ratings, the
project studies if ratings are reflected in app descriptions, user reviews,
developer information, etc. App log data will be collected to analyze content
maturity of in-app advertisements. The project will then build an effective text
mining approach to estimate the true rating of an app. Using this as a
foundation, the project will further analyze and evaluate a large number of
Android and iOS app ratings as well as in-app advertisement content. Statistical
analysis will be performed to understand the factors that lead to mis-rated
maturity ratings.