* 1551219
* EAGER: Fundamental Methods for Design, Control, and Motion Planning of Soft Robots
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Dmitry Berenson, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Reid Simmons
* 08/31/2018
* USD 247,355.00

The next frontier for robotics is bringing robots into environments such as
homes, flexible manufacturing, and disaster sites, where the standard robot
design, consisting of rigid links actuated by electric motors, limits their
usefulness and creates safety concerns. Unlike rigid robots, soft robots have
the potential to be highly accessible, versatile, and inherently safe around
humans. However, there is currently a lack of engineering principles for
designing soft robots that perform practical tasks. It is also unclear how to
enable these robots to move reliably and efficiently in cluttered environments,
like a disaster site. This work explores new methods for designing, controlling,
and planning motion for soft robot arms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical
objective is to explore, formalize, and validate the fundamental algorithmic and
engineering principles necessary to build soft robot arms and allow them to
perform useful tasks. To that end, the project investigates (1) A modular soft
arm design where each module can offer a combination of 3D bending, extension,
and change in stiffness, (2) Modeling and control methods to achieve reliable
position, force, and impedance control, and (3) Motion planning algorithms which
plan in the belief space of the robot and exploit contact with the environment
to overcome uncertainty in the motion model.