* 1551497
* Pre-Production for Silicon Run Nanoelectronics Video
* EHR,DUE
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2017
* Ruth Carranza, Pellet Productions, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Abby Ilumoka
* 08/31/2017
* USD 74,965.00

This project supported by the National Science Foundation (NSF) Advanced
Technological Education (ATE) and Improving Undergraduate STEM Education
(IUSE:EHR) programs will conduct a workshop to begin development of educational
video materials documenting how modern silicon-based microelectronic integrated
circuits are produced. The project will be led by Silicon Run Productions of
Mountain View, California. The eventual goal of the effort is video material
that can be used by educators for the benefit of students at all levels with
particular emphasis on undergraduate science, technology, engineering,
mathematics, and computer science students and the education of the general
public. Silicon-based technology is vital to nearly all consumer products as
well as the many industries that support the semiconductor infrastructure.
Silicon-based integrated circuit (IC) microfabrication is also central to
emerging technological products such as micro-electromechanical systems (MEMS)
that incorporate IC processes or utilize hybrid formats. Gaining access to
state-of-the-art industrial microfabrication sites is problematic due to
cleanroom and competitive issues. The project has been able to enlist
cooperation of a silicon-based nanotechnology integrated circuit facility for
the purposes of developing and filming documentary material. With otherwise
little access to such facilities, the intended educational video will provide
students with a real-world look at industrial integrated circuit manufacturing
upon which modern electronics such as mobile phones rely.

The Nanoelectronics video will feature the most advanced manufacturing processes
used to make todays planar and three-dimensional semiconductor devices. This
project will begin the pre-production phases of the activity and conduct a
workshop with educators and industry. The workshop focus will be to review the
existing material and explore the possible role and content of the video so it
can best serve students and an engaged general public. With input from the
workshop, a tentative script will be written to serve as a basis for preliminary
work in the microfabrication facility. The project has a unique opportunity to
document a modern 300 mm wafer manufacturing line that specializes in
nanoelectronics and sub-22 nm process technology. This phase of the
Nanoelectronics video project will provide the first steps toward a high-quality
documentary treatment of a vital area in modern technology resulting in a long-
needed update to current semiconductor processing videos. The work is expected
to have a broad impact on the education and training of technicians, engineers,
scientists and the education of the general public.