* 1551822
* Testing the State and Trait Accuracy Model: Links between Accuracy of Judging Affect and Accuracy of Judging Traits
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2016,12/31/2019
* Judith Hall, Idaho State University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 12/31/2019
* USD 406,358.00

Decision making is a process that is an essential, but challenging, aspect of
people's personal and professional lives. Important decisions about another
person are often based on first impressions. Impressions can include the
emotional state a person is feeling at that moment, or "affect", and how that
person generally thinks and acts: his or her personality traits. Making accurate
judgments has vital effects on the actions people take. Judging that a person's
affect is positive or negative allows people to decide whether approach or
avoidance is best at that moment. Accurately judging traits is useful for the
"who" and "how" of social living. People determine whom to approach with what
goal in mind, and they anticipate how such interactions might unfold. Making
good decisions in a variety of contexts is likely to lead to quality
relationships or collaborations and avoidance of negative ones. This, in turn,
may increase well-being, employee satisfaction, and productivity. Although
accurately judging both affect and stable traits is crucial to making high
quality decisions, researchers have developed models of these two kinds of
judgments independent of each other. The current project provides an innovative
merging of these areas of research, producing a model of how accuracy across
these judgment areas may be related. The investigators will test the newly
developed State and Trait Accuracy Model in four experiments. In addition, the
project provides research opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students,
and engagement in science for students in primary schools.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project tests two hypotheses about the relationship
and causal direction of people's accuracy in judging affect and judging traits.
The State and Trait Accuracy Model predicts a positive relationship between such
judgments, and further predicts that judgments of affect precede accurate
judgments of personality traits. To test hypotheses about the accuracy of
judging strangers, it is essential to have stimuli that display genuine emotions
and responses, rather than staged or artificial affective displays. Thus,
researchers from the three universities involved in this project have developed
a validated database of stimuli consisting of videotapes of individuals whose
personality traits and emotional state have been assessed. In the current
project, experiments will use segments of these videotapes as stimuli for
observers to make affect and trait judgments. Four experiments involve
manipulating observers' judgmental focus and manipulating the validity of affect
and trait information, either by mislabeling or by natural incongruences.
Undergraduate and graduate students will be involved as researchers and
participants in the project, providing research training opportunities. Children
in local primary schools will benefit by exposure to presentations and research
design experiences provided in their schools. Another benefit of this project is
that the infrastructure for research is enhanced via this collaboration of
researchers at three North American universities. In addition, society can
benefit from an increased understanding of how affective states and personality
traits can be judged more accurately--something useful to people in daily life
as well as to professionals. For instance, the U.S. economy may benefit from
employers being better able to determine the fit between applicants and jobs.