* 1551535
* EAGER: Inferring Mechanical Explanations from Manipulation Demonstrations
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2017
* Alberto Rodriguez Garcia, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Reid Simmons
* 08/31/2017
* USD 225,000.00

Robots are fast, accurate, reliable, and tireless, which make them great assets
for factories. However, robots lack intuition - at which humans excel. Current
robots have a hard time when tasked with imagining ways to manufacture new
products. In an effective human-robot collaboration, humans conceive new
products and feasible ways to manufacture them, and robots follow human
guidelines with excellent precision and reliability. The scenario of interest is
where a human operator demonstrates an execution of a task, such as mating two
parts, and a robot understands how to replicate it. This proposal is concerned
with improving the current robot understanding of those demonstrations. In
particular, it is concerned with recovering information that is not directly
observable with cameras, such as contacts between parts, and the forcefulness of
the motions, both important for the ability of the robot to replicate the
demonstration.

This proposal aims to automate the inference of contact events and contact
forces from noisy kinematic observations of the interaction between two known
parts. The central idea is to use trajectory optimization and complementarity
based models of contact to project noisy kinematic trajectories into
dynamically-sound and environment-compatible motions, contacts, and forces. The
problem is naturally under-constrained. There are many possible explanations for
a given demonstration, and this proposal will investigate different ways to
provide the optimizer with prior information to converge to a "reasonable"
explanation. The first phase will conduct experiments instrumented with motion
capture and force sensing to capture ground truth, and evaluate the ability of
the algorithms to explain it, and overcome degradations such as noise and
occlusions. A second phase will focus on un-instrumented scenarios and free-from
demonstrations. The technical merit of the proposal will be demonstrated in the
context of two high impact applications: automated assembly and shelf-
picking/shelf-restocking in a warehouse scenario.