* 1551227
* Understanding and Responding to the Growth of Computer Science and Engineering Course Enrollments at the Undergraduate Level
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2015,02/28/2018
* Jon Eisenberg, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Janice Cuny
* 02/28/2018
* USD 605,972.00

The National Academy of Sciences proposes a consensus study to (1) examine
patterns of enrollment in undergraduate computer science and computer
engineering (CS/CE/Information) courses, including possible drivers of recent
and potential future changes in enrollment; and (2) identify current and new
strategies for responding to recent and possible future changes in these
enrollment levels while maintaining or enhancing educational quality and the
participation of women and underrepresented minorities in these fields.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specific Issues that will be considered in this intensive
study include the following:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;-- Current and projected
patterns of enrollment in undergraduate courses in Computer Science, Computer
Engineering, and Information (within undergraduate Information Schools),
including an analysis of the factors that have driven recent growth and may
drive future growth. Data will be disaggregated by type of 4-year institution
(e.g. top 50, R-1). The study will include an analysis of enrollment patterns
among CS/CE/Information majors and minors and STEM and non-STEM majors taking
service courses offered by CS/CE/Information departments or enrolling in
CS/CE/Information courses on an elective basis. A primary goal of this effort is
to determine whether the recent increases in enrollment are similar to other
cyclic fluctuations that have occurred in the past or whether they are more
likely to be sustained. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;-- Strategies that various
institutions are using to respond most effectively to enrollment growth while
maintaining or enhancing course access as well as the quality of instruction,
considered by type of college or university. The study will examine the impacts
those strategies are having on CS/CE/Information departments in terms of, for
example, faculty and graduate student hiring and workload (including non-CS
faculty), student retention, and support for the needs of different categories
of students (such as non-CS majors, CS minors, STEM majors, and non-STEM
majors). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;-- The impact of enrollment growth on efforts to
increase the enrollment of women and under-represented minorities in
CS/CE/Information courses and degree programs, as well as strategies for
retaining those students in the CS/CE/Information field and encouraging their
pathways toward graduate degrees and careers in related fields in the context of
growing enrollments.