* 1551433
* Fate of Subducted Carbonates: Structure Prediction and Solid Solution Modeling
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2016,01/31/2019
* Paul Asimow, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 01/31/2019
* USD 410,000.00

Earth scientists agree that the regulation of carbon dioxide (CO2)
concentrations in the atmosphere over geological timescales is an essential part
of our planet's suitability for life. The essential ingredients of this long-
term carbon cycle, which regulates the availability of carbon for the biosphere
and the abundance of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere, are release of CO2 from
volcanoes and return of CO2 return to the mantle along with old oceanic crust at
subduction zones. In geochemistry, our ability to understand how a compound like
CO2 will behave in such environments depends on identifying what mineral or
fluid carries the carbon at each stage. Some information about this can be
gained from natural observations and some from experiments, but there are key
stages of the carbon cycle where calculation is the best tool at our disposal.
This project will carry out a detailed computational study of the structure,
thermodynamics, and stability of carbonate minerals under terrestrial mantle
conditions, in order to constrain their role in storing and transporting carbon
during subduction and melting processes. The approach combines tools from
computational mineral physics, materials science, and classical thermodynamics
to make predictions about complex solid solution phases at elevated pressure and
finite temperature. Such a comprehensive approach is highly unusual in Earth
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Building on their success in predicting a new
dense structure of CaMg(CO3)2 dolomite that is more stable than any observed
experimentally, and in computing the phase diagram of end-member dolomite
composition, the team has four goals for this project: (1) to determine the
kinetics of transition among the pure dolomite phases; (2) to determine the
influence of Fe2+ in the dolomite structure on phase stability, thermodynamic
properties, and phase relations in Ca(Mg,Fe)(CO3)2 system; (3) to compute phase
diagrams governing decarbonation in the CaO-MgO-FeO-SiO2-CO2 system; and (4)
optimistically, to compute phase diagrams governing redox exchange between C and
Fe in an extended system including reduced carbon and ferric iron. Their
approach begins with prediction of stable crystal structures from first
principles using a combination of evolutionary crystallography and density-
functional theory. Thermodynamics of stable structures are characterized by a
static equation of state and a fully anharmonic treatment of temperature effects
and vibrational entropy via a highly efficient molecular dynamics approach.
Solid solutions and configurational entropy are treated through detailed
consideration of ordering phenomena and Boltzmann weighting of populated
configurations. Finally, multicomponent phase diagrams are computed from the
chemical potentials of components in relevant phases. This proposal will fund
the stipend and computational resources required by a female graduate student
being trained in an unusual combination of experimental and computational
mineral physics approaches. Their workflow for computing the stability of novel
carbonate phases relative to free CO2 has the possibility to connect to novel
materials approaches to carbon sequestration.