* 1551719
* From memory flexibility to cognitive flexibility: Examining precursors to bilingual advantages during early childhood
* SBE,BCS
* 02/15/2016,01/31/2022
* Rachel Barr, Georgetown University
* Standard Grant
* Peter Vishton
* 01/31/2022
* USD 475,000.00

Two-thirds of the world's children are raised in homes where multiple languages
are spoken. Children who learn two or more languages exhibit what appear to be
lifelong cognitive advantages relative to those who learn only one language. In
particular, bilingual children show heightened cognitive flexibility, defined as
the ability to adjust their behaviors in response to changes in task demands,
and inhibit their attention to irrelevant information. Cognitive flexibility is
critical to educational success. The proposed studies will examine whether
advantages in memory processing during infancy can explain bilingual children's
heightened cognitive flexibility later in childhood. A better understanding of
how and why bilingualism enhances cognitive flexibility will allow educators to
develop pedagogical strategies to capitalize on bilingualism's protective
cognitive strengths. This may be especially important for bilingual children
from low income families who show an achievement gap relative to their middle
class, monolingual peers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Memory inference and memory
flexibility will be tested in 1- and 2-year-old monolingual and bilingual
children and these same children will be tested at 3- and 5-years on cognitive
flexibility. Memory flexibility involves the ability to recognize similarities
between objects based on how they function rather than how they look, which
involves the ability to shift between cues. Memory interference occurs when
competing cues disrupt memory encoding, and reduction of interference requires
inhibition of conflicting cues. It is predicted that longitudinal analyses will
show that bilingual infants have greater memory flexibility and less memory
interference than monolinguals, which will predict enhanced cognitive
flexibility at both 3 and 5 years. In addition, the PI is committed to training
graduate and undergraduate students and will recruit bilingual students for
their unique linguistic skills; the project is therefore likely to train
minority students who are underrepresented in STEM fields.