* 1551483
* NSF Rapid Proposal: Flows of the future:  Capitalizing on an extreme weather year to evaluate future summer streamflows in the Cascades
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2016
* Gordon Grant, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Torgersen
* 07/31/2016
* USD 47,389.00

Snow is a crucial moisture source for forests, aquatic ecosystems, and
communities in the Pacific Northwest and across the western US. The winter of
2014-2015 was the warmest winter on record followed by an anomalously warm, dry
spring resulting in historically low streamflows and early declarations of
drought conditions across western Oregon. This hydrologic drought represents an
overall decrease in streamflow that can be monitored conveniently by downstream
gages. However the upstream impact of decreased streamflow is difficult to
assess from downstream gages. It is therefore necessary to assess how headwater
streams react to decreased rainfall and meteorologic drought. Understanding how
headwater streams react (and by what mechanisms) to meteorologic drought will
enable the interpretation of stream gage records in terms of upstream ecological
response. The field campaign will provide undergraduates with valuable field
training, conducting scientifically exciting and societally relevant research.
This research effort will also provide the post-doctoral researcher with an
opportunity to mentor and train undergraduates. The investigators will
capitalize on this opportunity through a coordinated set of activities
including: 1) meeting with public and private water supply and power utilities
to provide a framework for future flow forecasting; 2) meeting with Federal and
State land and water managers to share findings and discuss implications for
water availability and ecological consequences of low flows; and 3) working with
journalists to disseminate accurate real-time findings (similar to the monthly
snow report).

This proposal posits that headwater streams can respond to drought by
contracting laterally or longitudinally. And that spring fed streams will
respond with "jumps" from sequential spring outflow levels whereas surface flow
fed stream will contract. These source regions for water will have chemically
differing signatures which they can track. The study region includes (a)
surface-flow dominated Western Cascades watersheds, representing a flashy
streamflow regime with rapid baseflow recession and very low summer flows; and
(b) the spring-fed High Cascades watersheds, representing a slow-responding
streamflow regime with a long and sustained baseflow recession that maintains
late summer streamflow through deep-groundwater contributions to high-volume
coldwater springs. The investigators will use a field-based approach to collect
and analyze data from both spring-fed and surface flow-dominated watersheds
throughout the dry season, from approximately June through October (or first
rainfall event of consequence). Summer streamflow recession will be monitored
using USGS mainstem gages and project stage height/stream discharge
relationships developed for our small streams. The longitudinal contraction
hypotheses will be tested by repeat measurements of channel head locations in
each watershed and continuous monitoring of water temperature (an indication of
presence/absence of water) at headwater springs. The lateral contraction
hypotheses of streams will be tested by repeat surveys of multiple transects per
stream.