* 1551318
* Interdisciplinary Workshop on Statistical Natural Language Processing Methods for Software Engineering
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2018
* Premkumar Devanbu, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 09/30/2018
* USD 65,792.00

This grant funds a workshop to bring together two communities: Software
Engineering and Natural Language Processing. Statistical natural language
processing (NLP) techniques and tools have become very powerful and are
applicable in many domains. Software Engineering researchers have begun to to
adopt NLP techniques and tools in the context of Software Engineering to analyze
repositories of source code as if they were natural language artifacts. The
purpose of this grant is to bring together the Software Engineering and Natural
Language communities to address these problems. Many Software Engineering
processes and products involve natural language artifacts, such as requirements
documents and code comments, and peer reviews, which play a role in program
comprehension, code search, traceability and many other purposes in the software
development process. The workshop will accelerate the pace of Software
Engineering research in these areas and beyond. Natural Language researchers
will identify new research directions stimulated by challenges in the Software
Engineering domain. Natural Language can be a mode of communication to assist
disabled such as people who are visually impaired and or have muscular injuries,
thus one of the broader impacts is to advance research that would make
programming tasks and jobs more accessible to those populations.