* 1551138
* A Vision-Based Technique for Damage Assessment of Civil Structures
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2015,07/31/2017
* Salvatore Salamone, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Yick Hsuan
* 07/31/2017
* USD 179,798.00

Structural health monitoring is an important subject area of research because of
the aging infrastructure of the nation and the desire to extend life of
buildings and structures. Distress in reinforced concrete structures such as
bridges, buildings, and nuclear power plants can be detected by cracks in is
concrete. It is advantageous to record characteristics of the cracks remotely
and mechanically to reduce use of manpower. The cracks can be recorded using
digital camera. The challenge is to quantify the length and size of these cracks
in computer based system. Mathematics based fractal analysis has a potential to
quantify the cracks. An algorithm will be developed for fundamental fractal
analysis of 2D digital visual images and apply the algorithm to surface cracks
in reinforced concrete structures. The algorithm will be validated using
previously collected data in laboratory tests. Research will be pursued to
assess structural damage from the crack patterns.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
objective of this project is to create a vision-based structural health
monitoring system for the automatic assessment of damage in reinforced concrete
civil infrastructures. The system is based on the fractal analysis of 2D images
of the visible spectrum and will be capable of retrieving surface crack patterns
that can provide a quantitative measure of damage. The PI will investigate
fundamental fractal properties of 2D digital visual images and apply the
algorithm to surface cracks in reinforced concrete structures. The database from
the Network for Earthquake Engineering Simulation Project Warehouse will be used
to validate the algorithm. It is planned to validate the hypothesis that fractal
analysis can be used for nondestructive evaluation method and can provide crack
pattern. The crack pattern can be used to assess structural damage. It is
planned to incorporate results of this project in existing graduate course.