* 1551040
* Towards Synergizing International Collaboration on Plug-In Electric Vehicles
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2017
* Alireza Khaligh, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Roxanne Nikolaus
* 08/31/2017
* USD 15,000.00

Towards Synergizing International Collaboration on Plug-In Electric
Vehicles&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part 1:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to
initiate a bilateral, international research collaboration between researchers
from the University of Maryland at College Park (UMD), Maryland, USA and the
Istanbul Technical University (ITU), Istanbul, Turkey in the area of next
generation plug-in electric vehicles. The requested funding will support the PI
and his graduate student from University of Maryland to visit the ITU team and
their facilities. The PI's ongoing research on the increased technical
capabilities of plug-in electric vehicles will benefit significantly from ITU's
newly established, state-of-the-art automotive center test platforms, which
currently do not exist at UMN, and are required for the experimentation needs of
the PI's research. ITU's expertise in high-efficiency control of electric and
hybrid vehicles would also be a valuable resource for the UMD team. The visit
will serve the two teams to determine how to device a collaboration plan, and
determine how the complementary skills of the two teams could be exploited for
the planned research. The visit will also help the US team to gain familiarity
with the sophisticated platforms and equipment at the ITU?s Mechatronics
Education and Research Center (MERC) and Advanced Vehicle Technologies and
Research Center (AVTRC). In addition, the project will offer a unique
international research opportunity to the US student, who will work with the ITU
team for a month, after the return of the PI. This extended stay will provide
the student with some exposure to a new culture, as well as experience in a
collaborative international research environment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part
2:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will pave a path for future international
collaborations to achieve major breakthroughs in control, modeling and design of
power electronics interfaces and adjustable speed drives for the next generation
of plug-in electric vehicles. It will extend the research and educational
activities in transportation electrification at the University of Maryland and
the Istanbul Technical University in two main areas: (a) design and control of
adjustable speed drives for various propulsion machines including induction
machines and permanent magnet synchronous machines; and (b) feasible
methodologies and practical approaches for real-time implementation and
validation of onboard integrated chargers. It is the intention of the UMN and
ITU research teams to improve and strengthen this collaborative effort with the
development of other collaborative multidisciplinary research efforts of much
larger scale, such as through IRES and PIRE proposals.