* 1551249
* Workshop on Formal Methods for Security (November 2015)
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2015,01/31/2017
* Stephen Chong, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Nina Amla
* 01/31/2017
* USD 88,339.00

This aim of this workshop is to identify existing successes and opportunities
for applying formal methods to security problems, and raise awareness of these
opportunities in relevant communities, including academia, industry, and
government research labs. The workshop will bring together researchers from
academia, industry, and government research labs that are working in the areas
of security and formal methods, and researchers currently applying formal
methods to security problems. Workshop participants will identify current and
forthcoming computer security challenges, and identify opportunities to apply
formal methods to meet these challenges. The main deliverable of the workshop
will be a report summarizing the discussions and findings of the workshop, which
will be publicly available.

By enabling leading researchers to engage with security problems using a richer
palette of formal methods, the workshop will promote more robust security across
a wide range of socially central types of system. It should stimulate
development of better ways to design and implement future secure systems; better
ways to determine whether existing systems are vulnerable; and better ways to
assess the consequences of existing vulnerabilities. The workshop will also
enrich the experience of graduate students who can participate and also assist
by taking notes and providing materials for the report. Early career researchers
such as post-docs will also be included.