* 1551221
* BPC-A: Computing Alliance of Hispanic-Serving Institutions--Building a Resilient, Sustainable, and Adaptable CAHSI Ecosystem
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2016,07/31/2023
* Malek Adjouadi, University of Texas at El Paso
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Forbes
* 07/31/2023
* USD 4,003,924.00

The University of Texas, El Paso proposes to extend the work of the Computing
Alliance of Hispanic-Serving Institutions (CAHSI) in collaboration with their
partners: California State University-Dominguez Hills, California State
University-San Marcos, Dade College, Florida International University, New
Mexico State University, Texas A&amp;M University-Corpus Christi, University of
Houston Downtown, University of Puerto Rico Mayaguez, and the University of
Texas Pan American. Together these Hispanic-Serving institutions will work to
adapt proven strategies that have positive impact on (1) the number of Hispanic
students who enter the workforce with computing degrees; (2) the retention and
advancement of Hispanic students and faculty in computing, and (3) the
development of sustainable, competitive education and research programs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To accomplish this, CAHSI has already implemented a number
of programs, including Peer-Led Team Learning (PLTL) that creates an active
learning experience for students and leadership experiences for undergraduates
serving as peer leaders, the Affinity Research Group (ARG) model that emphasizes
the deliberate and intentional development of technical, team and professional
skills and knowledge required for research, and Mentor-Grad that engages
undergraduates in experiences and activities that prepare them for graduate
studies and the professoriate. CAHSI has a strong record of success: recent
bachelor's graduation rates of Hispanics in computer science increased by nearly
25% within their member institution, while over the same time period, the
national trend showed a 39% decline. This extension will further existing goals
and intentionally develop a sustainable ecosystem to (1) institute a sustainable
infrastructure that supports CAHSI's continued impact and (2) become recognized
as an organization that affects decision-making and cultural change at the
local, regional, and national levels. To achieve these goals CAHSI will
establish the cyber infrastructure to support collaborations and dissemination
of CAHSI practices, establish collaborations beyond the Alliance with
organizations and institutions sharing common goals, and promote multicultural
awareness in administrators, faculty, and students.