* 1551674
* SG: Origin and Evolutionary History of Gene Transfer Agents in Marine Bacteria
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2019
* Olga Zhaxybayeva, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 03/31/2019
* USD 156,249.00

Exchange of genes is an important evolutionary process that occurs at high
frequency within microbial populations, allowing them to adapt quickly to
changing environmental conditions. Acquisition of resistance to antibiotics in
bacteria is one of the many ways in which such gene swapping impacts society.
Because of the potentially tremendous benefit to their survival, bacteria have
developed a large arsenal of mechanisms for gene trade. One enigmatic gene
exchange mechanism involves shuttling genes packaged in particles (so-called
Gene Transfer Agents) that resemble bacterial viruses. This raises many
questions about the origin and functionality of this mechanism. How beneficial
is it to exchange genes this way? Do Gene Transfer Agents represent former
viruses that were "domesticated" by bacteria? Bacterial viruses are numerically
the most abundant organisms on Earth. Could many of these viruses in fact be
Gene Transfer Agents? Answers to these questions will advance our understanding
of how gene exchange contributes to bacterial adaptation. Because of
accumulating evidence that Gene Transfer Agents are of use to a microbial
population as a whole rather than to an individual cell, this project will also
advance our knowledge on the origin and maintenance of cooperation, a long-
standing mystery of evolutionary biology. Since bacteria and viruses are key
players in all Earth environments, including human bodies, the project will
benefit both the scientific community and broader society.

Researchers at Dartmouth College will investigate the above questions via
computational analyses of genetic information from marine bacteria. Those
bacteria are key players in Earth's nutrient cycling and ocean habitability.
Genes encoding Gene Transfer Agents (GTAs) will be identified and extracted from
bacterial genomes and oceanic metagenomes. These GTAs will then be rigorously
compared to similar genes from bacterial viruses. The comparison will assess the
GTA's evolutionary relationship to viruses and the selective pressure exerted on
their genes by bacterial hosts. Given the recent discovery of the GTA system and
its resemblance to actual viruses, many true GTAs in available genomic sequences
could be mistakenly annotated as integrated bacterial viruses. To address this
important issue, the researchers will develop a novel bioinformatic method that
aims to successfully distinguish Gene Transfer Agents from their viral
counterparts. Ultimately, this cross-disciplinary project will contribute to
better understanding of oceanic and global elemental cycles and of adaptive
evolutionary processes that drive bacterial populations in marine and other
environments. The data sets and computer programs generated in this project will
be shared with scientific community.