* 1551067
* EAGER: NeTS: Under-Ice Mobile Networking: Exploratory Study of Network Cognition and Mobility Control
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Min Song, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Thyagarajan Nandagopal
* 08/31/2018
* USD 299,716.00

Autonomous underwater vehicles (AUVs) with acoustic communication capabilities
are the platform of choice for under-ice exploration. Different from commonly
studied open-water environment, the sound speed in the under-ice environment
exhibits an increasing trend with water depth, which renders sound propagation
shadowing and multiple reflections by the ice cover. Such acoustic environment
characteristics have to be judiciously accounted in under-ice acoustic
communication systems, which otherwise could lead to severe communication
disconnection as observed in field experiments. This project focuses on an
under-ice AUV network that migrates as a swarm for water sampling in an unknown
ice-covered region, and develops algorithms for AUVs to learn the under-ice
acoustic environment and adapt AUV mobility to the characteristics of the
acoustic environment and the water sample field to achieve optimal under-ice
mission performance while maintaining desired acoustic connectivity. This
project will expand the frontier of under-ice exploration by autonomous
vehicles. Given the vital role of ice-covered regions in many underpinning
factors of modern society, such as economic growth and scientific research, this
project will yield significant socio-economic impacts. In addition, the project
will support two Ph.D. dissertations, and involve junior researchers in both
algorithm development and field experiments.

This project will innovate over two interrelated domains: under-ice acoustic
environment and network cognition, and adaptive AUV mobility control.
Specifically, a recursive algorithm will be developed to estimate the
environment parameters pertaining to acoustic propagation, as well as the
network state (including AUV positions and velocities), leveraging the acoustic
measurements obtained during packet transmissions within the AUV network. The
estimated parameters will characterize under-ice acoustic field for AUV mobility
control. Moreover, an adaptive algorithm will be designed to adjust the mobility
of AUVs to the acoustic field and the water sample field, with a goal of
minimizing the sample field estimation error while ensuring desired acoustic
connectivity among the AUVs. The developed algorithms will be evaluated via
simulations and offline experiment data processing. Within an about 10-month
ice-cover period of local lakes in this project, extensive under-ice experiments
will be conducted under a wide range of geometric and environment conditions.
This project will develop and showcase fundamental and crosscutting techniques
for under-ice AUV mobile networking, underlying the synergy of environment
cognition, statistical signal processing, and wireless mobile networking.