* 1551992
* Renewed field investigations of Pliocene sediments at Lomekwi
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2016,09/30/2022
* Francis Brown, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 09/30/2022
* USD 372,356.00

This project investigates early human relatives (hominins) and the environment
they lived in 3.5 to 3.3 million years ago, through continued paleontological
fieldwork at the site of Lomekwi, Kenya. Recent fossil discoveries, including
from Lomekwi, have revealed more hominin diversity than was previously known for
that time period. Furthermore, stone tools were recently discovered at Lomekwi,
predating the origin of our genus Homo by over one half million years. This
fieldwork will help uncover who the first toolmakers were and if there was
something special about the environment of the region that spawned species
diversity or the advance in technological behavior. The project will strengthen
international collaborative ties between the United States and Kenya, and
educate students from both countries working together in paleontology and public
outreach. The project will bring journalism students, education specialists and
scientists together to collaborate in developing middle school and high school
teaching materials on human prehistory and science designed to meet Next
Generation educational standards for national
distribution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Paleontological research at Lomekwi is aimed
at recovering more hominin fossils (3.5-3.3 Ma) and characterizing their
paleoecological context. Until recently, the only known middle Pliocene hominin
was Australopithecus afarensis, and hominin diversity appeared to have blossomed
only later. With additional fossil data, it now appears that more than one
hominin, and perhaps several, coexisted in the mid-Pliocene, most notably
Kenyanthropus platyops from Lomekwi. Also, the recent announcement of 3.3 Ma
stone tools from Lomekwi suggests that at least some pre-Homo hominins had more
advanced material culture earlier than previously imagined. The appearance of
stone tools and hominin diversity raises fundamental questions about local and
regional environmental and/or biogeographic factors that may have influenced
hominins in West Turkana in the mid-Pliocene. Finding more fossils at Lomekwi
stands to reveal how many hominins were present at that time, whether K.
platyops is indeed a valid taxon, who the Lomekwian tool makers may have been,
and what paleoenvironmental factors may have influenced their diversity and
behavior. This project will support an international collaborative team,
undergraduate and graduate student training, local community science education
and outreach, and science curriculum development. Joint funding for this project
is provided by the National Science Foundation's Office of International Science
and Engineering (OISE).