* 1551344
* Experimental Calibration of the Olivine-melt Ni Thermometer Under Hydrous Conditions: Applications to Hygrometry, Oxybarometry and Olivine Phenocryst Growth Rates
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2018
* Rebecca Lange, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 12/31/2018
* USD 340,000.00

Water plays a unique role in the planetary evolution of Earth, particularly at
subduction zones. The recycling of oceanic water into the mantle at subduction
zones, the tectonic setting where continental crust forms, triggers partial
melting and the formation of hydrous basalts, which differentiate to form
continental crust, unique to Earth within our solar system. One of the many
challenges associated with the study of hydrous basalts is that current
thermometers cannot be accurately applied to them. The goal of this project is
to calibrate a Ni-based olivine-melt thermometer, which is independent of melt
water contents and can thus be applied to hydrous basalts to obtain accurate
temperatures of formation. It will also allow the concentration of water in
basaltic liquids to be determined at the onset of crystallization. This project
will engage two Ph.D. graduate students and at least three undergraduate
students, who will be trained in the operation of various experimental apparatus
and analytical techniques, as well as thermodynamic modeling; all of these tools
and skills have important applications in material science. The project will
support students from underrepresented groups in a research team that has
demonstrated a commitment to expanding the diversity of those in the
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific goals of this proposal are to
perform hydrous phase-equilibrium experiments in a cold-seal apparatus under
controlled fO2 and fH2O conditions on a variety of natural basalt and basaltic
andesite liquids over a range of temperature and pressure, which will enable
calibration of how these parameters, together with melt composition, affect the
partitioning of Ni between olivine and liquid. In addition, the depression of
the olivine liquidus as a function of melt water content (up to ยกร 8 wt%) will
be experimentally mapped out for several melt compositions. Once a well-
calibrated thermometer and hygrometer are in hand, it will be applied to &gt;100
basalts from the Mexican and Cascades volcanic arcs and compared to results from
olivine-hosted melt inclusions. Two additional experimental goals are to measure
crystal growth rates of olivine phenocrysts under hydrous melt conditions,
especially for natural samples that contain olivine with diffusion-limited
growth textures, and to test whether Fe-Mg KD values obtained in hydrous
olivine-melt experiments can be used to place constraints on the oxidation state
of natural basalts.