* 1551978
* Collaborative Research: Investigating the relationships among subduction character, volatile cycling, and eruptive activity along the Aleutian Arc
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2020
* Taryn Lopez, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Dennis Geist
* 05/31/2020
* USD 92,009.00

The Aleutian Volcanic Arc stretches about 4,000 km from mainland Alaska to
Kamchatka, Russia, separating the Bearing Sea to the north and the Pacific Ocean
to the south. The arc is home to about 145 volcanoes of which 52 have erupted in
historic time. The eruptive activity of these volcanoes ranges from continuous
small explosions to devastatingly large eruptions such as the one that occurred
at Katmai in 1912. Volcanic activity in the Aleutian Arc is a result of
subduction of the Pacific plate beneath the North American plate. During this
process, volatile elements such as water, carbon and nitrogen that are locked up
in the sediments and oceanic crust are slowly transferred into the region deep
under the Aleutian Arc volcanoes. Under high pressure the volatiles are squeezed
out of the subducting plate into the overlying (mantle) region, where they help
to melt rock and generate magma. The lower density of the magma and volatiles
compared to the surrounding rock allows these fluids to ascend to the Earth's
surface where the magma ultimately erupts through volcanism and the gases are
released to the atmosphere. While it is well-known that volatiles play a
significant role in both generating magma and influencing eruption explosivity,
it is currently not well understood how the source of volatiles (subducted
plate, mantle and crust) and the amount of volatiles released over time (e.g.
their flux), may influence volcanic eruption size, explosivity and frequency.
This project aims to constrain the process of volatile subduction and release
through volcanism in the poorly studied Western Aleutians, and to provide
insight into volcanic activity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Western and Central
portions of the Aleutian Volcanic Arc are the ideal locations to investigate the
influence of subduction angle, rate and sediment composition on magma generation
and volatile flux. The subduction rate and sediment flux increases along the arc
from Kiska, the western-most volcano, to Cleveland, located within the central
region of the arc. Additionally, the number of historic eruptions within Central
Aleutian volcanoes appears to be greater in number than compared to the Western
Aleutian volcanoes. Through a previous expedition volcanic gas samples, gas
emission measurements and explosively erupted lava samples were collected at
five Western Aleutian volcanoes. Through this project these samples will be
analyzed for their chemical and isotopic composition and measurements will be
used to compute the fluxes of carbon dioxide, sulfur dioxide, nitrogen and water
to the atmosphere. Constraints on the quantity and type of material subducted
into the Aleutian Arc from previous studies will be compared to the composition
of volatile and lava outputs, as well as the total flux of volatiles measured
here, to provide insight into volatile cycling and magma generation. This
information will be compared to historic data on eruption size, style and
frequency for each of the target volcanoes to identify possible links between
subduction character and volcanic activity, to ultimately help improve eruption
forecasting and hazard mitigation.