* 1551495
* Mid-Miocene Rhyolites of Eastern Oregon: Constraints for the Timing of Columbia River Basalt Volcanism and Associated Rhyolite Flare-up
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2016,12/31/2021
* Martin Streck, Portland State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 12/31/2021
* USD 210,078.00

The Pacific Northwest of the United States is an area that has been affected by
volcanic eruptions for millions of years. Volcanic activity is a direct
consequence of processes that take place in the Earth's deep interior and, thus,
studying volcanic rocks provides an important window into understanding
fundamental aspects of the dynamic behavior of the earth. A particularly
volcanic active period in the Pacific Northwest was from about 17 million to 14
million years ago. During this period, Oregon and Washington states were
inundated by the basaltic lava flows of the Columbia River Basalt (CRB, in
places hundreds of feet thick and covering in excess of 150,000 square miles.
The cause of CRB volcanism has been debated for decades and researchers favor
two alternative hypothesis. One is that melting is caused by a deep seated
"mantle plume" originating hundreds of miles deep near the core/mantle boundary.
The second interpretation is that melting takes place at shallower levels in the
Earth's mantle, triggered in part by the active tectonics of the region. One
important aspect in this discussion is how the thermal anomaly, as recorded by
this voluminous volcanism, is behaving in time and space, in other words where
did volcanism start and how did activity spread geographically with time. Just
in the last few years, it has become apparent that CRB volcanism did not only
produce basaltic lava flows but also rhyolite magmas. This research addresses
primarily the timing of the newly recognized component of CRB volcanism based on
radiometric age determinations. It is designed to provide a better understanding
of where CRB volcanism started and how it spread. Volcanic vents for rhyolite
magmas point more directly to a basalt magma at depth while fissure eruptions
that fed basalt lava flows can happen long distances away from where basalt
magmas from the Earth's mantle rose to the surface. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
primary focus of this field and laboratory study is to fully document CRB
related rhyolite volcanism of eastern Oregon in terms of distribution,
composition, and timing focusing on a series of understudied mid-Miocene
rhyolite centers. This will test the validity of current notions of a northward
migration of co-CRB rhyolite volcanism starting at the McDermitt volcanic field
and adjacent areas along the Oregon-Nevada border. This in turn will have
implications for the significance of observed age progression in floodbasalts of
the CRBG. McDermitt rhyolites have traditionally been viewed as the oldest
rhyolites related to the CRB province, predating those that erupted further
north in Oregon. Fieldwork, augmented by geochemical and petrographic data, will
establish stratigraphic sequences at selected centers. After a conceptual
framework of the evolution of a center has been established, a subset of samples
will be selected for age analyses by 40Ar/39Ar single-crystal laser-fusion and
incremental heating methods. Emphasis will be placed on dating stratigraphic
sections where rhyolites are intercalated with CRB lavas in order to precisely
constrain timing of CRB volcanism with attention to constraining the
controversial age of the Grande Ronde Basalt.