* 1551474
* Collaborative Research: Overcoming Obstacles to Scaling-Up with a Cyberlearning Professional Development Model
* EHR,DRL
* 06/26/2015,10/31/2016
* Barbara Zahm, IAT Interactive, LLC
* Continuing Grant
* David B. Campbell
* 10/31/2016
* USD 394,963.00

It's About Time publishers in collaboration with the University of Colorado at
Boulder develop and test a cyberlearning professional-development model that
builds on the successful Curriculum Customization Service model implemented in
Denver with EarthComm. The cyberlearning system is tested with the Project Based
Inquiry Science (PBIS) curriculum - a proven comprehensive middle school science
curriculum. In the first two years, six unit-specific materials, curriculum
implementation webinars, electronic teacher editions, and teacher planning guide
software are developed with teacher input and tested. In the third year, forty
middle school teachers nationwide use the cyberlearning system. The learning of
their students is compared to students of teachers who had other professional
development. The cyberlearning system is evaluated for scalability,
affordability, flexibility, and effectiveness for changing teacher practice and
student learning.

In the first two years ethnographic studies done by WestEd inform the project
about how teachers use the cyberlearning system and which parts are most
efficacious. At the same time WestEd collects data of student learning and
classroom practice from teachers who have had traditional professional
development offered by the publishers. At the same time, data are gathered about
student learning in classes whose teachers receive traditional professional
development. These teachers form a matched control group for the teachers
engaged in cyberlearning professional development in the third year. Their
student learning data are compared to the learning of students whose teachers
are engaged in the cyberlearning professional development. The research is
evaluated by three members of the Advisory Board who have credentials in
research methodology, content and broadening participation.

Effective implementation of reform-based STEM curricula depends upon curriculum-
based, consistent and well developed professional development. Scaling-up to a
broad-based national market is logistically constrained by traditional face-to-
face professional development. The project will lead to a tested, useful,
affordable, and effective system on-line system to support teacher
implementation of reform science curricula that will be used by It's About Time
publishers and will be available to others. The results disseminated in the
research and practitioner literature can transform the professional development
provided by publishers of reform science materials.