* 1551892
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Dynamics of language processing and the consequences for new language learning
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/2016,02/28/2017
* Judith Kroll, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* William Badecker
* 02/28/2017
* USD 18,228.00

As the economy, society, and culture of the United States continue to take part
in a larger global culture, it is becoming more important to learn languages
spoken in other countries, as well as to improve the methods for teaching
English as a second language to the families arriving to the United States.
Children appear to be better at learning new languages than adults, who instead
have very mixed outcomes in how well they ultimately learn a new language. For
decades, research has attempted to understand why adults experience more
difficulty in learning new languages and what characterizes good language
learners compared to less successful language learners, so that we can use this
information to improve teaching methods. From this research, we have learned how
certain factors contribute to the outcomes in new language learning, but much of
the variability remains unaccounted for, suggesting that there is still a piece
of the puzzle missing. With National Science Foundation support, Ms. Kinsey
Bice, working under the direction of Dr. Judith Kroll, will investigate how
individual differences in learning may shape patterns of new second language
learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The current project will examine how previous
language experience combines with general cognitive resources to affect the
trajectory of new language learning. Previous research has identified
differences in the way that the native language is processed that may contribute
to the trajectory of new language learning (i.e., fast and slow language
learners), and that may also be affected by how speakers recruit various aspects
of cognition (e.g., working memory, pattern abstraction) when processing their
native language. This project will examine how these differences in skilled
language processing predict the trajectory of new language learning, as well as
whether the differences are related to variation in non-language abilities.
Bilingual speakers, who already have experience with learning a new language and
who do not use either language exactly as monolingual speakers do, have
previously been found to be better at acquiring new languages, but bilinguals
differ from each other in many ways that affect their language learning
outcomes. This project will compare both monolingual and bilingual speakers in
how they process their skilled languages and how they learn new languages.
Behavioral methods and brain potentials will be used to determine whether the
brain reflects some learning processes that are not apparent in behavior alone.
The bilinguals tested will be typical college students who are taking advanced
foreign language classes, as well as heritage Spanish speakers who are raised in
Spanish-speaking homes but then educated in English. These two groups of
bilinguals represent language experiences that American citizens often encounter
themselves, while the monolingual groups will be recruited from parts of the
United States that differ in the levels of ambient exposure to foreign
languages.