* 1551330
* NSF/SBE-BSF: Biological mechanisms underlying the acquisition of reading skills
* SBE,BCS
* 02/15/2016,01/31/2020
* Jason Yeatman, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Peter Vishton
* 01/31/2020
* USD 630,000.00

Many aspects of human behavior such as walking, smiling, and learning a language
develop naturally as children experience the world and people around them.
However reading is not a naturally occurring development. Rather, learning to
read requires instruction, training, and practice. The goal of this funded
project is to investigate how children's brains change over the course of two
months of reading instruction. The present proposal capitalizes on cutting-edge
measurement techniques and software algorithms that the research team has
developed, to characterize the biological processes that underlie learning to
read.

Children between six and twelve years of age will be followed longitudinally
during an eight-week, intensive reading instruction program. Quantitative
Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) measurements that are sensitive to changes in
myelination, the creation of new tissue macromolecules, and the packing density
of axons within the white matter will be used to monitor changes in brain tissue
structure during learning. Functional MRI will be used to model how the
computations performed by the brain's reading circuitry change in response to
reading instruction. By integrating multiple measurement modalities, and
sampling children of different ages, this project will determine how the brain's
capacity for experience-dependent plasticity changes over the course of
elementary school and whether learning can be predicted based on a model of a
child's reading circuitry. Toward this end, the project tackles 3 major
challenges: (1) Determine what properties of human white matter change in
response to reading instruction; (2) Measure how the brain's capacity for
plasticity changes over development; and (3) Model the relationship between
changes in brain circuit structure and cortical computation. Understanding how
the developing brain builds circuits to rapidly translate printed symbols into
meaning is an important scientific challenge with implications for education and
the treatment of reading disabilities. A deeper understanding of the interplay
between biological and cognitive development will lead to innovative approaches
to education that are tailored to a child's unique pattern of brain maturation.