* 1551338
* EAGER: Similarity Measures Based on Refinement Operators and Metric Embedding Applied to the Analysis of Immune Repertoires
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2017
* Ali Shokoufandeh, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Jie Yang
* 08/31/2017
* USD 139,849.00

The notion of similarity plays a key role in modern machine learning and
artificial intelligence (AI) in general, since it serves as an organizing
principle by which algorithms classify objects, form concepts, and make
generalizations. While similarity assessment has been widely studied, the
important special case of assessing similarity in domains where the data of
interest is structured has not received sufficient attention. These structured
representations, however, play a key role in many domains, such as biomedicine,
where data of interest naturally lends itself to structured representations. The
research performed in this project aims at filling the gap in structural
similarity knowledge by creating a novel generalized framework for similarity
assessment. To achieve the creation of this framework the PIs will focus on the
specific biomedical application of immune cell populations and their dynamics
during development and in response to disease. By focusing on this specific
domain, the performed research will evaluate the new approach in a real-world
setting, while leading to significant contributions to the understanding of
immune dynamics.

The key concepts that will be developed in this research project are refinement
operators and metric embedding. The key insight of the proposed work is that
refinement operators can be used to define similarity measures, and to abstract
away from the underlying representation formalism. This will lead to a new
framework for similarity assessment that is applicable to a broad range of
representation formalisms. Moreover, we propose to use metric embedding
techniques to provide computationally efficient numerical approximations to the
resulting similarity measures. The definition of general and tractable
similarity measures, applicable to a range of structured representations, will
be a significant contribution to structured machine learning and AI. The
research team will use data collected from high throughput sequencing
experiments, and evaluate the generality and performance of the proposed
similarity measures by using them to analyze how repertoires of immune cell
populations can be described and compared by their clonotypes (sets of cells
with the same progenitor cell). The results from applying similarity measures to
this problem will help us start to construct a comprehensive view of the impact
of clonotype and whole repertoire information on our understanding of the
dynamics of immune responses in general.