* 1551761
* Function and Evolution of Jaw-Muscle Fiber Type in Primates
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2016,01/31/2017
* Christine Wall, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 01/31/2017
* USD 224,278.00

Studying muscle can help us to understand the diets of early humans and other
extinct primates. Jaw-muscle fiber types play an important role in fine-tuning
the jaw muscles for specific motor tasks such as chewing and powerful biting.
This research will study jaw-muscle fiber types across a range of primate
species and use those data to test three hypotheses about the evolution of jaw
muscle patterns in primates. Results of this work will provide new insights into
the relationship between muscle and diet by i) increasing knowledge about the
behavioral and ecological factors that shape feeding-system anatomy; ii)
advancing our understanding of how jaw-muscle fiber types and whole muscle
anatomy work together to generate the jaw movements and jaw forces necessary
during feeding and aggressive biting; and (iii) refining models of chewing
biomechanics in living and fossil primates. A central component of this work
includes the training and mentoring of undergraduate and graduate students and
postdoctoral scholars, including women and underrepresented minorities, in
state-of-the-art methods for muscle fiber typing. In addition, results will be
incorporated in community outreach programs aimed at exposing primary school
girls to science. Lastly, this project will generate a unique collection of
digital images and slides of muscle tissue that will be made available to the
scientific community for teaching and research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The jaw-
closing muscles are the motors of the masticatory system. Collectively, these
muscles are responsible for generating the jaw movements and forces associated
with feeding behaviors as well as non-feeding oral behaviors such as aggressive
biting and wide-mouth opening for canine threat display. While fiber
architecture is an important determinant of whole muscle function, its
functional and adaptive significance cannot be fully appreciated in the absence
of information on fiber type. This lack of data on primate fiber phenotype
limits 1) knowledge about variation in jaw-muscle fiber phenotype; 2) the
functional significance of this variation for behavior and performance; and 3)
the specificity with which we can model and test hypotheses of feeding-system
function and performance in both living and fossil species. To provide a more
complete framework for linking measures of primate masticatory anatomy and
physiology with function and performance, the investigators will collect and
analyze novel data on jaw-muscle fiber type composition and distribution in
select, closely related species of strepsirrhine and anthropoid primates that
diverge in a key feeding or biting behavior. The data collected will be used to:
(i) quantify the myosin heavy chain (MHC) fiber type composition and
distribution in primate jaw-closing muscles using state-of-the-art
immunohistochemistry; (ii) test three key functional and adaptive hypotheses
that have been advanced to explain the evolution of fiber phenotype in mammalian
jaw muscles: the frequent recruitment hypothesis, the aggressive bite
hypothesis, and the high occlusal force hypothesis; and (iii) assess the
correspondence among fiber phenotype, fiber architecture and leverage with the
goal of refining models of masticatory biomechanics. This project will provide
novel data on the contractile proteins found in primate jaw-closing muscles,
advance knowledge of the ecological and behavioral factors that drove changes in
the primate jaw-muscle fiber phenotype, and yield new insights into how key
components of feeding-system morphology such as fiber architecture, fiber
phenotype and leverage combine to facilitate or constrain feeding behavior in
primates, including species that have been advanced as models for interpreting
feeding behavior and diet in early human ancestors.