* 1551834
* CompCog: Large-scale, empirically based, publicly accessible database of argument structure to support experimental and computational research
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2023
* Joshua Hartshorne, Boston College
* Standard Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 07/31/2023
* USD 442,473.00

A basic function of language is to say who did what to whom. Linguists have
identified many of the ways English fits who, what, and whom into a sentence,
but it is still unclear why different rules apply to different sentences. But
the language system is far more complex than this example suggests. English has
about 150 different ways of fitting who, what, and whom into a sentence.
Consider the sentence "Agnes received the package from Bart" in which the
subject of the sentence (Agnes) gets the package. In contrast, in "Agnes gave
the package to Bart," Agnes is still the subject of the sentence but she doesn't
get the package. We might also say "Agnes tore at the package" or "Agnes looked
at the package" but "Agnes saw at the package" doesn't work. This variability is
a problem for teaching language and for building more robust voice-enabled
systems. In this project, the investigators organize a large team of citizen
scientists to try to identify some of the rules of who, what, and whom in
English by analyzing the grammar and meaning of over 6000 verbs. This project
will develop and evaluate methods for harnessing the power of collaborations
with citizen scientists, facilitating broader engagement of the public in
science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on characterizing the
semantics of the 6340 verbs listed in VerbNet, the most complete compendium of
verb argument structure. From VerbNet, the investigators will generate example
sentences for every verb in every compatible argument structure. These sentences
are posted onto a website (gameswithwords.org/VerbCorner) where volunteers can
code these sentences for 100 semantic features that have been previously
identified as likely being relevant to verb argument structure rules. The
website incorporates a number of strategies in order to make volunteer
participation more enjoyable and rewarding. As part of the project, the
investigators will assess existing and new analytic models for determining when
sufficient judgments have been collected for a given item. Given the increasing
importance of crowd-sourcing, developing and assessing these models should
provide dividends beyond the current project.