* 1551333
* IEEE SRDS 2015:  Request for Student Travel Awards for the 34th International IEEE Symposium on Reliable Distributed Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2016
* Nalini Venkatasubramanian, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Gurdip Singh
* 08/31/2016
* USD 15,000.00

This project provides NSF support for students to attend and participate in the
34th IEEE 2015 International Symposium on Reliable Distributed Systems (SRDS) to
be held in Montreal, Canada on September 28-October 1, 2015. SRDS 2015 is a
premier international technical event that brings together technical research
papers, tutorials and workshops centered on various aspects of reliable
distributed computing applications and platforms. Additionally, the conference
will include multiple keynotes, panels on cutting edge topics, a Ph.D. forum and
discussion sessions. The aims of the conference are manifold: 1) to provide a
international forum for investigation of major challenges in addressing next-
generation of mission critical distributed computing platforms; 2) to stimulate
interactive discussions on research in distributed computing and reliability
through panels, posters, tutorials, and discussion sessions (3) to motivate and
engage future generations of researchers via conference and workshop
presentations, interactive poster sessions, panel and breakout sessions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This effort will promote the next generation of students
and researchers to identify scientific foundations for building large scale
distributed computing environments that can work reliably and efficiently. This
travel support will permit a more qualified and diverse group of student
attendees. Students attending the conference benefit from both the technical
content of the conference and the professional interaction with senior
researchers from other universities and with industry. A Student Scholar
Roundtable will be organized where selected students will get a chance to
informally interact with senior researchers in the community and get feedback on
their research interests. SRDS 2015 will offer many opportunities for students
to meet, interact, and exchange ideas in an informal atmosphere including
members of the program committee, speakers and organizers.