* 1551205
* EDT: Math-to-Industry Boot Camp
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2020
* Fadil Santosa, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 05/31/2020
* USD 600,000.00

The Math-to-Industry Boot Camp is an intense six-week session designed to
provide training and experiences that will be valuable for enriching the
experiences of doctoral students focused on areas of pure mathematics. Domestic
students across the U.S. will be eligible to apply to participate in this
program which will enhance the typical pure mathematics doctoral program through
the provision of courses in areas such as data analysis and mathematical
modeling. Additionally, the students will work in teams on projects and will be
provided with soft skills training. They will be able to interact with industry
participants at various points in the program. Students successfully completing
the program will gain an appreciation of the usefulness of mathematics for
solving real-world problems and will be empowered to make an informed career
decision. The boot camp will take place at the Institute for Mathematics and its
Applications on the campus of the University of Minnesota. The outcome of this
project is the development of a powerful work force that meets the needs of
industry, and ultimately contributes to the economic well-being of the
U.S.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed boot camp has been designed to enhance
the training of Mathematics Doctorates by providing the students with skills and
experiences that are valuable for seeking positions in industry and business, or
for recognizing the relevance of mathematics in industrial or government
settings. The program will expose students to careers outside academia and
position them to make informed career choices. The camp starts with the basics
of programming, in languages and environments such as Java, Python and Matlab.
There will be a module on data analysis, followed by a module on mathematical
modeling. This is followed with two team projects. Both projects will be goal
oriented but open-ended, with the second being posed by industry practitioners.
Soft-skills training, such as project management, running meetings, making
"elevator pitches," effective presentations, and report writing for non-
scientific audiences will be provided. Students will be mentored throughout the
six-week period and will have ample opportunity to interact with industry
participants.