* 1551960
* Proposal for an Agenda-setting Workshop on Trade and Innovation ? The Economics, Law, and Political Economy of Asia Pacific Trade Agreements
* SBE,SMA
* 08/01/2015,12/31/2016
* Dieter Ernst, Center For Cultural&Tech Interchg East&West
* Standard Grant
* Maryann Feldman
* 12/31/2016
* USD 45,000.00

Economists have studied possible economic and structural effects of mega-
regional trade agreements. The reduction in trade costs, harmonization of rules
and standards, and structural adjustment are estimated to create large welfare
gains. However, it is extremely difficult to model the impact of these new types
of trade agreements on innovation and the distribution of innovation gains. Much
depends on how the new international rules are written and implemented for
intellectual property protection, the development and use of technical
standards, government procurement, competition policy, and other forms of
industrial and innovation policy. These new international benchmark standards
for trade could well be far more important for the competitiveness of the US
economy and its global partners than the mere reductions of border-trade costs,
which economists model with the most confidence.&lt;br/&gt;The conference will
be on emerging trends in Asia-Pacific Trade Agreements and their impact on
innovation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The emergence of international corporate
networks that integrate dispersed production, engineering, product development
and research across geographic borders is a defining characteristic of
globalization. These networks may be hampered, if the new trade rules are
incompatible with global standards. The proposed workshop will address these and
other issues related to the mega-regionalism trend. The focus will be on the new
international benchmark standards for trade defined by the emerging Trans-
Pacific Partnership agreement (TPP) and by other trade agreements, including
Free Trade Agreements (FTAs) and the related TRIPSPlus and Competition
provisions; plurilateral trade agreements such as the Information Technology
Agreement (ITA); and debates on a possible Trade in Services Agreement (TISA).
This agenda-setting workshop will examine