* 1551787
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The structure of complex verbal expression in Ndebele
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/2016,01/31/2018
* Karlos Arregui-Urbina, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 01/31/2018
* USD 15,288.00

Languages describe when actions or events happened (e.g., past or present
"tense") and different ways events can occur ("aspect"). Some ?analytic?
languages express this by adding words as in English by using two verbs, a main
verb like 'eat' or 'see' and an additional auxiliary verb where the tense (?I
did eat?) and aspect (?I have eaten?) information goes. Other, ?synthetic?
languages build these expressions with more complex verbs by stacking prefixes
or suffixes. However while languages can generally be described as analytic or
synthetic, these modes of expression sometimes interact in ways we do not yet
understand, but which will be illuminated by this dissertation project by
examining their use in a particular language.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
dissertation project investigates the nature of word formation, focusing on the
way verbs encode inflectional meanings in Ndebele, a language of Zimbabwe. This
research will be conducted at two locations in Zimbabwe and involve elicitation
of linguistic data from native speakers. It aims to contribute to the
understanding of mechanisms that regulate the relationship between synthesis and
periphrasis by investigating contrasting single verb and multi-verb
constructions in Northern Ndebele. Ndebele verbs exhibit a high level of
synthesis, e.g. the Ndebele counterpart of English "It will be given" with three
verbal elements is expressed by a single verb word "Kuzaphiwa." At the same
time, the language makes considerable use of periphrasis, in various types of
multi-verbal constructions involving a series of auxiliaries or light verbs.
Light verbs are auxiliary-like, expressing information found in verbal prefixes
or suffixes, or even as adverbs in other languages. As such, Ndebele offers an
interesting and important perspective on the study of word formation due to the
abundance of both synthetic and periphrastic forms within a single language. The
dissertation will investigate this locus of cross-linguistic variation in the
limits of word-internal complexity that languages allow.