* 1551866
* CompCog: The edge of the lexicon: Productive knowledge and direct experience in the acquisition and processing of multiword expressions
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2016,01/31/2021
* Roger Levy, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Tyler Kendall
* 01/31/2021
* USD 329,233.00

Language is the most discrete, measurable cultural record of the human mind, and
is uniquely expressive among the communicative systems found in nature. Every
day we comprehend hundreds of sentences that we hear or read but have never
encountered before, and we produce hundreds more. Yet our success at these many
acts of communication belies the difficulty of the task: language is rife with
ambiguity, our attention is limited, our environments may be noisy, and we often
have incomplete information about the shared knowledge and beliefs of the people
we engage with. This ability, unique to our species, poses profound challenges
for our scientific understanding of the capabilities of the human mind.
Deepening our understanding of these capabilities requires a combination of
ideas and methods from linguistics, psychology, and computer science. Advances
in this area help lay the groundwork for improvements in natural language
technologies such as document summarization, paraphrasing, question answering,
and machine translation, and in better identification, diagnosis, and treatment
of language disorders.

Within this broader research enterprise, this project focuses on the "edge of
the lexicon", elucidating the conditions under which a linguistic expression
begins to get stored in the mind of the native speaker who uses it, and the
consequences of the expression being stored as a holistic unit. Native speakers
know both productive rules that license and allow interpretation of phrases and
sentences that they have never before encountered and a rich inventory of
lexical items that can be combined through these productive rules. Many of these
lexical items are individual words, but there is evidence that specific,
frequent multi-word expressions, such as "meat and potatoes" or "large majority"
may also get stored in the lexicon. This project combines artificial
intelligence-based computational models, large linguistic datasets, and
controlled psychological experimentation to explore the edge of the lexicon,
probing how direct experience with specific multi-word expressions leads to
their being stored in one's mental lexicon, how such storage is reconciled with
productive knowledge in language comprehension and production, and how these
expressions emerge and change over time.