* 1551099
* SBP: Gender Ideology Perspectives in STEM Fields
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2020
* Bernadette Park, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 07/31/2020
* USD 302,851.00

Despite recent gains, women still remain underrepresented in STEM (Science,
Technology, Engineering, and Math) fields. This is of national concern because
of the U.S. STEM workforce is vital to maintaining our status as a global leader
and competitor. This research examines the role of gender and ethnic intergroup
ideologies in creating an unwelcoming social climate in male-dominated STEM
domains. These ideologies are prescriptive sociopolitical beliefs, such as the
belief that men and women are naturally suited to do different jobs and they
should stick to those areas alone. These beliefs influence attitudes and
behaviors, and can result in a negative environment for learning and working.
These negative environments can reduce women's interest and persistence in STEM
domains. This research crosses dimensions of intergroup perceptions, and
examines novel hypotheses in several experiments and a longitudinal study. The
proposed studies examine both the effect of experimentally manipulating the
ideologies, as well as the effect of naturally occurring variation in ideology
endorsement on the experiences of women and ethnic minorities in STEM fields.
The goal is to understand factors that affect persistence in STEM fields, and
ways to enhance persistence. Ultimately, this research could increase the
participation of underrepresented groups in STEM, and U.S. competitiveness in
STEM fields.

Across four studies, gender ideology is manipulated experimentally to test
whether (1) assimilation (women adapting their behaviors to a male-dominated
environment) and segregation (men and women should stick to their areas of
expertise) perspectives increase agreement with gendered math and science
stereotypes, (2) these perspectives are particularly prevalent where they have
the potential to do the most harm - among men in male-dominated STEM fields, and
(3) the presence of such perspectives cause women to feel excluded and
unwelcome. Two additional studies explore points of overlap and divergence in
reactions to gender versus ethnic diversity messages. While women are predicted
to respond most favorably to a gender blind perspective, past research shows
that ethnic group members respond more positively to a multicultural
perspective. Finally, a large-scale longitudinal study examines how naturally
occurring variation in gender ideology endorsement relates in a prospective
fashion to selecting an academic major. These studies will provide the basis for
developing interventions aimed at gender and ethnic ideology beliefs in STEM
environments, to promote a culture of inclusion and belonging. They will speak
to how beliefs about group differences versus similarities contribute to
students' decisions to pursue or avoid STEM majors and careers, and address
points of overlap versus divergence in reactions by women versus ethnic
students. These findings ultimately could increase participation and
innovativeness in STEM fields.