* 1551782
* RAPID: Human Relations in Los Angeles
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2016
* Brian Calfano, Missouri State University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 08/31/2016
* USD 24,939.00

August 11, 2015 is the 50th Anniversary commemoration of the Watts Riots. The
commemoration will include a series of media, educational and community-based
programs that highlight issues relating to social justice, community policing,
and group relations. With the heightened sense of group identity through the
community focus on the Watts commemoration as well as other incidents, one can
survey the population of Los Angeles to examine attitudes to race, ethnicity,
and in-group vs. out-group. The questions along with survey experiments will
provide us with a better understanding of the lasting impact of the riots as
well as impact of other incidents that have occurred throughout the past year.
The finidngs can be used to develop policy and programming recommendations for
the L.A. Human Relations Commission, community partners, city council, and the
major's office. They findings could also be relevant for other communities with
heightened intergroup tensions. This includes areas where community and law
enforcement controversies have raged, such as Baltimore, Ferguson, and
Charleston.

This projects holds promise for political scientists and social psychologists
interested in questions related to particularistic and superordinate identities.
First, the Los Angeles focus regarding the Watts anniversiary allows for
understanding of whether and how random exposure to particularistic and/or
superordinate identity cues against a "real world" backdrop of increased public
consideration of intergroup boundaries produces results different from what
scholars have disccovered in using identity primes in the lab or survey-based
studies outside of areas such as this one. Second, the survey instrument enables
this project to examine the effects of identity priming on a wider array of
outcome meaures than imployed in political science to date. Instead of focusing
just on future political behavior such as voting, demonstrating, etc. the focus
is broaden to focus on neighborhood, social network, policing, mental health-
related issues, etc. This broader focus enables broader insights into identity-
based effects.