* 1551187
* Timing, Rates and History of Post-YTT (&amp;lt;74ka) Resurgent Uplift of Samosir Island, Toba, Sumatra
* GEO,EAR
* 02/15/2016,12/31/2021
* Shanaka de Silva, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 12/31/2021
* USD 359,938.00

Large calderas like Toba, Sumatra are the sites of the most devastating natural
events on Earth, supereruptions. With their potential to cause regional
devastation and global disaster, understanding the processes and timescales of
these supervolcanoes is crucial to being able to address potential hazards.
While the climactic eruptions are the main event, these are just instances that
punctuate long periods of relative calm. It is during these "resurgent" periods
that supervolcanoes recover and readjust before the next eruption cycle.
Critical information about the pre- and post-climactic activity of a
supervolcano is encoded during this period, yet despite decades of research,
resurgence remains poorly understood. This is of concern because most hazardous
calderas today are in a resurgent stage. The goal of this project is to
understand the timescale, rates, duration, and mechanisms that occur at large
resurgent calderas through a case study of the Toba caldera, Sumatra, the
Earth's most recent supervolcano.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Since the climactic
eruption of 2500 km^3 of magma 74 ka as the Young Toba Tuff (YTT), there is
evidence of several small eruptions within the Toba caldera as well over 1 km of
vertical uplift of the caldera floor to form the island of Samosir. The
hypothesis that remnant magma left after the climactic eruption was the source
of this resurgence will be addressed through a program of stratigraphic
correlation and age dating to reveal the spatiotemporal pattern of eruptions and
the rate and motivating force for the uplift. Post YTT lavas are to be dated
using coupled U-series and (U/Th)/He age determinations in zircon to resolve
eruption ages and the rate and duration of uplift of Samosir are to be
investigated using a combination of C-14 age dating and time control through
stratigraphic correlation using paleomagnetic properties of uplifted lake
sediments on Samosir. Toba's relative youth is a unique advantage among large
calderas and it is anticipated that this project will reveal unprecedented
details of the post-climatic history and longevity of a large caldera and its
magmatic system that can be used to inform more sophisticated numerical models
of caldera mechanics than currently available. Furthermore, the serendipitous
opportunity to address previously recalcitrant aspects of the region's
geomagnetic field will attract further attention to Toba and this work. Graduate
students will receive interdisciplinary training in modern caldera science and
associated geochronology within an international collaborative framework with
colleagues in USA, Germany, Australia, and Indonesia. The science conducted will
give further impetus to efforts to develop a UNESCO Geopark at Toba.