* 1551236
* EDT: Front Range Applied Mathematics Exchanges and Workshops
* MPS,DMS
* 03/01/2016,12/31/2019
* Myron Allen, University of Wyoming
* Continuing Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 12/31/2019
* USD 299,475.00

The goal of this collaborative project, entitled FRAMEWORK (Front Range Applied
Mathematics Exchanges & Workshops), is to transform doctoral training in the
mathematical sciences by incorporating writing, presentation, and research
activities that provide Ph.D. students with marketable skills and technical
tools to further their non-academic career opportunities. By sharing
complementary resources at both the University of Wyoming (UW) and the Colorado
School of Mines (CSM), the program will sustainably expand capacity, support
enriched, non-academic and academic experiences for students, and allow trainees
to participate in broadening activities early in their graduate careers, saving
later years for intensive work on dissertation projects so that time to degree
will not be affected. Prior to the start of formal thesis research, students
will develop mathematical and statistical approaches to tackle problems arising
in other areas of science and engineering. Each doctoral student supported by
FRAMEWORK will spend one or two summer periods working on interdisciplinary
research problems in collaboration with an external partner from industry, a
national laboratory, or a research institution. Due to these summer research
experiences, the students will be well positioned to continue work at the
external partners' organizations, thereby gaining experience that could
ultimately lead to employment opportunities after graduation. Ultimately, the
program will broaden the range of career paths for Ph.D. graduates in the
mathematical sciences, and increase the both the quality and quantity of
students who complete internships, enter the industrial workforce, and accept
postdoctoral positions at national labs. Finally, the FRAMEWORK program will
also serve a recruiting tool to increase the number of qualified U.S. students
who apply to Ph.D. programs, especially women and under-represented minorities.

The FRAMEWORK program contains four central elements: (1) Summer internship
opportunities at nonacademic organizations, which will introduce PhD students to
applications outside their coursework such as technical communication, project
management, proposal writing, and budget development; (2) Annual end-of-summer
workshops, during which incoming PhD students will be trained in writing skills
and the previous cohort's internship experiences will be showcased; (3) A course
exchange program that will enable the shared delivery of foundational graduate
courses so that other faculty members will be free to offer new advanced and
special-topics courses; and (4) The targeted recruitment of community-college
and baccalaureate students at non-doctoral institutions, which will enhance the
diversity of the Ph.D. pipeline. A variety of external partners, including the
National Center for Atmospheric Research, the National Renewable Energy
Laboratory, the Western Research Institute, and the Wyoming Technology Business
Center, have agreed to collaborate on this project. In consultation with these
partners, the FRAMEWORK program has developed broad research problems that
complement the strengths of faculty mentors at UW and CSM. Proposed projects
include uncertainty quantification for subsurface flow and renewable energy
problems, the modeling and simulation of infectious disease dynamics, and
computational methods for detecting material flaws in the wheels of railroad
cars, among others. The writing workshops, special-topics courses, and summer
internship programs will introduce students to professional skills and
nonacademic opportunities that are atypical for traditional doctoral programs.
In general, this collaborative venture will serve as a portable model for other,
similarly paired institutions to cooperate in enhancing doctoral education
throughout the nation.