* 1551864
* Collaborative Research: Quantifying Plume-Lithosphere Interactions with GNSS Geodesy, Seismology, and Geodynamic Modeling
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2021
* Dorothy Stamps, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 06/30/2021
* USD 399,047.00

Part 1: Continental rifting is a physical process that shapes the Earth's
surface and causes a range of geohazards for local populations. The East African
Rift System (EARS) is the Earth's archetype continental rift system in its early
stages of development and one of the focus sites of the NSF GeoPRISMS program.
Understanding the physics of deeper mantle interactions with continental rifting
at the shallow parts of the Earth remains an outstanding challenge in the
geosciences. In this project the physics of mantle-lithosphere interactions will
be addressed, with a focus on testing long-standing mantle plume hypotheses
using computational modeling and new seismic and Global Navigational Satellite
System / Global Positioning System (GNSS/GPS) precision positioning data to
constrain movements in the mantle and at the surface. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part
2: It has long been recognized that the mantle beneath the East African Rift
System (EARS) is thermally perturbed. A host of geophysical and geochemical data
are used to argue for a plume origin of the thermal perturbations. Whether the
EARS is underlain by a single, superplume or multiple plumes is hotly debated.
Fundamental to understanding the physical processes influencing the East African
GeoPRISMS focus site (Eastern Branch), and more broadly of large-scale mantle
dynamics, is testing the superplume model. New seismic and GNSS data are needed
from the GeoPRISMS focus-site along with thermomechanical modeling of
lithosphere-plume interactions to fully evaluate the superplume and multiple
plume models and advance our understanding of continental rifting processes. The
proposed work will allow two GeoPRISMS questions to be addressed: (1) How does
the presence or absence of an upper-mantle plume influence extension? (2) How is
strain accommodated and partitioned throughout the lithosphere, and what are the
controls on strain localization and migration? Seismic data from 9 new stations
in northeastern Uganda will be installed to collect data for generating mantle
flow indicators (seismic shear wave splitting, SKS) and improved sub-surface
images (seismic tomography) of the Eastern Branch. If a consistent northerly
fast polarization direction in the SKS measurements is discovered for most or
all of the seismic stations the superplume model would be corroborated. If a
more complex pattern of fast polarization directions is observed, then
alternative interpretations will be examined, including the multiple plume
hypothesis. The tomography models will constrain initial conditions of the
proposed geodynamic modeling. A transect of new GNSS stations across the Eastern
Branch spanning Kenya (7) and Uganda (3 co-located) will also be installed. If
the GNSS data have along-rift motions that align with SKS observations, then the
superplume model with strong plume-lithosphere interactions is favored. If SKS
observations are consistent with the superplume model, but GNSS are not, then
surface-mantle decoupling is indicated. These and alternative outcomes of the
GNSS-SKS comparisons will be explored with 3D computational modeling of the
lithosphere-mantle system that is constrained by the new seismic tomography. To
characterize lithospheric coupling mechanics to upper mantle flow a suite of
material models will be developed to determine coupling properties at the
lithosphere-asthenosphere boundary (LAB). Modeled flow will be scored with new
GNSS and SKS-splitting observations at the surface and LAB, respectively. In
addition to the above scientific objectives this project will (1) enhance
diversity by providing graduate research opportunities in seismology for
underrepresented minority students supported through AfricaArray; (2) provide
training to African scientists through GNSS short courses and the AfricaArray
education program, (3) geodynamic modeling extensions will become publically
available as part of the ASPECT software package, (4) the GNSS stations will
become part of the permanent AfricaArray network and provide open data to the
community long after the project is over, and (5) seismic data will become
publically available. This project has been supported in part by the Office of
International Science and Engineering at NSF.