* 1551835
* Collaborative Research: Constraining the temporal evolution of mantle plume contributions to magmatism in the Turkana Depression
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2021
* Wendy Nelson, Towson University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 07/31/2021
* USD 39,089.00

The process by which the Earth's continental masses split apart to form new
oceans is a central tenet of the plate tectonic paradigm. This project focuses
on one of the most important features of continental rifted margins - that is
the origin of magmas that are erupted within them. While the construction of
oceanic crust late in the rifting cycle requires voluminous magmatic activity,
there is a growing understanding that magmas also play a pivotal role earlier in
the rifting process. Infiltration of magma into the tectonic plate during rift
initiation contributes to the rifting process by weakening and focusing strain.
However, the process of melt generation during rifting is poorly constrained.
East Africa, the geographic focus area of this research project, is the classic
example of a continental rift, and insights gained here have global application.
Using geochemical techniques on erupted lavas, this project seeks to determine
how magma is produced during continental rifting to improve our understanding of
the range of contributions from various mechanisms to generate melt. The results
will have important implications for understanding magma generation during the
initiation and evolution of rifting, and for our understanding of the
contribution of lithospheric, upper mantle, and deep mantle sources.
Constraining the mechanisms which control the structure and characteristics of
rifted margins has broad societal and economic benefits given much of the
world's population and hydrocarbon resources and located along rifted
continental margins.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal outlines a plan to
obtain new geochemical and geochronological data in order to better understand
the sources of rift lavas. The temporal variation in the role of a mantle plume
and easily melted portions of the lithosphere in melt generation processes will
be evaluated. The study region, in the eastern branch of the East African Rift,
is a focus site of the GeoPRISMS program. The hypothesis to be tested is that
volcanism in the study region has been plume influenced since the Eocene. This
hypothesis will be addressed by examining the following questions: (1) What are
the geochemical characteristics of the different sources of rift lavas; and (2)
how have contributions from these source(s) changed over time? These questions
will be addressed through a geochronological, geochemical, and paleomagnetic
study of lavas with a goal to construct a detailed geochemical characterization
of the sources of within-rift lavas and determine their spatial distribution and
temporal variation. The study of continental rift lavas throughout the long-
lived extensional process along the East African Rift has the potential to
improve understanding of the range of contributions from various melt generation
mechanisms. While many studies focus on isolated periods of melt production, the
work proposed here would examine the temporal development of melt reservoirs and
how contributions from these reservoirs evolve over time as rifting matures.
Establishing how "fundamental rifting processes, and feedbacks between them,
evolve in time and space" is one of the four key Rift Initiation and Evolution
questions identified in the GeoPRISMS draft science plan, thus the result of
this project will interface with other GeoPRISMS efforts across disciplines to
examine rift development. This project has been supported in part by the Office
of International Science and Engineering at NSF.