* 1551064
* INSPIRE: Co-Design of Adiabatic Quantum Annealers
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2015,12/31/2017
* Robert Lucas, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 12/31/2017
* USD 650,000.00

This INSPIRE award is partially funded by the Algorithmic Foundations Quantum
Computing in the CCF Division in the CISE Directorate; the Electronics,
Photonics and Magnetic Devices program in the ECCS Division in the ENG
Directorate; and Office of Integrative Activities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Quantum
computing has been an object of investigation for three decades. While general-
purpose quantum computers are not yet viable, open-system adiabatic quantum
annealing (QA) devices are already available. In the near future, such devices
could possibly address a range of nondeterministic polynomial time (NP) problems
that can be very challenging for today's classical computers. Unfortunately, the
designers of QA systems didn't have specific target applications in mind when
designing their machines, and therefore lack clear guidelines to weigh the
engineering trade-offs between such things as richer qubit connectivity versus
qubit quality. The main goal of this project is to develop a set of guidelines
to exploit application-specific features to improve the design of open-system,
adiabatic quantum annealers, possible extendable to other quantum devices.
Quantum annealers are special-purpose quantum computing devices that are now
available as experimental prototypes. Building these complex and fragile systems
in a scalable way requires making many engineering compromises. Currently
available quantum annealers target a very broad range of problems, leading to
very stringent design constraints that greatly reduce the efficient use of their
resources. This project takes a specialized view, where engineering design
trade-offs are guided by the features of specific applications and should lead
to more efficient adiabatic quantum annealers and other quantum
devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the most restrictive constraints in the
current implementation of quantum annealers is the limited connectivity of the
underlying information processing elements (known as quantum bits or qubits).
This limited connectivity is due both to the physical constraints imposed by the
2-dimensional layout of the device and the requirement for a scalable design.
The resulting architecture was selected and implemented in order to represent
the most general type of problem which the system is designed to solve, but this
can be done only by paying a significant cost in terms of the size of the
problems that can be solved. A problem in variables generally requires physical
qubits to be mapped into the architecture of the quantum annealer. This project
looks at two specific applications - graph partitioning and natural language
processing - both of which involve solving combinatorial optimization problems.
The idea is to use the specific features and structures of these problems to
design quantum annealing architectures that make more efficient use of the
available physical qubits. The results of this research will be widely
disseminated through publications and by reaching out to other researchers
actively working on building these devices. The new guidelines derived from this
effort are expected to greatly improve and accelerate the development of useful
quantum devices beyond quantum annealers.