* 1551411
* Collaborative Research: Mining Seismic Wavefields
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2019
* John Vidale, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Margaret Benoit
* 04/30/2019
* USD 526,248.00

A working group of the Southern California Earthquake Center (SCEC) will develop
and deploy cyberinfrastructure for mining seismic wavefields through data
intensive computing techniques in order to extend similarity search for
earthquake detection to massive data sets. Similarity search has been used to
understand the mechanics of tectonic tremor, transform our understanding of the
depth dependence of faulting, illuminate diffusion within aftershock seismicity,
and reveal new insights into induced earthquakes. These results were achieved
with modest data volumes ? from ~ 10 seismic stations spanning ~ 10 km ? yet
they increased the number of detected earthquakes by a factor of 10 to 100. This
geoinformatics project will develop the cyberinfrastructure required to enable
high-sensitivity studies of earthquake processes through the discovery of
previously undetected seismic events within massive data
volumes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This goal of this project is to develop a
cyberinfrastructure to mine seismic waveform data. The effort will develop
methods and hardware to use coherent signal processing on very large waveform
databases to detect, locate and characterize events that cannot be detected by
standard network operations (detection of single arrivals, association, location
by optimization). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The methodology involves the use of a
network-based approach for earthquake detection, especially weak and unusual
events that in the current method of treating signals individually go
unreported. The PIs will work on the large T and the large N problem, where
large T is using waveform similarity of multiple events over time to detect
earthquakes over long periods of time; and the large N is using waveform
similarity of single events over space as recorded on a dense seismic array with
up to thousands of stations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results will greatly
increase knowledge of the number of seismic sources of various kinds and
potentially identify patterns in earthquake occurrence that could inform hazard
and near-term rupture forecasting. Seismicity induced by human activities is an
emerging problem that adversely affects energy options for the 21st century,
including shale gas development, enhanced geothermal energy, and carbon
sequestration. A more complete view of seismicity related to these activities is
essential to managing the risks they pose.