* 1551063
* Eager: Large Scale Neuron Reconstruction through Development of Crowdsourced Reconstruction Experts
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2017
* Zoran Popovic, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Finbarr Sloane
* 08/31/2017
* USD 300,000.00

This award is supported by the EHR Core Research (ECR) program. The ECR program
of fundamental research in STEM education provides funding in critical research
areas that are essential, broad and enduring. EHR seeks proposals that will help
synthesize, build and/or expand research foundations in the following focal
areas: STEM learning, STEM learning environments, STEM workforce development,
and broadening participation in STEM. The ECR program is distinguished by its
emphasis on the accumulation of robust evidence to inform efforts to (a)
understand, (b) build theory to explain, and (c) suggest interventions (and
innovations) to address persistent challenges in STEM interest,
education,learning, and participation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Neuroscience is
arguably one of the most important sciences in terms of potential breakthroughs
in the next decade. Through a neuroscience game, the PI expects that people will
learn many aspects of science that are directly and indirectly related to the
game. There is strong evidence of this collateral learning process in the Foldit
community where many people learned more about proteins and shared this
knowledge with hundreds of their team members. Foldit is an online puzzle game
about protein folding.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will build a virtual gaming
environment around neuron reconstruction that carefully scaffolds instruction
along with social support and a reward system for novice players. This would
allow motivated players to contribute to neuroscience directly by performing
neuron reconstructions, independently verifying others' results, iteratively
testing interfaces, visualizations and reconstruction tools, as well as
collectively developing a corpus of knowledge around the activity of neuronal
reconstruction that can be studied and absorbed back into automated methods.
These results will be fed into a new database created in a subsequent larger
project - to classify neurons.