* 1551041
* NSF EAGER:  Visualizing science, technology and innovation activity sequences using EventFlow to develop new metrics of innovation
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2016
* Ben Shneiderman, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Maryann Feldman
* 08/31/2016
* USD 59,297.00

Understanding the relationship between science funding, employment, and other
outcome metrics is a key national goal. This research seeks to model, visualize
and understand Science, Technology and Innovation (STI) processes and networks
in order accelerate innovation and develop better outcome and impact metrics.
STI processes are comprised of project activities involving basic and applied
research, publication, invention, and proto-typing leading to the
commercialization of new products. This project develops new direct measures of
the research to commercialization STI process and fills a significant knowledge
gap with respect to the sequences and duration of STI activities and processes.
The research has the potential to facilitate policy aimed at accelerating
innovation.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This research models and measure temporal
sequences of STI activities (including research, invention, proof-of-concept,
and commercialization) culminating in the launch of new products, using STAR
METRICS Federal Reporter data and exploring links to patents, SBIR awards and
other data sources. The EventFlow tool will be adopted to offer novel
visualizations of how federally sponsored basic and applied research connects
with other types of activities leading ultimately to commercialization of new
products.