* 1551247
* RUI: Thermal Consequences and Textural Signatures of Reinjection in Mafic Sills
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2021
* Michael Zieg, Slippery Rock University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Dennis Geist
* 03/31/2021
* USD 163,424.00

Just as volcanoes have alternating periods of eruption and repose, igneous
intrusions can also have alternating periods of injection and crystallization.
This study will provide a better understanding of the emplacement process and
its effects in intrusive systems, specifically in mafic sills. The study will
identify the diagnostic physical and chemical signatures of magma reinjection
into a partially crystalline system and the specific textural characteristics of
a reinjection horizon that can be used to determine its timing and thermal
conditions. Diagnostic criteria for recognizing reinjections in mafic systems
will allow this process to be positively identified in other intrusions and will
place important constraints on models for magma chamber formation and evolution.
In addition, the data to be developed (texture, composition, and mineralogy
profiles) will be widely distributed as a resource for developing and testing
petrologic hypotheses, and for recognizing additional processes beyond those
specifically addressed in this study.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary goal of
this study is to define the detailed signature of reinjection events using a
continuous drill core profile through a diabase sill (the Black Sturgeon sill)
from Nipigon, Ontario. Petrographic data will include modal mineralogy, textures
(crystal size distributions), and fabric (alignment factor). Geochemical data
will include bulk-rock major and trace-element chemistry and mineral
compositions. Preliminary results have been used to tentatively identify the
positions and effects of several reinjection events in the Black Sturgeon sill.
This project will document the fine-scale variations around these sites and
locate and characterize other potential reinjection zones. These textural and
compositional variations will provide a set of discrete criteria that can be
used to demonstrate and document the existence of reinjection horizons in
magmatic systems. Numerical cooling models will then be integrated with textural
observations and with MELTS modeling to provide quantitative constraints on the
emplacement history of the Black Sturgeon sill, including the timing and spatial
distribution of the individual replenishment events.