* 1551952
* Giving to Others and Neural Development During Adolescence
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Andrew Fuligni, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Peter Vishton
* 08/31/2019
* USD 337,780.00

Adolescents' risky decision making and antisocial behaviors have received a
great deal of public and scientific attention. Less is known about prosocial
behaviors among adolescents, such as sharing and supportiveness. How do changes
in the adolescent brain relate to the development of these more positive
behaviors? And how does adolescents' tendency to engage in positive behaviors
vary depending upon the social context? This project brings together a team of
developmental and social psychologists and neuroscientists to study how one
particular aspect of prosocial behavior, giving to others, changes across
adolescence, and how brain changes relate to the age-related changes in
prosocial behavior. One specific goal is to explore whether giving behaviors
become more sensitive to the situation (such as the recipient and the cost of
giving) across development. Another goal is to understand the involvement of
different brain systems (such as those responsible for processing rewards and
inhibiting impulsive behaviors) in giving behaviors. A final goal is to
understand how other social skills such as perspective-taking and empathy relate
to giving and brain developments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A total of 120
participants at 9, 14, and 19 years of age will participate in an experimental
giving task while having their brains scanned in an MRI machine. They also will
complete questionnaires and daily checklists that assess social experience,
perspective-taking, empathy, and values. Giving to friends and strangers is
expected to increase and decrease, respectively, and giving to family will
remain stable across the years of adolescence. This differential giving should
correlate with greater activation and connectivity among neural networks
associated with reward, mentalizing, and cognitive control when giving to
friends as compared to family and strangers, and when giving to family as
compared to strangers. Differential giving and neural activation according to
recipient is expected to be linked with greater valuing and orientation toward
peers and family, and individual differences among participants in overall
giving and activation will be correlated with social experience, perspective-
taking, and empathy. Findings will enrich the field's understanding of the
developing adolescent brain for behavior by highlighting the role of neural
development in positive, prosocial behavior and the potential impact of social
experience in these dynamics.