* 1551152
* Early-Concept Exploratory Research on the Professional Formation of Engineers' Conceptions of the Public
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2017
* Nathan Canney, Seattle University
* Standard Grant
* Elliot Douglas
* 08/31/2017
* USD 106,658.00

The relationship between engineers and their ultimate client, the often-
invisible public, lies at the heart of the engineering profession's identity and
mission. Today, the over 2 million practicing engineers in the US routinely make
complex and critical decisions with significant implications for the public's
health, safety, and welfare in a relational vacuum, where publics are imagined
rather than engaged with. Postulating that different conceptions of the public
reinforce different professional ideologies, identities, and forms of practice,
this research seeks to examine how engineers see their relationship to the
public, what formal and informal mechanisms form those views, and how existing
conceptions are expressed in interactions with diverse publics. This work
constitutes a first step toward deeper insight into how the belief structures
created by engineers' conceptions of the public enhance or weaken engineering
practice and, ultimately, how they support or undermine the profession's
aspiration to promote the social good. Results will provide a basis from which
engineering education and the engineering profession at large could shift to
include a reimagined view of the public that renders publics visible,
underscores the technical and moral relevance of their voices, and gives them a
well-defined role in the engineering enterprise. By extension, this research
will make possible a revised understanding of engineers' role in society.

This research is driven by the hypothesis that engineering education promotes
conceptions that distance engineers from the publics they serve and compromise
their ability to promote the social good in locally desirable and socially just
ways. The proposed study initiates research in engineers' conceptions of the
public - what these conceptions are, how they form, and how they are expressed
in interactions with diverse publics during boundary work - through a single
case study methodology. The research design includes the following data sources:
1) official engineering documents that frame the profession's discourse around
engineers' relationship with society, 2) interviews with engineering students,
faculty, and practicing professionals, and 3) interviews with members of
mobilized publics who have extensive experience - positive and/or negative -
interacting with engineers. The analysis will involve two qualitative research
techniques to identify prevalent engineering conceptions, and will culminate in
data triangulation to determine points of convergence and divergence between how
engineers view the public and how members of diverse publics view themselves.
This work is exploratory, aiming to build a deeper understanding about
engineers' conceptions of the public. The goal is to set a foundation from which
educational interventions that foster mutually edifying collaborations between
engineers and society can be explored, developed, and implemented.