* 1551434
* Collaborative Research: A New Approach to Detrital Provenance Determination: Application of Laser-Induced Breakdown Spectroscopy (LIBS) to the Tourmaline Supergroup Minerals
* GEO,EAR
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2022
* Darrell Henry, Louisiana State University
* Continuing Grant
* David Lambert
* 05/31/2022
* USD 236,490.00

Understanding Earth's geological history provides insight into processes that
shape our planet and the distribution of economic resources. However, ancient
geological events can be difficult to decipher because their physical presence
may be lost to erosion. Fortunately, information on the types and ages of rocks
(i.e., their provenance) that were present prior to weathering and erosion are
encoded in some minerals that are preserved in sediments and sedimentary rocks.
Tourmaline is one such mineral. It is a key repository of geologic information
because it incorporates a wide range of chemical elements that reflect the rock
environment in which it forms - that is, it encodes the chemical signature of
that rock, similar to a fingerprint. Tourmaline is also a chemically and
mechanically resistant mineral that, when weathered out of the rock in which it
formed, can become a sand grain that is incorporated into sediments (and rocks).
Once it incorporates its original chemical signature, the tourmaline grain
stores that signature for millions or billions of
years.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work uses a synergistic approach to decipher
former geological events, their record in sediments and rocks, by integrating
chemical analyses of the mineral tourmaline using the new technology Laser-
Induced Breakdown Spectroscopy (LIBS) with the established technology Electron
Microprobe analyses (EMP). Both yield in-situ chemical fingerprints: LIBS is
advantageous because it collects signals of all elements and their complexes,
including the light elements, and provides relative compositions of elements,
while EMP is a mature analytical technique and is used for highly precise and
accurate micrometer-scale chemical data for most elements (except light elements
H, Li). One goal of this work is to use these complementary techniques to
develop robust approaches to provenance determination based on an extensive
collection of tourmaline samples of known provenance. The provenance techniques
will be applied, in a case study, to the geologic development of the East
Antarctic Mountains (650-480 million years ago). The goal of this case study is
to test the efficacy of tourmaline analysis by LIBS and EMP in deciphering
complex geologic history of East Antarctic. This study has two major
implications. First, it will develop new avenues of provenance studies to refine
our understanding of Earth history using the widespread mineral tourmaline. An
additional societal benefit is the potential to differentiate tourmalines from
different gem deposits that command radically different prices. Samples, data
and techniques from this study will be used in both undergraduate and graduate
classes at two minority-serving Universities to educate the next generation of
geoscientists. A student exchange between the two universities will broaden
their educational and analytical experience, necessary for today?s global
workforce. This research team includes two female co-PIs and all PIs serve as
mentors to a significant number of women in STEM disciplines. Collaboration with
industry brings together academics and industrial partners including a woman-
owned for-profit small business, in addition to collaborations with faculty at
another undergraduate-focused university.