* 1551458
* EAGER: A Knowledge Aggregator for the Social Sciences
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Barry Markovsky, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 08/31/2018
* USD 290,439.00

This project will develop an integrated set of web-based tools for advancing
theories about human individual and social behavior, called Wikitheoria. The
primary goal is to facilitate the evolution of better and more useful theories
by capitalizing on conditions for successful knowledge aggregation. The benefits
cut at least two ways. Tools developed in various areas of information
technology will be serving the social sciences by systematizing the theory-
building process. The theory modules thus produced will, in turn, enhance
research in cyber-human systems and other fields where assumptions that are made
about human and group behavior are not always well-grounded in prior theory and
research. In general, users that participate even minimally in Wikitheoria are
likely to gain an appreciation for the benefits of more careful attention to the
logic and terms of their theories. Assuming a threshold of participation is
eventually surpassed, the project may even transform the way theory is produced
and evaluated in the social sciences, and the way that social science theories
are utilized in cyber-human systems and elsewhere. The lessons learned should
also be applicable to the development of programs that facilitate Internet
community formation through incentive systems, especially knowledge aggregation
communities. The software will be made freely available, both as source code and
as a hosted service for research use.

A previous NSF grant supported the construction of a prototype that included,
among other elements, introductory presentations, instructions, tools to submit
"modular theories" to a library, and several crucial administrative subsystems.
This innovative new work will develop a completed online system that generalizes
beyond the prototype's basic functions, implementing a range of powerful
services and infrastructure. These include automated logical and semantic
analyses, recommender systems, extensive hyperlinking of the lexicon, analytics,
instructional and pedagogical materials, and discussion boards. The system will
support collective evaluation and cumulative enhancement of submitted materials,
user incentive systems, cross-fertilization between disciplines, identification
of integratable modules, evaluations of supporting research, theoretically
informed applications, and support for students and applied researchers outside
of the social sciences. Wikitheoria will provide tools for those seeking to
advance knowledge, and resources for those seeking to apply that knowledge. The
interactive nature of the site permits users at any level to ask questions about
content, point out ambiguous terms and statements, and in general become part of
the theory-development process in a way that is not possible with standard
publication models. Thus Wikitheoria can become a valuable standard resource for
computer and information scientists and engineers working on human-centered
projects, who need to sharpen their theoretical ideas, learn what similar
theoretical frameworks are already available, and situate their innovations in a
wider cognitive and social context.