* 1551036
* SCH: EXP: Smart integration of community crowdsourced data for real-time individualized disease risk assessment
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2015,09/30/2017
* Rumi Chunara, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 09/30/2017
* USD 457,545.00

This project addresses a major inefficiency in healthcare today: an under-
informed, homogeneous approach to patient care that doesn't consider community
disease prevalence and its effect on an individual's disease risk in an
actionable manner. The approach is to combine real-time diagnostic information
from select community members via an easy to use, gargle-based immunoassay
detection test with more abundant contemporaneous community symptom reports via
an online informatics platform. The hypothesis is that the likelihood of a
virological diagnosis of influenza (flu) can be accurately predicted for the
individual using real-time flu self-diagnostics and symptom information from
their community, and can influence a user to take appropriate measures to
prevent disease spread. This approach enables testing of several concepts
regarding (1) the specificity and sensitivity of a rapid flu diagnostic test for
Influenza A and B detection compared to a laboratory polymerase chain reaction
test, (2) generation of valid user-contributed diagnostic information at scale
(3), potential of real-time contextual data to be used to calculate influenza
risk, (4) use and acceptance of this information by individuals. The team brings
together experience in building and studying novel crowdsourced data sources for
disease surveillance and expertise in software, graphic design, epidemiology,
medicine, and engineering, to develop user-friendly systems that the community
will employ at scale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed system has substantial
potential for beneficial societal impact through acertaining and changing the
way people approach healthcare. Empowering individuals to generate and act on
health information impresses on them the importance of surveillance and educates
them to become more involved and accountable for their health. In order to
maximize the impact and sustainability of the system, this system also functions
as an educational tool. Clear open communication of anonymized and privacy-
protected data to the general public in an easy to interpret manner will assist
individuals, policy-makers and other researchers in using contextual disease
risk information. Undergraduate and graduate students from a variety of
backgrounds will have opportunity to participate in the research. Collaborators
at the American Public Health Association and their associated groups concerned
with the health of minority populations such as The Association of Minority
Health Professions Schools and The Latina Health Project will assist in engaging
a diverse group of participants nationwide.