* 1551999
* CEDAR: Lower-Upper Atmosphere Coupling via Acoustic Wave Energy
* GEO,AGS
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2019
* Jonathan Lees, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* John Meriwether
* 04/30/2019
* USD 176,302.00

The Coupling, Energetics, and Dynamics of Atmospheric Regions (CEDAR) program, a
broad-based, community-guided, upper atmospheric research program, is aimed at
understanding the behavior of atmospheric regions from the lower atmosphere
upward through the mesosphere and lower thermosphere (MLT) region near 80-120
km. Of particular interest is the energy transfer into the mesosphere lower
thermosphere (MLT) region resulting from the coupling to the lower atmosphere,
where there are violent phenomena such as thunderstorms, convective frontal
activity, tornados, and other violent storm weather phenomena, as well as
anthropogenic sources such as heating and air conditioning units, that will
produce strong acoustic wave signals. Such energy transfer might have importance
regarding a contribution to the MLT energy budget. This award provides support
for the balloon flight measurements over four campaigns (one for each season) of
acoustic wave activity using instrumented zero pressure balloon payloads flown
to stratosphere heights near 35 km. The project is aimed at establishing the
extent to which acoustic wave structures generated within the troposphere will
propagate to the MLT region and produce MLT heating through acoustic wave
dissipation. The balloon microphone sensors would measure the acoustic wave
energy flux for frequencies within the range of 1 to 10 Hz. A PhD graduate
student and a postdoctoral associate would be supported in this
award.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These observations would take place with launches
from the University of North Carolina Chapel Hill campus, which will create
considerable public interest in these experiments. Each campaign would feature
morning and evening flights of two balloons carrying aloft two microphones
mounted in each balloon payload that would obtained acoustic waveform data that
would be used in ray tracing software of acoustic wave structures to determine
trajactories, occurrence rates, and wave frequency. These measurements would be
obtained in four separate campaigns to measure the seasonal and diurnal
variation of the aooustic energy background. Determination of the possible
effects upon the MLT region would be based upon the application of linear sound
wave absorption theory following the lines of previous published work. In the
case of possible complex sound waveforms as might be generated by anthropogenic
sources (e.g., air conditioning systems, a more sophisticated treatment of the
analysis would be carried out to determine the impact upon the MLT temperature
in a quantitative way.