* 1551605
* Collaborative Research:  Who's Not at the Table? Building Research Capacity for Underserved Communities in Engineering
* ENG,EEC
* 10/15/2015,03/31/2021
* Julie Martin, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Christine Grant
* 03/31/2021
* USD 195,010.00

This workshop proposal focuses on developing a national agenda for research in
broadening participation in engineering by those who self-identify as persons
with disabilities, veterans, low income/first generation or members of the LGBTQ
community. The effort to increase the numbers of students who study computer
science and engineering is a national imperative. Furthermore, there is a need
to ensure this workforce is representative of the nation's populations as a
diverse workforce will spark greater innovation and creativity through the
incorporation of multiple perspectives and experiences in the creation of
technology. Efforts to create a more diverse workforce have often focused on
interventions to recruit and retain under-represented populations. As a result
progress has not occurred at a substantial rate as these efforts tend to be
localized and not easily scaled. What is needed is greater research in
understanding the various factors that impede and influence the full
participation of these underserved groups.

The project will convene a workshop of thought leaders, including scholars,
practitioners, policy makers and others from a broad spectrum of social science
disciplines. Brought together from across the nation, the participants will seek
to develop an understanding of how best to increase research capacity to better
understand why these groups are so underrepresented in the computer science and
engineering workforce. Participants will identify existing research and new
research possibilities regarding computing and engineering participation by
persons from the specified under-served groups. The goal is to help define the
national agenda for areas of research in the field of broadening participation
for these targeted populations in the engineering and computer science
workforce.