* 1551381
* Collaborative Research: Equilibrium and Kinetic Studies of New Trace Element Thermobarometers
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2016,02/29/2020
* E. Bruce Watson, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 02/29/2020
* USD 373,207.00

This project is a collaborative effort between Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
(RPI) and Syracuse University (SU) to develop tools and strategies to "reverse
engineer" key minerals of Earth's continental crust - that is, to learn how and
when these materials formed and the conditions experienced since their origin.
Consider, for example, the benefits of being able to "read" the history of a
single grain of sand simply by measuring its content of key chemical elements:
Was it formed during an episode of mountain building or during a volcanic
eruption? How far did it travel from its source? Was it associated with a
potentially valuable ore deposit at the time of formation? This project will
involve laboratory synthesis of selected minerals over a range of temperature
and pressure conditions, followed by measurement of the amounts of elemental
impurities incorporated during growth (the concentrations of aluminum and
titanium in quartz, for example, depend strongly on the temperature and pressure
of quartz formation). The broader purpose of the project is to develop "chemical
tools" for all researchers to use in deciphering events and processes of our
planet's past - from mountain building to formation of ore deposits.

A decade of experimental research at RPI has focused on evaluating the effects
of pressure (P) and temperature (T) on the solubilities of low-abundance
elements in key minerals of the continental crust. This enterprise has been
called "trace-element thermobarometry" because each application is based on the
concentration of a single, marginally compatible element in a common or
otherwise strategic mineral phase (e.g., Ti in zircon). These thermobarometers
differ in fundamental ways from "conventional" thermobarometers based on major-
element phase equilibria, and they have a key advantage: if the system is
properly constrained, the concentration of a single impurity in a single mineral
can be used as an indicator of its crystallization T and/or P. To date, this
effort has produced thermo(baro)meters based on the Ti content of zircon, the Ti
content of quartz ("TitaniQ"), the Zr content of rutile, and the Zr content of
titanite. The value of these thermobarometers has been enhanced significantly
through experimental calibration of the diffusion laws for all relevant
impurities in the phases of interest, so users can assess the robustness of the
thermobarometers for specific real-world applications. Efforts to date have had
significant impact in the geoscience community (as judged by literature
citations), but the development of trace-element thermobarometers and the
improvement of "old" ones is far from complete. The proposed work is aimed at
providing a full toolbox of thermobarometers for crustal systems that includes
cross-checks of the various P-T indicators. Specifically, the TitaniQ
calibration will be extended to lower P for application to volcanic rocks, and
Ti-in-zircon will be more thoroughly assessed for P effects. Entirely new
systems and applications will also be pursued, including the development of P-T
indicators based on Ti in coesite for ultra high-pressure (UHP) rocks, Al in
quartz to complement TitaniQ, Si and Al in rutile, and Ti in both K-spar and in
kyanite. Equilibrium studies of all new systems will be complemented by
diffusion measurements of the relevant elements. Further, the pressure-volume-
temperature properties of fluid inclusions in crystals from experimental run
products will be used in conjunction with trace-element thermobarometers to
confirm accuracy of our calibrations at relatively low P-T applications. The
proposed study involves implementation of techniques specifically in
experimental geochemistry, but the applications of our results extend across a
substantial expanse of geoscience, including not only igneous and metamorphic
petrology but also ore-deposits research, structural geology, tectonics, and
sedimentology.