* 1551059
* International Meeting for Computational Methods for Mental Health
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2017
* Nikolaos Papanikolopoulos, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Anne Emig
* 07/31/2017
* USD 7,000.00

Part 1:&lt;br/&gt;This project is about the organization of an international
symposium that deals with computational tools for mental health assessment.
Early intervention can dramatically improve the individual's quality of life,
for many psychiatric disorders. Accounting for 25% of all years of life lost to
disability and premature mortality, mental health disorders are the leading
cause of disability in the United States and Canada, according to the World
Health Organization. Symptoms of mental illness which emerge in childhood and
early adolescence are actually the later stages of a process which began years
earlier. Hence, psychiatric research is immensely interested in identifying and
detecting risk-markers (genetic, neural, behavioral, and/or social deviations)
that indicate elevated risk for the development of specific mental illnesses
prior to the onset of symptoms. This meeting will be organized at Cyprus where
mental health issues are still not addressed appropriately due to cultural
issues. The meeting will bring US experts and graduate students together with
researchers from University of Cyprus, where new efforts are initiated to deal
with the problem by scientists involved with psychiatry and computer science.
The complementary skills of CS, ECE, and medical experts from the two countries
will benefit this novel research area, and ultimately benefit the U.S and the
world. The discussions will be focused on tackling the gap in the current state
of the art and developing strategies to minimize that gap. This includes
identifying the progress that has already been made while recognizing the
pitfalls and determining new opportunities for mental health monitoring using
vision and sensor network technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part
2:&lt;br/&gt;This project is about the organization of an international meeting
that will involve the creation of computational algorithms and intelligent
distributed systems to assist with the early diagnosis of individuals who are at
risk of developing behavioral disorders. Previous research has indicated that
two critical areas of behavioral investigation for use in identifying at-risk
individuals have been abnormalities in motor activities and emotional range
displays, especially of the face. Motor abnormalities are based on the
observation that motor control involves the circuits of the brain associated
with dopamine, which are also implicated in behavioral disorders. Many different
disorders share the observation of disruption in the emotional range regulation,
so monitoring of facial expressions should be discussed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To
date, assessments of motor and emotional range have been done by the experts who
view and rate videos of an individual. However, these experts? subjective
ratings limit the analysis of behavioral conditions to only a narrow range of
behaviors, work only for small populations of individual subjects, and are both
costly and dependent on the observer's particular expertise. In order to enable
a wider population screening, automation is required. The proposed meeting is
focused on the development of this automated process that uses vision and sensor
networks. Innovative ways of capturing and quantifying the expertise of experts
will be presented along with metrics for assessing the evolution of the
behavior. In addition, new computational tools that support the evaluation of
the effectiveness of interventions will be discussed.