* 1551922
* Collaborative Research:  Revealing the Environment of Shallow Slow Slip
* GEO,OCE
* 05/15/2016,04/30/2020
* Anne Sheehan, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Deborah K. Smith
* 04/30/2020
* USD 167,528.00

Subduction zones, where one tectonic plate bends down beneath another tectonic
plate, are important in the evolution of Earth's surface as well as being a
major earthquake and tsunami hazard for society. In the last 15 years, dense
Global Positioning System (GPS) and earthquake observations made at subduction
zones have revealed a new style of fault slip. In addition to continuous slip
and sudden earthquake motion, many faults experience slow slip. In some
instances, a relationship between slow slip and damaging large earthquakes has
been observed. Most observations of slow slip occur at 20-40 km depth below the
seafloor. At the Hikurangi margin offshore of New Zealand, slow slip also occurs
at shallow depths, but detailed investigation of shallow slow slip has been
hampered by the lack of suitable seafloor observations. Understanding the
extent, distribution, and range of physical conditions for shallow slow slip
events is important, especially since the shallow fault interface is where
tsunamis are generated by earthquakes. This project uses recently collected
ocean bottom seismic and absolute pressure gauge data from the Hikurangi margin
to investigate the relationship between earthquake and slow slip and the
physical conditions that favor them. Results of this research will be
incorporated into an earthquake science course for the California State Summer
School for Mathematics and Science program for high school students at the
University of California-Santa Cruz. This project involves the mentoring and
training of three graduate students and two to four undergraduate interns,
including at least one from an underrepresented group in the Earth Sciences. All
students will benefit by receiving training from researchers at different
institutions.

A large shallow slow slip event occurred in October 2014, directly beneath the
Hikurangi Ocean Bottom Investigation of Tremor and Slow Slip instrument array, a
major U.S. led international experiment with Japanese and New Zealand
researchers. The experiment was designed to investigate the physical environment
that hosts shallow slow slip and its relationship to destructive, seismic slip
on the Hikurangi subduction thrust. This project will build on the initial data
analysis from this experiment to tackle four main objectives: 1) to improve
initial tremor and earthquake detection and location using the PageRank
technique and matched filtering cross correlation, 2) to investigate changes in
coulomb failure stress imparted on the megathrust from the 2014 slow slip event
and compare it to earthquake and tremor locations to test whether static stress
changes can explain their location, 3) to determine earthquake source parameters
and explore their spatial and temporal relationships with slow slip, geodetic
coupling and physical properties of the plate interface and 4) to improve images
of seismic velocity and attenuation structure using body wave velocity and
attenuation tomography and ambient noise surface wave tomography. This project
will complement similar efforts in Cascadia and Japan, allowing comparison of
the properties and environment of shallow and deep slow slip and build a
detailed picture of the relationship between seismic and aseismic slip and its
dependence on the velocity and attenuation structure.