* 1551511
* CAREER: Cross-Layer Power-Bounded High Performance Computing on Emerging and Future Heterogeneous Computer Clusters
* CSE,CCF
* 05/18/2015,01/31/2023
* Rong Ge, Clemson University
* Continuing Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 01/31/2023
* USD 509,486.00

Highly efficient and scalable computing systems are crucial to scientific
discovery and technology innovation critical to national security and human
society. However, the scalability of HPC systems is increasingly constrained by
the power requirement and the necessity to limit the power density of components
and server rooms. Comprising millions of components, today?s HPC systems already
consume megawatts of power; to meet an insatiate demand for performance from
mission-critical applications, future systems will consist of even more
components and consume more power. To resolve the conflicting needs of scaling
performance and limiting power, this research develops enabling technology for
efficient and scalable computing on emerging and future computer systems bounded
by power budgets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed power-bounded HPC approach
recognizes power as a scarce resource and exploits hardware overprovisioning to
scale performance within a power budget. Targeting at emerging heterogeneous HPC
clusters comprising power-aware multicore CPUs and manycore accelerators, this
research studies how to utilize all available power to maximize performance and
power efficiency at component, node, and cluster levels for a wide range of
applications. Specifically, this research (1) designs a novel application-aware
cross-component scheduling system for power-bounded multicore computing, (2)
creates a cooperative hybrid computing framework for power-bounded heterogeneous
computing, and (3) develops analytical models and techniques to support large
scale power-bounded computing. The completion of this research promotes novel
system and software designs that efficiently utilize every watt of power on
computation; the resulting analytical models form the theoretical foundation for
designing future HPC systems, architectures, and building blocks. This project
integrates educational components that engage graduate and undergraduate
students in innovative HPC research, and broaden the participation of
underrepresented and K-12 students.