* 1551095
* EAGER: Biophysical Theory of Mitotic Spindle Length Instability and Self Assembly
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2017
* Meredith Betterton, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2017
* USD 114,529.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY

This award is made on an EAGER proposal, and it supports theoretical research
and education on the biophysical theory of mitotic spindle length instability
and self-assembly. The mitotic spindle is an important part of the cytoskeleton
in eukaryotic cells. It is a self-assembled three-dimensional structure,
primarily composed of tubes made from specific proteins, and it functions as a
molecular machine that separates chromosomes during cell division. The ultimate
goal of this research program is to provide an answer to the fundamental
question: "How can the mitotic spindle, a non-equilibrium structure with
constant molecular turnover i) self-assemble, and ii) maintain a fixed length."
The PI intends to model the spindle length dynamics and self-assembly at
multiple scales, ranging from nanometer to micron, bringing together ideas from
statistical physics, molecular biophysics, structural, molecular, and cellular
biology. The effort has a very substantial computational component involving a
large-scale modeling framework. The PI intends to make the developed software
freely available through an open-source license.

TECHNICAL SUMMARY

Cells self-organize and dynamically generate complex three-dimensional
structures. Filament nucleation, polymerization, and interaction-driven
rearrangement are regulated in space and time to construct a wide variety of
assemblies. An important general question in the study of self-organized
cytoskeletal structures is how to integrate molecular-level knowledge to predict
higher-order aspects of assembly and organization. A prototypical self-assembled
cytoskeletal structure is the mitotic spindle, a microtubule-based machine that
segregates chromosomes during eukaryotic cell division. This project will create
a physical theory of the fission yeast mitotic spindle that recapitulates
spindle length stability/fluctuations and bipolar spindle assembly to address
the fundamental question of how a non-equilibrium structure with constant
molecular turnover can self-assemble and maintain a fixed length. This project
has three components. The PI will first develop essential model ingredients
including multiple species of motors/crosslinks, novel motor force-velocity
relations, two-stage binding/unbinding of motors/crosslinks, and dynamic
microtubules. Then the PI will determine the mechanisms underlying mitotic
spindle length fluctuations and stabilization of spindle length through the
integration of models that span from nanometer to micron scales. This component
will lead to the development of a quantitative physical theory of dynamic
stabilization of spindle length. Subsequently, the PI will determine the
ingredients necessary for bipolar bundle assembly in a minimal model of the
fission yeast mitotic spindle. This work will involve computational screens to
find regions of model/parameter space associated with self-assembly of a stable
spindle-like microtubule bundle and comparison to tomographic models. The effort
has a very substantial computational component involving a large-scale modeling
framework. The PI intends to make the developed software freely available
through an open-source license.