* 1551731
* CAREER: Understanding the Fundamental Principles Driving Household Energy and Resource Consumption for Smart, Sustainable, and Resilient Communities
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2022
* Sybil Derrible, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Yueyue Fan
* 07/31/2022
* USD 548,445.00

Ultimately, the amount of energy and resources that Americans consume depends
heavily on where as well as how they live. Thus residents of northern states
tend to consume more energy at home than residents of southern states, because
heating requires more energy than cooling. Similarly, people living in suburbs
tend to consume more energy for transportation than people living in city
centers because longer commutes consume more energy. Similar observations can be
made for all types of energy and resources, from electricity and transportation
to natural gas, water, and even food. This Faculty Early Career Development
(CAREER) grant will help to discover the fundamental principles that govern how
much "where" and "how" people live matters for energy and resource consumption.
The contributions from this research will directly assist in the development of
effective policies for more sustainable communities that consume less energy and
resources. Moreover, a better understanding of energy flows in cities will
provide planners and engineers with information that will enable them to design
smarter and more resilient infrastructure systems that are decentralized and
distributed. In addition, this grant will have a significant impact for the
broader public as it includes the development of a smartphone application to
enable anyone to calculate their daily carbon footprint and track their
performance over time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research places itself at the
nexus of urban metabolism and complexity theory. Urban metabolism is the study
of flows of material and energy in cities. The main hypothesis of this research
is that urban metabolism follows distinct mathematical laws at the community
scale that can be captured using elements of complexity theory. Various
mathematical laws (e.g., power law, lognormal distribution, uniform
distribution) will be applied using agent-based modeling techniques to generate
a theoretical space that will include every possible community profile in terms
of energy and resource consumption. These laws will then be tested for
individual communities using freely available data from municipal open data
portals. Additionally, this research will utilize elements of machine learning
to classify communities based on their energy and resource consumption patterns,
and network science to better understand the inter- and co-dependence between
the usage of electricity, water, natural gas, and transportation infrastructure.
The research will therefore offer a significant contribution to help design a
society that is smarter and more resilient while being more sustainable by
requiring less energy and fewer resources to thrive.