* 1551087
* Nebraska Conference for Undergraduate Women in Mathematics
* MPS,DMS
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2020
* Allan Donsig, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 12/31/2020
* USD 150,000.00

This award supports the Nebraska Conference for Undergraduate Women in
Mathematics (NCUWM) to be held annually for three years beginning in the winter
of 2016 at the University of Nebraska-Lincoln. The conference brings together
women undergraduate math majors from all over the United States for the purposes
of encouraging them to go to graduate school in mathematics or a related field
and increasing the success of those who do. NCUWM pursues these goals through a
variety of activities. Two plenary talks by prominent female mathematicians show
that women have made, and are continuing to make, exceptional research
contributions. Also featured are 48 talks and a larger number of posters by
undergraduate women about their own research; these presentations provide
valuable experience for the women who give them and serve to motivate the less
experienced women to find opportunities to do research projects. Panel
discussions demonstrate how mathematics offers natural and rewarding career
choices for women and provide the undergraduate participants with insider
knowledge and personal experiences that help them choose a graduate school and
be successful. There are also a variety of networking activities that help
participants connect with peers and mentors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NCUWM plays an
important role in inspiring young women to pursue mathematics. In addition to
anecdotal evidence from former NCUWM attendees who earned PhDs in mathematics,
an assessment report prepared after the 2015 conference concluded that NCUWM
strongly influences the attitudes and beliefs of the undergraduate participants
about pursuing graduate-level mathematics and mathematics related careers and
that the conference significantly contributes to the professional growth of
participants at all career levels. Plenary and invited speakers at the 2016
conference include mathematicians Emina Soljanin, Bell Laboratories; Abigail
Thompson, University of California Davis; Alejandra Alvarado, Eastern Illinois
University; Lorena Bociu, North Carolina State University; Johanna Franklin,
Hofstra University; Emilie Hogan, Pacific Northwest National Laboratory; and
Cristina Polizu, Standard and Poors.