* 1551531
* EAGER: Interaction Can Hurt - Exploring a Gesture-Based Design Paradigm for Chronic Pain Sufferers
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2017
* Michael Poor, Baylor University
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 08/31/2017
* USD 157,853.00

One of the most common human experiences is pain. It is essential to warn when
something is not right, and to alert when action needs to be taken. But when
pain persists for longer than 3 months it is called chronic and it can rob those
who suffer from it of their productivity, their mental well-being, and
potentially even their lives. As the general population ages the number of
people suffering from chronic pain induced by conditions such as Fibromyalgia
and Carpal Tunnel Syndrome who require computer interaction will increase.
Meanwhile, fueled by the deployment of new commodity technologies such as the
Microsoft Kinect, there is a growing reliance in a variety of mainstream
applications on touchless mid-air gesture-based interaction as an alternative to
the mouse/keyboard paradigm for non-expect users. As this trend accelerates and
becomes more widespread, people with chronic pain-related diseases (CPD) will be
among those most negatively affected. The PI's goal in this exploratory research
is to alleviate this problem by developing a design paradigm and best practices
for gestural interaction for users with CPD. Not only will project outcomes
profoundly change everyday life for members of the target user community, but by
more generally advancing the state-of-the art in gesture-based interaction
techniques they will also lessen the chance of other users developing future
physical ailments.

To these ends, the PI will build upon his "personal space" approach to gestural
interaction, which allows the user to define the area of interaction as well as
to rest their elbow during the interaction. He will consider separately gestural
pointing (the use of a user's body to control interaction location and
direction), and gestural manipulation (gestures used to hold, release, or select
items within an interaction system), seeking for each problem space to discover
which alterations to common touchless gesture interaction have a positive impact
on users' fatigue, accuracy, and throughput. Using natural and intuitive
gestures from the literature for operations such as grab, pinch and grasp as a
starting point, experiments will be conducted to answer questions such as what
are the various favored types of input, and which muscle groups are most
affected during use. Other input options, including whether to use static vs.
dynamic gestures, support for hand switching, and speech based input will also
be evaluated. The findings will be combined to create a design paradigm to help
shape a complete gesture-based interaction and best practices for users with
CPD.