* 1551850
* EAGER: Preliminary Studies for Real-Time Tracking of Cognitive Fatigue via Eye Movement Patterns
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Deepak Ganesan, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 08/31/2018
* USD 150,000.00

This project seeks to perform a preliminary exploration into the design of an
end-to-end mHealth system for detecting the fatigue state among individuals by
leveraging eye movements. Real-time detection of fatigue state is important for
a wide range of applications including reducing medical errors, reducing motor
vehicle operator errors, and improving overall health and wellness for the
general public. Despite these benefits, there is no widely available method for
predicting fatigue in the natural environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this
project, we are designing a real-time analytics engine that provides general
computational methods for inferring fatigue by fusing raw time-series data about
various eye measures (saccades, fixations, blinks, and pupil dilation). This
work includes a novel fatigue detector for natural settings that address
robustness to real-world variability, individual differences, and confounders,
and develops time-series pattern extraction methods to characterize temporal
progression of fatigue state. We are also performing a pilot evaluation of our
design for a student population. We envisage that a successful pilot will lead
to more extensive studies involving medical residents, motor vehicle operators,
shift workers, and other user groups where fatigue is a significant safety or
health issue. This project includes outreach including a two day mobile sensing-
themed workshop for middle school students. The workshop is offered at the UMass
Amherst campus and builds on an existing outreach partnership with Girls Inc. of
Holyoke, MA. that is aimed at addressing the widely recognized under-
representation of women in STEM fields.