* 1552934
* CAREER:  Theoretical Foundations of the UAS in the NAS Problem (Unmanned Aerial Systems in the National Air Space)
* CSE,CNS
* 02/15/2016,11/30/2016
* Kristin Yvonne Rozier, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* David Corman
* 11/30/2016
* USD 105,054.00

Due to their increasing use by civil and federal authorities and vast commercial
and amateur applications, Unmanned Aerial Systems (UAS) will be introduced into
the National Air Space (NAS); the question is only how this can be done safely.
Today, NASA and the FAA are designing a new, (NextGen) automated air traffic
control system for all aircraft, manned or unmanned. New algorithms and tools
will need to be developed to enable computation of the complex questions
inherent in designing such a system while proving adherence to rigorous safety
standards. Researchers must develop the tools of formal analysis to be able to
address the UAS in the NAS problem, reason about UAS integration during the
design phase of NextGen, and tie this design to on-board capabilities to provide
runtime System Health Management (SHM), ensuring the safety of people and
property on the ground. This proposal takes a holistic view and integrates
advances in the state of the art from three intertwined perspectives to address
safe integration of unmanned systems into the national airspace: from on-board
the vehicle, from the environment (NAS), and from the underlying theory enabling
their formal analysis. There has been rapid development of new UAS technologies
yet few of them are formally mathematically rigorous to the degree needed for
FAA safety-critical system certification. This project bridges that gap,
integrating new UAS and air traffic control designs with advances in formal
analysis. Within the wealth of promising directions for autonomous UAS
capabilities, this project fills a unique need, providing a direct synergy
between on-board UAS SHM, the NAS environment in which they must operate, and
the theoretical foundations common to both of these.

This research will help to build a safer NAS with increased capacity for UAS and
create broadly impactful capabilities for SHM on-board UAS. Advancements will
require theoretical research into more scalable model checking and debugging of
safety properties. Safety properties express the sentiment that "something bad
does not happen" during any system execution; they represent the vast majority
of the requirements for NextGen designs and all requirements researchers can
monitor on-board a UAS for system heath management during runtime. This research
will tackle new frontiers in embedding health management capabilities on-board
UAS. Collaborations with aerospace system designers at the National Aeronautics
and Space Administration and tool designers at the Bruno Kessler Foundation will
aid real-life utility and technology transfer. Broader impact will be achieved
by involving undergraduate students in the design of an open-source, affordable,
all-COTS and 3D-printable UAS, which will facilitate flight testing of this
project's research advances. An open-UAS design for academia will be useful both
for classroom demonstrations and as a research platform. Further impact will be
achieved by using this UAS and the research it enables in interactive teaching
experiences for K-12, undergraduate, and graduate students and in mentoring
outreach specifically targeted at girls achieving in Science, Technology,
Engineering and Mathematics (STEM) subjects.