* 1552230
* Cosmogenic surface exposure dating of Cordilleran-Laurentide ice-sheet separation during the last deglaciation: implications for abrupt sea-level rise
* GEO,EAR
* 02/15/2016,01/31/2021
* Anders Carlson, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Dena Smith
* 01/31/2021
* USD 249,931.00

The rise in sea level during the last deglaciation (21,000-6,000 years ago) was
punctuated by intervals of abrupt sea-level rise, called meltwater pulses (MWP),
which indicate the development of instability in one or more of Earth's ice
sheets. The largest MWP, MWP-1A, occurred 14,600-14,300 years ago with ~14 m of
global-mean sea-level rise. It was recently hypothesized that the collapse of an
ice saddle between the Cordilleran (CIS) and Laurentide (LIS) ice sheets could
have caused MWP-1A when the two ice sheets separated. Results from this research
will provide important data on whether the ice sheet failure caused rapid jumps
in sea level. Determining if the ice sheet separation caused a MWP will provide
insight into the evolution of North Atlantic climate and its relationship to
meltwater discharge to the Arctic Ocean where much of the ice sheet separation
meltwater would be routed. These findings will also have implications for
development of instability in the Greenland ice sheet as it has an ice saddle
similar to the one previously seen in the Cordilleran-Laurentide. Finally, these
results will date when an ice-free corridor formed between the Cordilleran and
Laurentide ice sheets, which has important ramifications for human migration
routes to the Americas. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will date the end of
CIS-LIS separation with 50 boulder cosmogenic surface exposure ages at six
locations along the suture zone of the ice sheets between 50°N and 60°N. These
ages will determine when CIS-LIS separation was complete, and if it was
concurrent with MWP-1A or another interval of rapid sea-level rise. They will
also document if CIS-LIS separation occur over centuries, which could cause a
MWP, or over millennia which would be inconsistent with separation causing a
MWP.