* 1552706
* CAREER: Robot Learning from Motor-Impaired Instructors and Task Partners
* CSE,IIS
* 02/01/2016,01/31/2023
* Brenna Argall, Rehabilitation Institute of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Juan Wachs
* 01/31/2023
* USD 525,000.00

Assistive machines - like power wheelchairs, robotic arms, exoskeletons,
prostheses - are vital for enabling independence for people with severe motor
impairments. However, there exists a paradox, where often the more severe a
person's impairment, the less able they are to operate these very machines which
might improve their quality of life. Here robotics technologies have the
potential to transform the field of human health and rehabilitation: by turning
the machine into a robot, that can operate itself autonomously and share the
control burden. It will be crucial that these robots adapt to the human user's
unique preferences and abilities, and how both change over time is crucial for
achieving widespread adoption and acceptance, and especially if attached to a
human's body to provide physical assistance. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There has
been limited study of robot learning from non-experts, and the domain of motor-
impaired teachers is even more challenging: their control signals are noisy (due
to artifacts in the motor signal) and sparse (if providing motor commands is
more effort), and filtered through an interface. Rather than treat these
constraints as limitations, the proposed work hypothesizes that such constraints
become advantageous for machine learning algorithms that exploit unique
characteristics (like problem-space sparsity) of control and feedback signals
from motor-impaired humans. The work develops multiple novel machine learning
algorithmic techniques, (1) that reason explicitly about the control interface
and how it interacts with the full robot control space; (2) that derive
information about the human's control patterns and task requirements, from
variability in the human's teleoperation commands; and (3) which include the
design of adaptation cues informed by reward- and example-based feedback from
motor-impaired teachers. The proposed work also performs subject studies with
motor-impaired end-users operating multiple robotic platforms, both to explore
this problem space and assess the functionality and user acceptance of the
contributed algorithmic techniques.