* 1552540
* Collaborating at the Centers: Faculty and Educational Development Strategies for STEM Transformation
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2015,06/30/2017
* Mathew Ouellett, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 06/30/2017
* USD 49,828.00

The purpose of the project is to convene a two-day workshop that brings together
directors of STEM Education Centers (SECs) and Centers for Teaching and Learning
(CTLs) at higher education institutions to create networks for collaboration in
support of the national agenda to reform STEM undergraduate education. The
workshop will build on interest expressed in previous meetings supported by
three major national organizations of institutional leaders and faculty members
involved in STEM undergraduate reform and will enable these national and
institutional leaders to develop plans for synergistic and collaborative efforts
to transform the quality of teaching and learning in STEM undergraduate
education. Because the workshop will involve a diverse group of leaders, it will
have impact, benefits, and significance for advancing excellence in STEM
undergraduate education at a wide array of higher education institutions across
the country.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The workshop is a collaborative endeavor
among members of the Professional and Organizational Development Network (POD),
the Association of Public and Land-Grant Universities (APLU), and the STEM
Education Network to bring together approximately 40 leaders from STEM Education
Centers and Centers for Teaching and Learning, who usually work in parallel but
independent ways. The two-day workshop will build on what is known about
evidence-based teaching as well as transformative and systemic change in higher
education, and will lead to identification of strategies for facilitating
greater implementation of effective teaching and learning strategies in STEM
fields at higher education institutions. Specific outcomes of the workshop will
include the following: (1) the development of recommendations for best and
promising practices for collaboration across STEM Education Centers and Centers
for Teaching and Learning in support of STEM reform; (2) plans for ongoing
collaboration among the leaders of these centers; and (3) the development of
potential research directions important to advancing the national agenda in
regard to reform in undergraduate STEM education.