* 1552791
* CAREER: Illuminating heme trafficking and signaling for research and education
* BIO,MCB
* 12/15/2015,11/30/2022
* Amit Reddi, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Charles Cunningham
* 11/30/2022
* USD 911,144.00

The goals of this project are (i) to understand how cells manage and utilize
heme, an essential but toxic nutrient, and (ii) to educate, train, and diversify
a new generation of scientists. Heme is required by much of life, enabling a
vast number of proteins and cellular processes to function properly. However,
heme is also known to promote cellular dysfunction due to its toxic properties.
How do cells and organisms utilize heme while mitigating its toxicity? The PI
proposes that there are distinct molecules that help shuttle heme to different
locations in a controlled manner and various physiological stimuli can initiate
heme mobilization. Using heme sensors recently developed in the PI's laboratory,
graduate, undergraduate, and high school/middle school students will collaborate
to determine how cellular heme is handled and mobilized throughout the cell.
This research will not only reveal the manner by which cells manage an
"essential toxin" like heme, but also provide new tools and methodologies that
will benefit the large community of scientists that study heme. Moreover, the
research will be used as a vehicle to promote participation of under-represented
minorities in science. A long-term scientific mentorship program will be
developed in which Hispanic middle school students from metro-Atlanta will work
with the PI's group to implement the research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Heme is
well known as an essential iron containing cofactor. A number of heme regulated
factors and processes are conserved from yeast to man, suggesting a role for
heme as a dynamic signaling molecule. This project aims to reimagine and expand
the role of heme in cell biology as a signaling molecule. The cytotoxicity and
hydrophobicity of heme requires that it be trafficked in a highly coordinated
manner from its site of synthesis in the mitochondria to hemoproteins present in
every subcellular compartment, including the nucleus. However, the molecules and
mechanisms that mediate the initiation, transmission, and integration of heme-
based signals and the spatio-temporal dynamics of heme mobilization for
trafficking and signaling are unknown. This is in large part due to the lack of
tools available to image labile heme pools relevant to trafficking and
signaling. The PI's group has recently overcome this major technological barrier
by generating genetically encoded ratiometric fluorescent heme sensors. The
project will utilize these heme sensors in conjunction with mass spectrometry
based proteomics and yeast molecular genetics to delineate the molecules and
mechanisms that mediate heme trafficking and signaling and their dynamics.