* 1552517
* CAREER: Synthesis Methods to Control Framework Aluminum Distribution in Zeolites for NOx Pollution Abatement Catalysis
* ENG,CBET
* 02/15/2016,01/31/2021
* Rajamani Gounder, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 01/31/2021
* USD 517,024.00

Abstract (Gounder; 1552517) This study will develop new synthesis strategies to
control the distribution of aluminum (Al) active sites in zeolite catalysts used
for nitrogen oxides (NOx) abatement and carbon feedstock conversion to fuels and
chemicals. Tailoring active site proximity and distribution in zeolites will
open new opportunities for catalytic innovation in both the environmental
protection and carbon conversion areas, while also providing new insight into
the chemistry of zeolite crystallization. The research will be linked with
educational and mentoring initiatives in the STEM areas for students at all
levels.

Currently, there is little understanding of the relationships between the atomic
arrangement of Al atoms in zeolites and the chemistry of the precursor solutions
and gels used to synthesize them. This work is based on the hypothesis that the
distribution of catalytically-relevant isolated and paired Al sites in zeolites
can be controlled by the charge density of the synthesis gel. Isolated and
paired Al sites have been shown by the principal investigator to play important
roles in the selective catalytic reduction (SCR) of NOx using copper
(Cu)-exchanged chabazite zeolites. The present study will develop predictive
relations between synthesis gel charge density and paired Al density for a range
of zeolites, establish relationships between the framework Al distribution and
extraframework Cu distribution in Cu-zeolites, and determine their kinetic and
mechanistic roles in the NOx SCR reaction. Building on prior collaborative
research, the PI will utilize characterization tools that provide rapid
quantification of the numbers of total and paired acid sites on proton- and
metal-exchanged zeolites, thereby facilitating the development of synthesis-
structure-function relationships that can be used to tailor zeolites for a range
of applications.