* 1552730
* CAREER: Etale and Motivic Homotopy Theory and Applications to Arithmetic Geometry
* MPS,DMS
* 05/01/2016,12/31/2019
* Kirsten Wickelgren, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 12/31/2019
* USD 324,087.00

This project lies at the intersection of algebraic topology, algebraic geometry
and number theory. It involves applying homotopy theory (a branch of algebraic
topology) to study arithmetic and geometry, using coarse aspects or invariants
of spaces to study arithmetic phenomena. A generalization of the number of
d-dimensional holes in a space is used to control the solutions to certain
polynomial equations. When d is equal to one, this has applications to a program
of Grothendieck to control solutions using the loops on a space. Maps between
certain spaces induce maps between the d-dimensional holes giving rise to a
notion of degree. A generalization of degree due to F. Morel is used to study
arithmetic properties of singularities. This project furthermore includes the
design and implementation of a series of four week-long summer math jobs for
gifted high school students from diverse backgrounds. During each of four
summers, approximately eight high school students will work on an important
mathematical problem which has an elegant or useful known solution, learning the
background material as necessary, and then creating learning materials for other
students of the same age group. The students will be accompanied by a teacher
from their high schools. In addition to the work on the specific mathematical
problem, career options in mathematics will be presented and support and
mentorship will be provided for students interested in pursuing mathematical
careers.

Certain arithmetic and geometric phenomena which appear delicate are invariant
under appropriate notions of homotopy. Such phenomena motivate the use of
homotopy theory to study arithmetic or geometry. The sub-projects contained in
this project share the perspective wherein problems in arithmetic or geometry
are approached by using Morel-Veoveodky's A1-homotopy theory and applying
realization functors. Sub-project 1 studies an enrichment of the Section
Conjecture and an approach to proving it. Running the same methods backwards
produces results on the differential graded algebra of the absolute Galois
group. Sub-project 2 applies an Eilenberg-Moore spectral sequence in Ã©tale
homotopy to compute (co)homology of branched covers. This has applications to
the study of the non-abelian Galois representation given by the fundamental
group of the projective line with three points removed, and has applications to
sub-project 1. The first step of sub-project 3 is to prove a joint conjecture
with Jesse Kass that the quadratic form appearing in the Eisenbud-Levine-
Khimshiashvili Signature Formula can be interpreted as a local degree in
A1-homotopy, where the natural notion of degree is a quadratic form. We then
enrich the Milnor number and use this enrichment to study arithmetic properties
of singularities.