* 1552178
* Core Support of the U.S. Hub of the Future Earth Secretariat
* GEO,RISE
* 12/01/2015,03/31/2023
* Sharon Collinge, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Lina Patino
* 03/31/2023
* USD 3,440,663.00

This award provides support for the US Hub of the Future Earth Secretariat. The
Director of the hub and associated staff have the primary responsibility for the
operation of the U.S. hub and will be responsible for building networks of
researchers and stakeholders in the U.S. to engage with Future Earth. The hub
director will serve as part of a six person international executive team that
will have oversight over the operations of the international Future Earth
organization. Future Earth is the most ambitious and far-reaching program in
global environmental change ever envisioned. The Future Earth program is
governed by an international alliance of funders, national agencies and
prominent scientists and stakeholders. It is strongly supported by major U.S.
agencies, under the interdisciplinary auspices of the U.S. Global Change
Research Program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In May 2014, a global consortium
representing the nations of Canada, France, Japan, Sweden and the United States
was selected as the preferred bidder to host the new Future Earth Secretariat.
This globally distributed approach to governance of the Future Earth program is
an ambitious and unique approach that has never been tried before in
International science coordination but which is common in other globally
distributed corporate structures. Through this new approach, each nation will
host a Global Hub and will work in a coordinated way to advance the Future Earth
Programme. The U.S. Global Hub will be hosted in Colorado at the University of
Colorado Boulder and Colorado State University. Although headquartered in the
Front Range of Colorado, the Global Hub will be closely tied to affiliate
organizations across the nation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The funding provided in
this grant will be used to support the work of the Hub Director and the US Hub
team, which will provide support for a range of activities to implement the
emerging agenda of Future Earth but will initially lead the or co-lead the
development of research enabling and global capacity building. The leadership of
these two functions reflect the US strength in both GEC research and
international development.&lt;br/&gt;