* 1552942
* CAREER: NOVEL INTEGRATION OF FLUID DYNAMIC DESIGN INTO ELECTRIC MACHINES
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/01/2016,01/31/2022
* Bulent Sarlioglu, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 01/31/2022
* USD 500,000.00

Energy efficiency and sustainable use of energy continue to be among nations'
most pressing challenges as global energy demand steadily increases. In fact,
global energy needs will continue to grow steadily into the future. Recent
studies indicate that the world's primary energy demand is likely to grow more
than 50% by 2030. Among global electric energy needs, compressor systems consume
a substantial proportion. The applications for compressors are very broad and
useful for humanity from many perspectives. Compressors can be found in very
small equipment such as sleep apnea machines, to kilo-Watt level micro-turbines
for power generation and heating, ventilation, and air conditioning (HVAC)
systems, to mega-Watt level natural gas turbines of power plants. Another useful
and sustainable application of compressors is for compressed air energy storage
systems. Other applications include prime mover of electrical generation
systems, aircraft jet engines, and high-speed propulsion systems. Among all
compressor types, axial flow compressors have one of the highest efficiency, and
most of the axial flow compressors require electric motors. Hence, there is a
need to design electric motors that can run the axial flow compressors at high
speed and efficiency at low cost. The motivation of this research aims to
develop an advanced electric machine to replace older, inefficient compressor
topologies with axial flow compressors, paving the way for more efficient and
sustainable energy use. The research proposes a novel and transformative motor,
by combining the rotor of the electric motor and airfoil of a compressor into
one structure. This approach will reduce the weight, volume, and cost of the
axial flow compressor systems and increase the efficiency compared to
traditional separate motor and compressor designs. The CAREER project aims to
disseminate the research results to university students via credit courses,
practicing engineers via short courses, seminars, and tutorials, and the general
public via demonstrations and open houses. The project will promote
participation of women and under-represented minorities in undergraduate and
graduate engineering education to advance equal participation and advance
diversity via various workshops and STEM activities such as Camp Badger.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The central hypothesis underlying this research effort is
that if a rotor of electric machine is shaped as an airfoil, then there will be
a conversion of mechanical torque from the rotor to kinetic energy in the fluid,
because the rotor will serve as an airfoil for the compressor and compress the
gas. Hence, this CAREER research proposes a novel electric machine where the
rotor is shaped as an airfoil that achieves both motoring and compressor
function. This approach will achieve self-cooling of the rotor and stator due to
inherent gas flow, reduction in the axial length of the compressor, simpler and
more robust mechanical design due to reduced axial length, and simpler bearing
design due to reduced axial length. The research aims to develop a unified
theory of electric machines and turbo machinery to integrate the torque
production and fluid dynamics. Multi-physics simulations will be performed to
analyze the electromechanical, thermal, structural, and fluid dynamic
attributes. Performance characteristics will be researched and benefits of the
novel integrated rotor-airfoil design will be quantified and compared with
traditional separate motor and compressor designs. Finally, a proof-of-concept
prototype will be built and tested to validate the design, analytical and
simulation results. This transformational research aims to achieve lower weight,
volume, and cost, higher efficiency, and higher reliability of next generation
high-speed compressor systems. The proposed concept is applicable to and will be
investigated for turbines and fans.