* 1552482
* CAREER: Raman Spectroscopy of Interlayer Phonons in van der Waals Heterostructures
* MPS,DMR
* 02/01/2016,10/31/2017
* Rui He, University of Northern Iowa
* Continuing Grant
* Germano Iannacchione
* 10/31/2017
* USD 207,586.00

Non-technical abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Van der Waals heterostructures are a new class
of materials that could lead to new novel electronic and optoelectronic devices.
These materials are formed by vertically stacking atomic layers such as
graphene, hexagonal boron nitride, and transition metal dichalcogenide (e.g.
molybdenum disulfide) layers. The forces between these layers are relatively
weak. However, they can dramatically change the properties of the system and
induce phenomena that are absent in individual layers. By stacking or
epitaxially growing different atomic layers on one another, one may design and
fabricate artificial materials with unprecedented optical, electronic, and
vibrational properties that cannot be achieved in natural crystals. Raman
spectroscopy, which is a direct, noninvasive, and sensitive optical probe, is
used to explore the interlayer coupling, the interface effect, and the
interaction between vibrations and charge carriers in these heterostructures.
This research provides crucial guidance in designing novel electronic and
optoelectronic devices using stacked atomic layers. The research activities have
a powerful impact on the undergraduate students at the University of Northern
Iowa. The principal investigator integrates the research topics into two
existing courses. Undergraduates at all levels, including freshman students, are
encouraged to participate. The principal investigator also uses departmental
contacts with area high schools and collaborates with Physics Education faculty
colleagues and the director of the Classic Upward Bound program to involve
teachers and students at regional high schools. Engaging high school students
and undergraduates in research is very important in advancing STEM (Science,
Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics) education in young
people.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical abstract:&lt;br/&gt;This research
explores fundamental physical properties of various van der Waals
heterostructures using Raman spectroscopy of interlayer phonons (typically at
low frequencies) and photoluminescence. The research projects include: (i)
Develop an interlayer-phonon-based Raman technique to characterize the
rotational angle and Moire wavelength of heterostructure superlattices. This
study offers a simple method of characterizing Moire pattern features without
using scanning tunneling microscopy; (ii) Explore the electronic, optical, and
vibrational properties of complex multilayer van der Waals heterostructures and
the indirect-direct gap transition in MoS2 bilayers intercalated with different
middle layer materials. This research provides crucial guidance in designing
novel electronic and optoelectronic devices using stacked van der Waals
multilayers; (iii) Study van der Waals heterostructures that involve Dirac
materials. In particular, the research team investigates the change in the
electronic band structure of twisted bilayer graphene after it is placed or
sandwiched between hexagonal boron nitride. This study probes the change in the
electronic and vibrational properties of graphene at the hetero-interface; (iv)
Probe the interaction between carriers and interlayer phonons in twisted bilayer
graphene devices with a dual-gate. This study explores the Coulomb interaction
between two charged graphene layers and the interlayer potential formed upon
gating. The techniques and methods established in these research activities can
be applied to heterostructures formed from any two-dimensional crystals stacked
in any desired sequence.