* 1552320
* EAGER:  Development of Atom Efficient Single Site Catalysts for Low Temperature Hydrocarbon and CO Emissions Removal
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2015,06/30/2017
* Jean-Sabin McEwen, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 06/30/2017
* USD 120,035.00

The project marries computational advances in "single site" catalysis with the
demands of automotive catalysis to provide theory-driven aid to experimental
design of low-temperature active and thermally stable next-generation automotive
catalysts. This is an ambitious undertaking given the complex reaction
environment of automotive catalysts and the broad range of conditions that they
experience over their useful life. The proposed research will aid the
implementation of high-efficiency low-temperature combustion systems by enabling
the design of catalysts capable of meeting strict emission standards in a low-
temperature exhaust environment, while also minimizing reliance on expensive
noble metals. Development of automotive catalysts has historically relied on
trial-and-error catalyst screening, with little theoretical underpinning. This
proposal has the potential to develop a theory-aided approach to catalyst
design, thereby opening up the design space while reducing the experimental
burden.

The proposal lays groundwork for a comprehensive, predictive, and experimentally
validated model of single site catalysis for low-temperature automotive emission
oxidation of carbon monoxide and hydrocarbons. It builds on recent advances in
catalysis that speak to the ability to synthesize single site catalysts and
demonstrate their advantages over supported metal clusters or particles in a
number of reactions. The extension of these advances to automotive catalysis is
not straight-forward, however. Automotive catalysis is more complicated than
most catalytic applications because of the complex and dynamic changes in
exhaust gas environment and broad operating temperature ranges under which the
catalysts must function over a long life. The proposal will build on
experimental progress in the synthesis of single site palladium-containing
catalysts, as well as previous work demonstrating the effectiveness of lanthana
for stabilizing noble metal particles. The dual thrust to predict single site
catalyst properties needed for both low-temperature conversion efficiency and
durability at high temperatures represents an ambitious extension of
computational efforts over previous work. The resulting methods and
understanding should be generalizable to other systems. The investigator has
also included in the proposal plans to integrate computational catalysis into an
educational program for high school students aimed at illustrating the
importance of fundamental chemistry for advances in alternative energy fields.
Those programs will be conducted in collaboration with educational institutions
and existing programs that aim to provide opportunities for minorities.