* 1552184
* CAREER: The Role of Inhibition in light adaptation of the OFF Retinal Pathway
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2023
* Erika Eggers, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Quentin Gaudry
* 06/30/2023
* USD 900,000.00

When going from a dark movie theater into the bright sunshine, vision is
initially overwhelmed by the suddenly bright light levels, but after time we are
again able to see well. This process, called light adaptation, involves a change
in the sensitivity of neurons in the retina of the eye. Although retinal
adaptation to brighter light levels is a crucial function of the visual system,
the changes that happen in the retina to enable this adaptation are not well
understood. Previous work has suggested that release of the chemical dopamine
from retinal neurons is responsible for light adaptation, but the details of how
this works are not clear. This study will determine what changes are occurring
in the retina to allow adaptation to increasing light levels and determine how
dopamine is changing visual signaling. Additionally, since the retina is an
easily accessible part of the brain, these experiments can be used as a model
for how dopamine changes the responses of groups of neurons. Dopamine signaling
is important throughout the brain and in disorders such as Parkinson's disease.
As part of this research, educational materials will also be developed with
students to explain how light adaptation works and the importance of this
process for normal vision. These materials will be used to increase interest in
science for high school students, many of whom are underrepresented in science,
and the public through outreach at a yearly festival and web interactions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Light adaptation is a crucial retinal signaling mechanism
that allows the visual system to avoid saturation by resetting the gain of
neuronal signaling. Light adaptation also increases visual acuity by increasing
the response of ganglion cells, the output neurons of the retina, to small light
stimuli. Inhibition of bipolar cells, which relay information to ganglion cells,
influences ganglion cell spatial resolution. Therefore, light adaptation
modulation of bipolar cell inhibition could increase visual acuity. However, the
role of inhibition in light adaptation is not known. Modulation of inhibition
may be especially important to adaptation of the retinal pathway that responds
to the offset of light (OFF), as inhibitory inputs to OFF-bipolar cells switch
between dim light rod and bright light cone sources and light adaptation
decreases the spatial extent of inhibition to OFF-bipolar cells. This suggests a
model where light adaptation narrowing of bipolar cell inhibition underlies the
changes in ganglion cell spatial signaling. It is unknown how narrowing of OFF-
bipolar cell inhibition will affect OFF-ganglion cell signaling or what
mechanisms underlie the OFF-bipolar cell changes. Dopamine is a key
neuromodulator of retinal light adaptation. Dopamine-mediated uncoupling of gap
junctions and/or increases in inhibitory connections between upstream neurons
might narrow OFF-bipolar cell inhibition. However, the role of dopamine
modulation of physiological inhibition is not known. These proposed mechanisms
for light adaptation of OFF pathway inhibition and their effects on retinal
acuity will be tested using a combination of single-cell electrophysiology,
morphology, genetic mouse models and optogenetic activation of retinal neurons.