* 1552668
* CAREER:Robust Verification of Cyber-Physical Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 01/15/2016,12/31/2022
* Scott DeLoach, Kansas State University
* Continuing Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 12/31/2022
* USD 446,681.00

Cyber-physical systems (CPSs) have become pervasive in the modern society,
enabling transformative applications in the transportation, healthcare and
energy sectors. However, the reliable development of CPSs remains an outstanding
challenge. At the design level, hybrid systems theory provides a rich set of
techniques and tools for ensuring correctness of high level functional
properties such as safety and liveness. Current analysis techniques at the
implementation level focus primarily on detecting low level runtime errors such
as buffer overflows and divide by zero. A holistic approach to verifying
functional specifications will considerably enhance the reliability scenario of
CPSs development. This project investigates a robust verification methodology
that guarantees functional correctness of the implementation by a "deeper"
analysis on the design. More precisely, robust verification not only ensures
that a design satisfies a given specification, but that small perturbations in
the design still satisfy the specification. The perturbations on the design
account for the deviations in the implementation with respect to the actual
system. The proposed research investigates new foundations, abstractions and
verification algorithms for robust analysis, in light of novel quantitative
and/or topological aspects of robustness. In addition, prototype tools are
developed to enable practical application and evaluation. The successful
completion of the research will advance the knowledge in the fields of formal
methods and hybrid control systems by leveraging ideas from control theory,
dynamical systems theory, optimization theory and satisfiability modulo
theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;New cross-disciplinary courses at the undergraduate
and graduate levels in hybrid control system design and analysis will be
developed and taught. Activities for pre-college students involving programming
with physical systems will be conducted towards increasing their interest in
STEM related careers. Undergraduates, especially those from minority and
underrepresented groups, will be recruited and mentored through involvement in
research and outreach activities. The success of this research will force a
quantum jump in the existing verification methodologies for CPSs, in particular,
in the domains of automotive and aerospace systems, by bridging the gap in the
analyses at the design and implementation phases.