* 1552368
* CAREER: Multiphysics Damage and Healing of Rocks for Performance Enhancement of Geo-Storage Systems - A Bottom-Up Research and Education Approach
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2020
* Chloe Arson, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Giovanna Biscontin
* 12/31/2020
* USD 500,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Program grant will enhance
engineers' understanding of the formation and healing of rock fractures as it
pertains to underground energy and waste storage systems, while providing
undergraduate students from a diverse background with both research and
international collaboration experiences. The safe storage of energy or waste
products in underground rock formations relies on an understanding of the
fractures that exist within the rock mass, and the fluid flow through the
fracture system. Currently, engineers have an incomplete understanding of how
microscopic theories of fracture formation and the healing of fractures can be
used to develop models of rock mass behavior. Therefore, the objectives of this
CAREER award are to: understand and predict changes in rock fractures; develop
numerical models of fracture networks; formulate and assess innovative models of
fracture damage and healing; and interpret rock deformation and fluid flow
instabilities resulting from fracture damage and healing. In addition to
preventing subsidence, borehole instabilities and contaminant leakage, the
proposed models will be applicable for optimizing containment and shielding
properties of geomaterials and assessing the environmental impact of energy
geotechnologies. Research and education activities will be integrated to train
undergraduate students in design and research, engage graduate students in
mentoring and public deliberation, and foster long-term international
collaborations. The PI will collaborate with a number of educational and
outreach programs at Georgia Tech in order to assess the effectiveness of the
activities and improve the participation of students, especially those from
under-represented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific research goal of
this CAREER plan is to understand and predict the evolution of rock
microstructural and poromechanical behavior upon chemo-mechanical damage and
healing. Geological storage in salt and carbonates is used as an illustrative
problem for investigating the following fundamental scientific questions: why do
pores and cracks heal? how long do mechanical and hydraulic recovery take? how
much energy does healing require? A major expected outcome of this project is a
new continuum damage and healing theoretical framework for rock mechanics, which
uses a minimal set of explanatory dissipation variables defined as moments of
probability of microstructure descriptors. Original contributions include: a
theory to predict pore geometry evolution upon multi-physics damage and healing
processes; creative mathematical models to describe pore network topology with
geometric variables that control damage and healing; fundamental relationships
between pore-scale healing time and macroscopic mechanical recovery time - a
step forward to bridge poromechanics and damage mechanics; innovative
computational methods to predict mechanical instabilities and percolation
thresholds upon damage and healing, verified in collaboration with leading
experimentalists; and realistic multi-physics simulations of geological storage,
in collaboration with industry partners. The rigorous integration of topology,
thermodynamics, poromechanics and continuum mechanics will transform the theory
of damage and healing mechanics and provide a framework to interpret rock stress
path history from topology descriptors. Research findings will be useful to
recommend the conditions of moisture and temperature necessary to minimize
damage and/or enhance healing in rocks and to design safe and sustainable
geological storage systems. The education goal of this CAREER plan is to engage
an international and cross-disciplinary community of undergraduate and graduate
students in energy geotechnology research and engineering. Research, education
and outreach activities will be integrated by: collaborating with geoscientists
to train geosystems students on how to design and conduct rock mechanics
experiments; making students' thinking visible in undergraduate classes to
implement solution design strategies; engaging graduate students in public
deliberations on energy geotechnology; supervising a Vertically Integrated
Laboratory that will build a trans-generational, cross-disciplinary and
international scholar network, improve undergraduate students' learning outcomes
and inspire students in geomechanics; and creating a sustainable student
exchange program between Georgia Tech and top European institutions including
Ecole des Ponts Paris Tech (France).