* 1552355
* CAREER: Glycoside Hydrolase Processivity and Substrate Recognition Mechanisms
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2022
* Thomas Dziubla, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 04/30/2022
* USD 524,492.00

Abstract: Payne (1552355)&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will provide
fundamental understanding of the kinetics and thermodynamics by which a class of
enzymes, known as glycoside hydrolases (GHs), catalyze the breakdown of biomass
into sugars that can be processed further to fuels and chemicals. The knowledge
thus obtained will guide the bioengineering of these enzymes to improve their
efficiency and reduce the cost of renewable bio-based approaches to a
sustainable energy future. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;GHs break down crystalline
biomass material such as cellulose or chitin by processivity - the repeated
catalysis - or chewing away - of the bonds that hold the biomass material
together. A number of factors related to the detailed structure and composition
of both the GH and the biomass material affect the processivity. Although the
processive mechanism has been the focus of numerous structural and biochemical
studies, a clear connection between enzyme structure and processive function is
still lacking. To this end, the proposed research focuses on developing a
molecular-level understanding of the mechanisms governing GH processivity
through molecular modeling and thermodynamic calculations backed by experimental
biochemical characterization - the latter carried out with an international team
of researchers. Although the work will primarily be directed at a model GH
system utilizing chitinases, the goal will be to develop a generalized theory of
GH processivity that will be assessed in the more common (and more complicated)
cellulosic materials that will eventually form the basis of a renewable biomass
fuel industry. The proposal also involves related elements of education and
outreach - notably international research experiences for graduate students,
dissemination of high performance computing tools to underserved research
communities, and outreach to young girls aimed at exciting them about
opportunities in science and engineering, especially in the biochemical area.