* 1552838
* CAREER: Hierarchical Control for Large-Scale Cyber-Physical Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2019
* Wei Zhang, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Ralph Wachter
* 07/31/2019
* USD 286,329.00

Many complex engineering systems involve interactions among a large number of
agents with coupled dynamics and decisions due to their shared environment and
resources. Such systems are often operated using a hierarchical architecture,
where a coordinator determines some macroscopic control signal to steer the
population to achieve a desired group objective while respecting local
preferences and constraints for individual agents. Examples include electricity
demand response programs, ground and air transportation systems, data center
power management, robotic networks, among others. The goal of this project is to
establish new control and game theoretic foundations, along with numerical
algorithms, to enable formal and scalable design of hierarchical population
control systems.

In contrast to the existing literature that primarily focuses on static
strategic agents, this project will consider both strategic and non-strategic
agents with nontrivial dynamics. The project involves three tasks. (i) First, it
will establish control theoretic foundations for hierarchical population control
of non-strategic agents (HPCN). Each non-strategic agent is associated with a
predefined local response rule and is modeled as a hybrid system. A novel
approach based on abstraction of stochastic hybrid systems (SHS) will be
investigated to solve the HPCN problem. (ii) The project will also develop a
uniform-price dynamic mechanism design framework for hierarchical population
control of strategic agents (HPCS). The framework is based the near-Nash
equilibrium concept that can facilitate the analysis of the game-theoretic
population behaviors. Advanced bi-level optimization algorithms will also be
developed to address the computational challenges associated with the proposed
mechanism design approach. (iii) The two proposed hierarchical population
control frameworks will be used to study important demand response applications
for the future power grid.

This research will significantly advance our understanding in complex
engineering systems that involve coordination of a large population of dynamic
agents. In collaboration with the Pacific Northwest National Laboratory, the
project is also expected to yield practical algorithms and numerical tools for
the design of electricity demand response programs. Moreover, the project will
impact several education activities such as use of new pedagogical tools in
teaching, involvement of undergraduate students in research, and research
integration with teaching.