* 1552782
* CAREER: Biomechanics of Red Blood Cell Adhesion and Deformability
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2022
* Umut Gurkan, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Laurel Kuxhaus
* 06/30/2022
* USD 665,000.00

Healthy red blood cells are soft and are not sticky so that they can slip easily
through even the narrowest of blood vessels in the body. Increased stiffness and
stickiness of red blood cells can impair blood circulation and this does occur
in many diseases and conditions, including anemias, sepsis, malaria, lupus,
heavy metal poisoning, blood transfusion complications, diabetes, cancer, kidney
and cardiovascular diseases, obesity, and some neurological disorders. Medicine
does not have a complete understanding of the mechanical changes of red blood
cells in these conditions. This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER)
project will advance our knowledge of red blood cell adhesion and deformability
in the microcirculation using special built micro-channel devices that have
adjustable stickiness where one can see the deformation of the cells as they
flow, deform and interact with the micro-vessel walls. The principal
investigator will use the beautiful imagery and the scientific art that arises
from these experiments to reach out to the community through the Science,
Technology and Art (STArt) education program that will be developed in
collaboration with the Cleveland Institute of Art. The STArt program aims to
stimulate scientific curiosity and interest in high school students through
hands-on, scientific art themed workshops.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
objective of this CAREER award is to test the hypothesis that a red blood cell's
adhesion affinity is a function of its deformability and phosphatidylserine
translocation to the outer membrane surface. The exceptional deformability of
the red blood cell is facilitated by its membrane skeleton, which is physically
connected to the adhesion receptors. Phosphatidylserine is a phospholipid
located on the inner leaflet of the cell membrane. Even though the translocation
of phosphatidylserine to the outer membrane surface has been correlated to
adhesion, its role in red blood cell's increased adhesion affinity remains
unclear. The research will systematically investigate, at the single cell level,
the biomechanical properties of live red blood cells in microphysiological blood
flow. The new knowledge gained will answer important questions: (1) which of the
red blood cell receptors are associated with higher adhesion affinity and lower
deformability? (2) Is the adhesion affinity a surrogate measure of red blood
cell's deformability, phosphatidylserine translocation, and function? (3) Can
the unhealthy red blood cells be identified and excluded from the circulation
solely based on their adhesion affinity and reduced deformability? Proposed
research will pioneer an integrated understanding of red blood cell adhesion and
deformability, which may be pertinent to any disease accompanied by
microcirculatory impairment.