* 1552651
* CAREER: Common Links in Algorithms and Complexity
* CSE,CCF
* 12/15/2015,05/31/2017
* Ryan Williams, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 05/31/2017
* USD 209,701.00

The field of algorithm design builds clever programs that can quickly solve
computational problems of interest. The field of complexity theory
mathematically proves "lower bounds," showing that no such clever program exists
for (other) core problems. Intuitively, it appears that these two fields work on
polar-opposite tasks. The major goal of this project is to discover counter-
intuitive new connections between algorithm design and complexity theory, and to
study the scientific consequences of the bridges built by these connections. It
is hard to overestimate the potential impact---societal, scientific, and
otherwise---of a theoretical framework which would lead to a fine-grained
understanding of what computers can and cannot do. This project is focused on
exploring concrete steps towards a better understanding, via studying links
between the seemingly opposite tasks of algorithms and lower bounds. Another
goal of the project is to bring complexity research closer to real-world
computing, and to introduce practitioners to aspects of complexity that will
impact their work. A final goal is educational outreach, through online forums
dedicated to learning computer science, teaching summer school courses, and
collaboration with the media on communicating theoretical computer science
(including links between algorithms and lower bounds) to the
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI seeks common links between algorithms and
complexity: counter-intuitive similarities and bridges which will lead to
greater insight into both areas. A central question in computer science is the
famous P versus NP open problem, which is about the difficulty of combinatorial
problems which admit short solutions. Such problems can always be solved via
?brute force?, trying all possible solutions. Can brute force always be replaced
with a cleverer search method? This question is a major one; no satisfactory
answers are known, and concrete answers seem far away. The conventional wisdom
is that in general, brute force cannot be entirely avoided, but it is still
mathematically possible that most natural search problems can be solved
extremely rapidly, without any brute force. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Computational
lower bounds are among the great scientific mysteries of our time: there are
many conjectures and beliefs about them, but concrete results are few. Moreover,
the theory is hampered by ?complexity barriers? which show that most known proof
methods are incapable of proving strong lower bounds. The PI's long-term
objective is to help discover and develop new ways of thinking that will
demystify lower bounds, and elucidate the limits of possibilities of computing.
The PI hypothesizes that an algorithmic perspective on lower bounds is the key:
for example, earlier work of the PI shows that algorithms for the circuit
satisfiability problem (which slightly beat brute force search) imply circuit
complexity lower bounds. The PI has developed several new links within the past
few years, and has proposed many more to be investigated. Among the various
angles explored in this project, the potential scientific applications are vast,
ranging from logical circuit design, to network algorithms, to improved hardware
and software testing, to better nearest-neighbor search (with its own
applications in computer vision, DNA sequencing, and machine learning), and to
cryptography and security.