* 1552487
* CAREER: Network Theory of Critical Interdependent Infrastructures
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Filippo Radicchi, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Yueyue Fan
* 08/31/2021
* USD 577,778.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) grant will establish an
integrated research and education program devoted to the study of critical
infrastructures from the perspective of network theory. Physical networks -
transportation, water, food supply, communications and power generation and
transmission - and transactional/relational infrastructures - financial and
trade networks - represent fundamental assets for society and the economy,
serving as the backbone for the flow of information, people and goods. A complex
mesh of interdependencies among critical infrastructures is at the basis of
their operational effectiveness. For example, the power grid depends on the
communication network for control, and the communication network relies on the
power grid for electricity supply. The presence of interdependencies also
dramatically augments the vulnerability of infrastructures by boosting the
potential for cascading failures due to the amplification of small-scale initial
failures or targeted attacks to catastrophic proportions, and substantially
delaying restoration after collapse. Although the urgency of these issues has
been stressed since 1996 by the President's Commission on Critical
Infrastructure Protection, recent infrastructure collapses that have followed
extreme events such as terrorist attacks and natural disasters highlight a
growing risk of catastrophic failures. This project will develop a new
generation of analytic and computational methods to better understand the role
of interdependencies among critical infrastructures in their security,
stability, robustness and resilience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study of critical
interdependent infrastructures has a relatively long tradition in engineering
research. Typical approaches involve agent-based simulations, economic
theoretical analyses, system dynamical equations, and reliability theory. This
project contributes to the advancement of this field by studying
interdependencies among critical infrastructures using tools and methods from
statistical physics of complex networks. This is a potentially transformative
approach, so far attempted only in theoretical studies of coupled random network
structures, but not in the analysis of real-world critical infrastructures. The
research goal of this project is to develop a unifying network theory able to
describe different types of critical interdependent infrastructures within a
single modeling framework. The framework will allow the understanding of basic
features of these systems, and how microscopic properties of their structure and
dynamics lead to significant emergent phenomena at the global scale. The
mathematical analysis enabled by the framework will provide ready-to-use
formulas of intervention for fast recovery after catastrophic failures. These
methods will be applied to critical interdependent infrastructure systems, such
as energy production and distribution, waterways, pipelines, communication
networks, and multimodal transportation networks, within the United States. A
key educational goal of this CAREER award is to integrate novel undergraduate
and graduate courses dedicated to the network theory of critical interdependent
infrastructures into the Informatics and Engineering programs at Indiana
University.