* 1552464
* CAREER: Data-Driven Models for Biological Dynamics
* BIO,MCB
* 02/15/2016,01/31/2017
* Steve Presse, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Gregory W. Warr
* 01/31/2017
* USD 378,426.00

The living cell is an active environment where large biological molecules (such
as proteins or DNA) move, collide and react. Current experiments observe these
processes indirectly in living systems and as a result, interpreting data from
indirect observation is a key challenge in understanding and mathematically
describing what happens inside cells. The proposed work will contribute to the
development of quantitative biology by considering how data-driven models can be
inferred from currently available experimental data. This modeling will produce
novel theoretical frameworks to capture how the diffusion of biomolecules and
their fluctuating shapes ultimately sustain life. Activities focused on the
intersection of biology and physics will be undertaken with the goal of
advancing science literacy. A new introductory course in biophysics will be
developed for a wide audience, and several outreach activities will be
undertaken. Undergraduate and high school students will be engaged in the
research through the American Chemical Society Project SEED, with special
emphasis placed on recruiting women and students from underprivileged
backgrounds. A Summer Camp Program (for ages 8-12) will be held at the
Indianapolis Zoo on the subject "The Bacterial Serengeti: exploring the
bacterial fauna".&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project has two overall goals: 1)
Extracting models of conformational dynamics of single molecules (from single
molecule force spectroscopy) that will help go beyond the Markov model paradigm
and characterize conformational memory of biomolecules linking dynamics and
function in nascent chains, folded proteins under varying conditions, as well as
active (ATP-hydrolyzing) motors; 2) Developing data-driven frameworks for
intracellular anomalous diffusion in the complex crowded cellular environment
directly from fluorescence correlation spectroscopy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award is supported jointly by the Cellular Dynamics and Function program in the
Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences and by the Physics of Living
Systems program in the Division of Physics.