* 1552287
* CAREER: Bridging spectroscopy measurement and molecular structures in H-bonded materials by advanced ab initio theories
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/2016,02/28/2021
* Xifan Wu, Temple University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 02/28/2021
* USD 475,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY

Hydrogen-bonded materials, such as water and aqueous solutions, are important
materials. This award supports theoretical and computational research and
educational activities aimed at achieving a fundamental understanding of the
molecular structures and electronic properties of such systems as liquid water,
solid ice, and aqueous ionic solutions, by utilizing parameter-free quantum
mechanical simulations. Professor Wu uses a combination of advanced molecular
dynamics simulations and accurate electronic structure methods based on
electronic excitation theory to predict the spectral properties of hydrogen-
bonded materials and correlate the computed features with experimental
spectroscopy measurements. Such computational modeling studies deepen our
understanding of the physical, chemical, and biological processes closely
related to life sciences, and provide useful guidance for designing photovoltaic
and catalytic reactions of technological relevance in liquid water.

Prof. Wu trains graduate, undergraduate, and high school students in
computational materials science by involving them at different levels in various
aspects of his research program in hydrogen-bonded materials. Furthermore, Prof.
Wu conducts outreach activities in close collaboration with local high school
teachers in New Jersey by developing conceptual physics courses and exposing
high school students and teachers to modern advances in hydrogen-bond structures
of various important materials.

TECHNICAL SUMMARY

Hydrogen-bonded materials, such as water and aqueous solutions, are important
materials. This award supports theoretical and computational research and
educational activities aimed at achieving a fundamental understanding of the
molecular structures and electronic properties of such systems as liquid water,
solid ice, and aqueous ionic solutions, by utilizing various first principles
electronic structure techniques. Professor Wu carries out the ab initio
molecular dynamics simulations based on van der Waals inclusive hybrid density
functionals on a variety of systems including the Hofmeister series, solvated
hydroxide, solvated hydronium, solvated OH radical, and benchmark calculations
for liquid water and solid ice. Furthermore, Professor Wu studies valence and
core electron excitations using GW many-body perturbation theory, compares them
with available experimental spectra, and assigns spectral features to hydrogen-
bond structural properties.

The research involves methodological development and refinement. The hybrid
functional inclusive van der Waals density functional is efficiently implemented
on massively parallel computational platforms within the ab initio molecular
dynamics framework. In addition, the static-GW with model screening is further
extended to include the energy dependence of quasiparticles and includes the
electronic screening based on random phase approximation with efficient software
implementations, particularly for large disordered systems.

The PI will train graduate, undergraduate, and high school students in
computational materials science by involving them at different levels in various
aspects of his research program in hydrogen-bonded materials. Furthermore, the
PI will conduct outreach activities in close collaboration with local high
school teachers in New Jersey by developing conceptual physics courses and
exposing high school students and teachers to modern advances in hydrogen-bond
structures of various important materials.