* 1552220
* CAREER:   Point Defects in Two-dimensional Material Systems: Fundamentals and New Perspectives
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2022
* Sefaattin Tongay, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Lane
* 05/31/2022
* USD 500,000.00

Nontechnical Description: It is known that introducing defects or imperfections
into a crystalline material, either by removing atoms or adding foreign atoms,
can change material's properties, and this approach has led to many ground
breaking applications such as light emitting diodes, transistors and sensors.
Today, there is a good understanding of how to manipulate these imperfections to
achieve the desired properties of traditional semiconductors such as silicon.
However, researchers are just starting to understand how to use defects to
manipulate a whole new class of materials: two-dimensional (2D) semiconductors
that are atomically thin, which have an unusual set of properties and are
expected to perform far better than traditional semiconductors in some regards.
The research component of this CAREER award is to explore innovative ways to
introduce defects in 2D materials and to study how defects change the 2D
material's properties. One way this can be done is to remove atoms by striking
the material with energetic particles. Alternatively, foreign atoms with
different electrical charges can be anchored in their place. The research team
uses state-of-the-art techniques to visualize how these imperfections form, how
they react and how they impact the material properties. This project also brings
nanoscience and 2D material concepts to the public through open house events and
summer camps for high-school students, as well as participation of graduate and
undergraduate students in active research. Findings from this project are
disseminated through journal publications, conference presentations, and a
publicly-accessible 2D materials database, which the team is developing in
collaboration with a non-profit organization,
MaterialsProject.org.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: This research
project aims to uncover the physics of point defects, in particular those in
emerging 2D semiconducting materials such as WS2, GeSe, GaSe, and InTe. The
research team uses advanced high-resolution spectroscopy and microscopy
techniques to investigate chalcogen vacancies, anti-site defects, and
substitutionals. Defects are introduced at desired defect concentrations during
growth or after growth by alpha-particle irradiation to achieve desired material
properties. Nano-photoluminescence, ultra-fast spectroscopy, and electron energy
loss spectroscopy measurements allow determination of energy states of defects
and effects of defects on the excitonic complexes, optical absorption and
emission characteristics, as well as electronic structure of 2D materials.
Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) studies help to determine structural
characteristics, relaxation dynamics, and diffusion speed of defects. The
overarching goal is to measure, analyze, and establish the roles of point
defects in determining the optical and electronic properties of select 2D
semiconducting materials and explore new routes to control material properties
on demand.