* 1552909
* AF: EAGER: Small Space Algorithms and Representations for Graph Optimization Problems
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2017
* Sanjeev Khanna, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 08/31/2017
* USD 125,000.00

As very large data sets become more prevalent, there is a rapidly growing
interest in design of sublinear algorithms (algorithms whose resource
requirements are substantially smaller than the size of the input) and in
developing compressed representations of data. The focus of this project is to
design sublinear space algorithms and compressed representations for several
fundamental graph optimization problems that are intrinsic to many applications
in computer science and related disciplines. The proposed research is broadly
divided into two parts. The first part of the project considers sublinear space
algorithms for graph optimization problems in the streaming model where an input
graph is presented as a sequence of edge updates. In particular, this part of
the project studies streaming algorithms for the problems of approximating the
maximum cut and the maximum matching. In the second part of the proposal, a new
class of sketching problems is introduced whereby the goal is to create a
compressed representation that allows for arbitrary updates to a pre-specified
subset of the input data. The proposed research considers design of updatable
compact sketches for problems concerning cuts, flows, and matchings in graphs.
Small space algorithms and compressed representations that compute and describe
relevant properties of graphs will play an increasingly important role as vast
amounts of networked data is being collected and processed in diverse
application domains. The research proposed here will go hand-in-hand with
educational and student-training initiatives. The PI will integrate topics from
proposed research in advanced courses that will provide focused research
opportunities for graduate and undergraduate students. The project will also
support and train PhD students whose dissertation work will be aligned with the
proposed research. The project will also support PI?s on-going work on
introducing high-school students to exciting ideas in theoretical computer
science.