* 1552687
* CAREER: Scaling-up Resistive Synaptic Arrays for Neuro-inspired Computing
* CSE,CCF
* 02/01/2016,12/31/2018
* Shimeng Yu, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 12/31/2018
* USD 239,688.00

Neuro-inspired deep learning algorithms have demonstrated their power in
executing intelligent tasks such as image and speech recognition. However,
training of such deep neural networks requires huge amount of computational
resources that are not affordable for mobile applications. Hardware acceleration
of deep learning, with orders of magnitude improvement in speed and energy
efficiency, remains a grand challenge for the conventional hardware based on
silicon CMOS technology and von-Neumann architecture. As the learning algorithms
extensively involve matrix operations, neuro-inspired architectures that
leverage the distributed computing in the neuron nodes and localized storage in
the synaptic networks are very attractive. The ultimate goal of this project is
to advance the neuro-inspired computing with emerging nano-device technologies
towards a self-learning chip. A chip that learns in real-time and consumes low-
power can be placed at frontend sensors, bringing broad benefits for a number of
current applications. The PI will establish close collaboration with industry
through student internships and technology transfer. The plan for integration of
research and education will train students with interdisciplinary skills. The
cross-layer nature of this project ranging from semiconductor device, circuit
design, electronic design automation, and machine learning is expected to
provide an ideal platform for this educational goal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
technical goal of this project is to overcome the challenges that prevent
scaling up of the crossbar array size for neuro-inspired architecture. Resistive
devices with continuous multilevel states have been proposed to function as
synaptic weights in the crossbar architecture. However, with the increase of the
array size, issues associated with device yield, device variability, and array
parasitics will arise and may degrade the system performance. The PI plans to
tackle these challenges by exploiting hierarchical research efforts from
devices, circuits and architectures. The outcome of the research includes device
compact model, circuit-level benchmark simulator for estimating the
area/latency/power of the crossbar array macro, and architectural tool for
efficiently mapping the learning algorithms into the crossbar architecture. The
PI has established a custom fabrication channel for tape-out of resistive
devices on top of CMOS peripheral circuits via his collaboration with academic
partners. The prototype chip with measured data is expected to make a strong
impact on this field, which previously relied on the simulations for predicting
large-scale array performance.