* 1552375
* CAREER: Engineered Spatially Periodic Structure Design Integrated with Damage Detection Philosophy
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2021
* Didem Ozevin, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Gianluca Cusatis
* 05/31/2021
* USD 515,842.00

The research objective of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award
is to enable civil engineers to design bridges and other critical structures so
that the structure will naturally provide signals about its structural state
with only a minimum installation of sensors. This will result in a safer and
more resilient civil infrastructure as new construction or retrofitting
incorporates these designs. This is significant because critical structures have
been failing without sufficient warning despite the fact that the cracks in
these structures were already being inspected and monitored with the latest
modern techniques. The research has the potential to transform the field of
structural engineering by detecting damage at the earliest stage. The
educational impact of the research will include modifying existing steel and
prestressed concrete design courses to introduce damage detection concepts to
undergraduate students, developing Honors College research projects, involving
high school and undergraduate students into research, and developing mentoring
program within female civil engineering students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this
research, an acoustic based damage detection method will be introduced into the
design stage by adding spatially periodic subsystems into structural elements.
Existing structures exhibit some localized periodicity such as perforated beams,
and equally spaced bolts in steel connections where spacing is based on stress
distribution and spacing requirements. The structural periodicity can be tuned
to make the design behave as an acoustic metamaterial, which can be able to
block, redirect, and strengthen propagating elastic waves released by newly
formed crack surfaces in the deployed infrastructure. Local resonance in an
acoustic metamaterial medium affects the elastic wave spectrum such that certain
wave frequencies cannot propagate to the medium if the frequency falls within
these stop bands. Once the periodicity is modified by damage, the elastic wave
spectrum will change, and then structural damage can easily be detected as a
disturbance of the normal resonant frequencies. Highly narrowband and sensitive
micro-mechanical transducers will be tuned to the stop band of the periodic
subsystem and positioned strategically such that one sensor will be sufficient
to detect the localized damage. The combined response of structural design and
periodic behavior will be tested with analytical and numerical models and
validated on laboratory scale structural tests.