* 1552045
* CEDAR: The First All-Sky Airglow Imaging Studies at Geomagnetic Conjugate Sites in Europe and Africa
* GEO,AGS
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2022
* Jeffrey Baumgardner, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* Alan Liu
* 09/30/2022
* USD 489,115.00

Proposal Number: AGS - 1552045&lt;br/&gt;Principal Investigator: Jeffrey
Baumgardner&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Boston University&lt;br/&gt;Proposal title:
CEDAR: The First All-Sky Airglow Imaging Studies at
Geomagnetic&lt;br/&gt;Conjugate Sites in Europe and
Africa&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;This project will significantly
advance an existing collaboration between Boston University, the South African
National Space Agency (SANSA), and the University of Padua in Italy to
investigate hemispheric asymmetries in upper atmospheric phenomena using a
unique configuration of magnetically conjugate all-sky imagers. The SANSA and
Padua expertise are essential to the project because instrumentation will be
physically located at these two sites. The imagers were previously developed by
BU and installed under separate funding. The Padua imager is the first
continuously operating all-sky upper-atmospheric imager on the European
continent. With its conjugate imager at SANSA, the pair is positioned to shed
new light on hemispheric asymmetries at altitudes where the atmosphere
transitions into the space environment. The research team, one of the premiere
groups in optical aeronomy, proposes to leverage the expertise of the
international collaborators and the new type of data set to make important
advances in understanding upper atmospheric dynamics. The project will provide
an international research experience for a graduate student who will complete a
doctoral thesis during the 5-year period of the project. The international
collaborations with institutions in Italy and South Africa that will be
supported by the project are both compelling and have strategic importance for
developing observing capabilities aimed at addressing frontier issues in upper
atmosphere - Geospace coupling. In support of this effort, the NSF Office of
International Science and Engineering (OISE) is co-funding this project by
supporting all requested international travel through the Global Venture
Fund.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The target phenomena for this primarily observational
investigation include: Stable Auroral Red (SAR) arcs, Medium Scale Traveling
Ionospheric Disturbances (MSTIDs), ionospheric latitude gradients, and
mesospheric waves - all dynamically important signatures of coupling between
atmospheric and geospace regions. Exploring the longitudinal and hemispheric
differences in these phenomena has the potential for increasing our
understanding of the dynamics of the coupled ionosphere-thermosphere-
magnetosphere system as it interacts with inputs from space and from the lower
atmosphere. The focus on a new longitude sector is important for several
reasons. Moving between longitude sectors introduces a changing offset between
the geomagnetic coordinate system that organizes space weather inputs and the
geographic coordinate system that organizes diurnal and seasonal changes in the
atmosphere. In addition, upward propagating disturbances from the lower
atmosphere due to weather systems or orography also change with location.
Geomagnetic conjugacy has the important effect of selecting locations where the
space weather disturbance inputs are similar for a given event but diurnal and
seasonal conditions are not. The potential then exists to begin to separate out
the effects attributable to the different types of inputs and their
interconnections.