* 1552571
* CAREER: Bioinspired Artificial Channel Water Treatment Membranes
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2016,10/31/2019
* Manish Kumar, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 10/31/2019
* USD 500,000.00

1552571&lt;br/&gt;Kumar&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this CAREER program is
to utilize the principal investigator's (PI's) diverse industrial and academic
experience to build an integrated research, education ,and outreach program
centered on bioinspired membranes for water treatment. This program is relevant
to food-energy-water nexus problems and solutions. Artificial water channels, a
new class of channels made using organic synthesis, were recently demonstrated
by the PI to have permeability properties similar to biological water channels,
or aquaporins, and their current synthetic analogs, carbon nanotubes. This
research approach has the potential to be a "game changer" in membrane treatment
of water.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical goal of this project is to design
and synthesize a new class of membranes based on peptide-appended pillar[5]arene
channels. The central hypothesis of the proposed work is: Solvent compatible
channels will enable the scalable synthesis of practical ultra-permeable
channel-based membranes. The scientific research objectives of the program are:
1) Understand the effect of angstrom-scale pore properties of diameter,
hydrophobicity, and charge, on selectivity and water permeability using model
peptide-appended pillar[5]arene channels; 2) Explore the compatibility of
peptide-appended pillar[5]arene channels with block copolymer membranes and use
this knowledge to maximize channel packing; and, 3) Correlate the structure and
transport properties of peptide-appended pillar[5]arene block copolymer
membranes. The tunable pore size will allow application of these membranes
across critical areas of water treatment and reuse including: 1) drinking water
treatment, 2) brackish water and seawater desalination, and, 3) wastewater
reuse. The compact nature of membrane technology will allow its implementation
in decentralized treatment as well as in low footprint centralized treatment in
dense urban areas. Overall, given the increasing pressure on water sources and
the interconnectedness of energy, food, and water operations, success in the
proposed program can have a significant impact on the food-energy-water nexus.
The proposed program will utilize bioinspired membranes and their connection to
water transport in natural systems, such as plants and the human body, to engage
diverse students at all levels (K-12 though graduate) in multidisciplinary
research and education activities. The three specific educational objectives of
the proposed program are: 1) Provide early stage mentorship to a diverse
multidisciplinary group of engineering undergraduates (UGs) through first year
seminars and research engagement; 2) Evaluate four UG research engagement models
common at universities; and 3) Expand and diversify a current water-science-
based K-12 summer camp and assess its impact on participants.