* 1552836
* CAREER: At-scale Analysis of Issues in Cyber-Security and Software Engineering
* CSE,CNS
* 05/15/2016,04/30/2022
* Christopher White, Vanderbilt University
* Continuing Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 04/30/2022
* USD 503,243.00

One of the most significant challenges in cybersecurity is that humans are
involved in software engineering and inevitably make security mistakes in their
implementation of specifications, leading to software vulnerabilities. A
challenge to eliminating these mistakes is the relative lack of empirical
evidence regarding what secure coding practices (e.g., secure defaults,
validating client data, etc.), threat modeling, and educational solutions are
effective in reducing the number of application-level vulnerabilities that
software engineers produce. This research aims to perform experiments analyzing
programming assignment submissions to Massively Open Online Courses (MOOCs)
before and after secure coding and threat modeling techniques are taught to
empirically measure their impact on the rate of security vulnerabilities in
assignment implementations. A key component of this research will be the use of
MOOC assignment specifications and variations that have the potential to be
affected by common cybersecurity vulnerabilities, such as problems with input
validation to web applications or privilege escalation on mobile platforms.
Because these critical security implementation issues will be known ahead of
time, the MOOC assignments will allow automated assessment of how successfully
each assignment implementation manages these security
issues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Key questions investigated by this research include
analyzing the impact of varying secure coding and threat modeling techniques on
vulnerability production in software, what level of abstraction these techniques
need to be taught at to be effective, the relative return on investment of
threat modeling vs. automated vulnerability assessment effort, and the
comparative effectiveness of making developers aware of security issues versus
requiring active application of secure coding and threat modeling techniques.
The broader impact of this research is substantial. Very little empirical data
is available for organizations to use to properly value the secure coding and
threat modeling techniques that have been developed. By creating a large body of
rigorous evidence to illustrate how effective (or possibly not effective)
different techniques are, the research will allow organizations to evaluate
their return on investment and improve the use of these techniques in the
software engineering process.