* 1552267
* CAREER: Distances in Random Media
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2022
* Michael Damron, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 05/31/2022
* USD 400,000.00

The projects to be supported by this CAREER award center on analyzing distances
in random environments. Some examples include finding travel times on road
systems with random traffic, the minimal number of connections between people in
social media graphs, and generally the total cost of moving from one place to
another in a medium where microscopic distances are unknown. The research
questions are combined with educational activities, like summer workshops on
probability theory for young researchers, summer projects with undergraduates,
and funding for a postdoctoral researcher. The proposed work has connections to
other areas of mathematical physics, like the structure of disordered magnets,
and satisfaction problems from computer science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
proposal details projects in probability theory and mathematical physics,
specifically in statistical mechanics. The main models are percolation models
and first-passage percolation (FPP), and the questions are to analyze the
extreme values of collections of random variables that are highly correlated. In
FPP, the main observable is the travel time from one node of a network to
another one in a random environment, and we plan to study the asymptotics and
fluctuations of this travel time, along with the structure of minimizers
(geodesics) and near-minimizers. Much of the research will involve Busemann
functions, which are tools from metric geometry used to study parallelism of
geodesic rays. It is expected that results obtained in these studies will have
consequences in spatial growth and epidemic models, other percolation problems,
disordered spin systems, and polymer models. The proposed work includes an
educational component, with funds for a postdoctoral researcher, summer
workshops, and summer projects for undergraduates.