* 1552784
* CAREER: experimental design and model reduction in systems biology
* CSE,CCF
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2021
* Peng Qiu, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 12/31/2021
* USD 444,517.00

Mathematical modeling is a crucial tool for understanding behaviors of complex
biological systems. In systems biology, mathematical models are often highly
complex, accounting for interactions among genes and proteins in the system. In
contrast, the amount of experimental data is almost always limited. This
information gap between complex model and limited data presents challenges to
model analysis, and obscures the insights into the key controlling mechanisms
underlying complex biological systems. Two intuitive strategies to close the
information gap are to obtain more data and to simplify the model. To obtain
more data, experimental design is needed to answer the following question: among
all possible new experiments, which one will bring in the maximal amount of new
information? To reduce the model, one needs to answer the question: among all
possible simplifications (e.g., remove or combine parameters or variables),
which one is the most appropriate? This project aims to develop novel
computational algorithms to answer both questions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Experimental design is a question that biologists consider
on a daily basis. Model reduction answers a fundamental biology question of how
to identify key mechanisms underlying complex biological systems. Rigorous
computational algorithms for these two questions are expected to greatly benefit
experimental studies of complex biological systems, provide insights that are
complementary to biologists' expert intuitions, and bring new knowledge to the
field, which is exactly the research focus of this project. The proposed
research will also lead to educational activities, such as development of
computational tutorials and workshops for biologists, development of novel
interdisciplinary courses at both undergraduate and graduate levels, as well as
research supervision and community outreach to high-school, undergraduate and
graduate students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although experimental design and model
reduction are two quite different problems, this project will develop a unified
computational framework and geometric interpretation to tackle both problems in
a systematic way. The key idea is to consider a mathematical model as a
manifold, and use its geometric features to guide experimental designs and model
reduction. The proposed research is organized into two thrusts. Thrust 1 aims to
develop computational algorithms to identify experiments that minimizes
parameter uncertainty, establish geometric interpretations. The proposed
algorithms will be implemented in open-source software, which will be offered to
researcher from diverse disciplines and will also serve as education tools.
Thrust 2 aims to develop model reduction algorithms based on manifold learning,
explore their ability to identify mechanisms for the adaptation behavior, and
apply the proposed algorithms to study protein signaling pathways and cell
differentiation processes. The research results will be disseminated to the
broad audience via peer reviewed publications, conference, seminars, and
workshop tutorials.