* 1552654
* CAREER: III: Modeling the Heterogeneity of Heterogeneity: Algorithms, Theories and Applications
* CSE,IIS
* 02/01/2016,11/30/2019
* Jingrui He, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Wei Ding
* 11/30/2019
* USD 407,895.00

Many high-impact data mining applications exhibit the co-existence of multiple
types of heterogeneity, such as different classification tasks, different data
sources, and different labeling oracles. It has broad applicability such as
fraud detection, manufacturing, transportation, healthcare, etc. This project
aims to answer two fundamental questions: (Q1) how to jointly model multiple
types of heterogeneity? (Q2) how to theoretically characterize the model
generalization performance? It is expected to advance the algorithmic and
theoretical foundations of state-of-the-art data mining techniques limited to a
single type of heterogeneity and the sparse literature on modeling dual
heterogeneity. The resulting algorithms and theories will be assimilated into
new curriculum development and multiple K-12 outreach activities. It could
benefit various real applications where multiple types of heterogeneity co-
exist. A close collaboration with industrial partners promises timely and
measurable impacts on two application domains, including security and
manufacturing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In particular, this project strives to
develop a unified, overarching data mining framework, with three complementary
research thrusts. The first thrust creates a suite of effective and efficient
algorithms for modeling the co-existence of multiple types of heterogeneity. The
key idea is to introduce a joint regularizer on the parameter space to model the
interplay among different types of heterogeneity. The second thrust
theoretically characterizes the model generalization performance, especially how
it is affected by (1) the co-existence of multiple types of heterogeneity and
(2) the violations to the underlying assumptions behind each type of
heterogeneity. The third thrust systematically evaluates the algorithms and
theories from the first two thrusts on real applications. More details can be
found at:
http://faculty.engineering.asu.edu/jingruihe/lab-2/projects/heterogeneous-
learning/.