* 1552567
* CAREER:   Examining Factors that Foster Low-Income Latino Middle School Students' Engineering Design Thinking in Literacy-Infused Technology and Engineering Classrooms
* EDU,DRL
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2022
* Amy Wilson-Lopez, Utah State University
* Continuing Grant
* Finbarr Sloane
* 12/31/2022
* USD 802,184.00

This is a Faculty Early Career Development Program (CAREER) proposal responsive
to Program Solicitation NSF 15-555. The CAREER program is a National Science
Foundation-wide activity that offers the most prestigious awards in support of
junior faculty who exemplify the role of teacher-scholars through outstanding
research, excellent education and the integration of education and research. The
project will investigate how literacy-based instructional strategies, as well as
contextual factors, mediate the development of engineering design thinking of
low-income Latino middle school students, including English learners, as they
attend technology and engineering courses. Engineering design thinking will
focus on fundamental aspects of this discipline, such as identifying a problem;
considering possible solutions; formulating a plan for the solution; developing,
implementing, and testing the plan; evaluating results, redesigning the plan,
and testing it again. Literacy-based instructional strategies will include
comprehension (summarizing, predicting, inferring, and questioning written
text); vocabulary (constructing explicit definitions by making connections to
their students' background knowledge); writing-to-learn heuristic (identifying a
need, defining a problem, generating solutions, testing, observing results,
making claims based on empirical evidence, optimizing, and reflecting on how
ideas change); and argumentation (thinking and articulating the relationships
between claims and evidence). Technology and Engineering courses are based on
the application of existing technology within the field of engineering through
the use of basic engineering principles and technical skills, while
simultaneously addressing national literacy, science, and engineering standards.
These courses are designed to acquaint students with the states' labor markets
and the employment opportunities for which they can
prepare.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study will focus on three research questions:
(1) How do literacy-based instructional strategies mediate the development of
engineering design thinking?; (2) How do features of technology and engineering
classroom settings seem to support students' literacy and engineering design?;
and (3) How do contextual factors appear to afford or constrain middle school
technology and engineering teachers' use of literacy-based instructional
strategies? Employing a staggered design-based research and its iterative cycle
of design, implementation, and retrospective analysis; the project will work
with (a) 10 urban and rural middle schools, (b) 10 teachers who teach mandatory
technology and engineering courses, (c) 22 classrooms, and (d) 660 students over
the course of 7 trimesters, as they integrate engineering design and literacy.
Each classroom will be organized in small groups (pairs of students)
representative of English language proficiencies (e.g., English learners at
different proficiency levels; non-English learners) to promote cooperative
learning, facilitate the implementation of the literacy strategies, and trace
evidence of conceptual change in the context of engineering thinking. Data
gathering strategies will include classroom observations, video- and audio-taped
of pairs working, pre- and post-surveys, and interviews with students and
teachers. Data interpretation strategies will include retrospective analysis,
microgenetic learning analysis, within-case analysis, cross-case analysis, and
constant comparative analysis to identify the features of the technology and
engineering classroom settings that support students' engagement with literacy.
Case studies will result in contextualized profiles of student learning in
particular learning environments, suitable for identifying the consequences
attributable to the treatments and describing the mechanisms and conditions
under which these relationships occur within the target population. The key
outcome of the proposed study will be a literacy-infused engineering design,
research-based and field-tested model of instruction for middle school Latino
students, potentially adaptable in other similar settings. A four-member
advisory board with expertise in engineering, engineering design, and literacy
instruction will oversee the work annually and assess completed tasks. An
external researcher will be responsible for the formative and summative
evaluation of the project.