* 1552424
* CAREER: Three-Dimensional Nanolithography with Inexpensive Hardware
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2016,04/30/2020
* Chih-Hao Chang, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 04/30/2020
* USD 500,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) grant will pioneer a novel three-
dimensional nanolithography system using light interactions with colloidal
nanoparticles. The ability to create a three-dimensional object at the nanoscale
has enabled unique material properties and device performances. However, almost
all of the existing lithography systems are based on complicated mechanical,
electronic, and optical hardware that can be prohibitively expensive. This award
supports fundamental research to provide the required knowledge for three-
dimensional nanolithography that is based solely on colloid-light interactions
instead of current expensive lithography, hence nanolithography with inexpensive
hardware. The new process focuses on colloidal nanoparticles, which will serve
as elementary building blocks that can manipulate and shape light for nanoscale
patterning. This system will enable scalable printing of complex three-
dimensional nanostructures for needleless drug delivery, multifunctional
materials, and stretchable sensors. The results of this research will find broad
application in biomedical, energy, electronic, and aerospace industries that
will benefit the U.S. economy and the advance its manufacturing sector. This
research is interdisciplinary and will further understandings in nanotechnology,
physics, materials science, and engineering. The integrated research and
educational goals will greatly increase engineering education in society through
direct engagement of K-12 students, teachers, parents, and the local community
in nanotechnology and nanomanufacturing.

This research aims to overcome the key barriers to existing 3D nanolithography
systems, which can have high operating cost, limited patterning resolution,
and/or low fabrication throughput. State-of-the-art direct-write approaches,
such as electron-beam, focused-ion-beam, two-photon lithography, can achieve
fine features and have played critical roles in laboratory device
demonstrations. However, these systems require serial patterning and layer-by-
layer processes that are time intensive and difficult to scale. This research
diverges from the traditional hardware-intensive approaches to lithography, and
replaces them with colloidal nanoparticles that are illuminated to generate a
wealth of near-field optical nanopatterns. By tailoring the light properties and
particle parameters, such interactions will be harnessed as a novel mechanism to
pattern complex 3D geometries. This approach combines the cost-effectiveness of
"bottom-up" self-assembly, while retaining the user-specified pattern
controllability of "top-down" lithography. The research team will perform
rigorous modeling of near-field light-particle interactions to investigate the
image formation mechanism, develop fabrication processes to control structure
geometry and material composition, mitigate process defects and increase yield
in a scale-up prototype system, and demonstrate continuous printing of complex
3D nanostructures into novel functional devices.