* 1552868
* CAREER: Distributed Nonlinear Neural Computation
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2022
* Xaq Pitkow, Baylor College of Medicine
* Continuing Grant
* Quentin Gaudry
* 05/31/2022
* USD 591,195.00

This project aims to understand how large populations of neurons transform their
encoded information to drive behaviors meaningful to the organism. This will be
accomplished in two ways. First, the research will derive new analysis methods
that experimentalists can use to interpret neural data from naturalistic tasks
of moderate complexity. Second, by the project will create a broadly applicable
computational framework for synthesizing these analyses into a theory of
probabilistic neural computation. Both of these components are informed by three
basic principles: information in the brain is distributed across many neurons,
sensory evidence is weighted by its reliability, and neural computation occurs
in multiple stages. Current analyses that connect animal behavior to neural
activities apply to tasks that are so simple that an animal would not actually
need a brain to solve them: the same computations could be accomplished in a
single step by wiring the sensory organs directly to the muscles. Clearly there
is a need to study more complex tasks that require multi-step computations, and
the proposed research will provide the rigorous statistical foundation needed to
analyze data from such studies. The research will also have a broader
educational impact by creating interactive teaching games that explain concepts
needed for thinking about big neuroscience data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The long-
term goal of this research program is to explain brain function by constructing
quantitative theories of how distributed nonlinear neural computation implements
principles of statistical reasoning. To accomplish this goal, this project will
create a normative theory for what information about naturalistic tasks should
be encoded in neural populations, and data analyses that can reveal which
aspects of that information are actually decoded. The normative theory is based
on probabilistic population codes, a model in which large-scale neural activity
patterns encode not just estimates of a stimulus, but also the reliability of
those estimates. This model is currently applied only to small-scale inference
problems, and one aim of this project is to extend this model by constructing
biologically plausible network models for complex naturalistic tasks involving
many interacting variables. The key components of this model, and indeed of any
model of naturalistic computation, are nonlinear operations. To determine
whether the posited nonlinear computations occur in a real brain, the other aim
of the project is to derive a statistical analysis technique centered on a novel
generalization of standard choice-related activity, termed nonlinear choice
correlation. By combining this measure with estimates of neural correlations,
experimentalists will be able to infer the class of distributed nonlinear
computations the brain uses from simultaneous recording of neural activity and
animal behavior.