* 1552164
* CAREER: New Models for Controlling InP Nucleation, Growth, and Luminescence using Magic-Sized Clusters and Targeted Surface Chemistry
* MPS,CHE
* 02/01/2016,07/31/2021
* Brandi Cossairt, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 07/31/2021
* USD 674,998.00

One of the hallmarks of modern society has been efficiently and effectively
transforming energy from one form to another, which has enabled increased human
productivity and aided economic development. As technologies mature, continued
progress on this front requires developing new materials with new and improved
function. As a result of their emergent, size-dependent properties,
nanomaterials are forecasted to significantly shape the future of next
generation energy technologies. Nanomaterial function relies on the ability of
scientists to access these materials with uniform and precise atomic structures.
This is an enormous challenge since nanomaterials contain hundreds to thousands
of atoms and even a few atoms out of place can significantly alter their
function. Research conducted under this CAREER award aims to address the
fundamental challenges in controlling the composition and interfaces of
nanomaterials with atom-level precision. The globally-relevant nature of this
research is leveraged to advance the major educational goals of this project,
namely to: 1) create an undergraduate specialization in Chemistry for Energy at
the University of Washington (UW), 2) develop hands-on demonstration materials
and workshops on the topic of colloidal nanoscience targeted to middle and high
school students in collaboration with the UW Phi Lambda Upsilon (National
Chemistry Honor Society) chapter, and 3) broaden participation in chemistry at
the undergraduate, graduate and professional level through work with the
Chemistry Women Mentorship Network, the UW Women in Chemical Sciences, and the
NSF-supported Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scientific goal of this award is to understand
how indium phosphide (InP) and related colloidal quantum dots (QDs) nucleate and
grow in solution and how to rationally modify that mechanism and the properties
of the resulting nanocrystals using surface chemistry. As a step toward this
goal, several themes are initiated to provide the experimental context in which
nucleation, growth, and photoluminescence modulation in these materials can be
studied. These include: 1) testing new models of InP nucleation using isolable,
structurally characterized and atomically precise magic-sized cluster
intermediates; 2) understanding how surface chemistry impacts the structure and
function of InP magic-sized clusters to gain access to general strategies for
anisotropic shape control and doping; and 3) discovering new post-synthetic
surface chemistry to turn-on and color-tune the luminescence of InP and related
QDs using Lewis acid coordination chemistry. The research approach focuses
primarily on the development of new hypothesis-driven synthetic methods as well
as spectroscopic and theoretical characterization of the properties and
electronic structure of these materials. Ongoing collaborations with experts in
time-dependent electronic structure theory, X-ray crystallography, and X-ray
photoelectron spectroscopy are leveraged to help answer fundamental structural
and mechanistic questions. The educational component addresses the need to train
the next generation of scientists and engineers to solve scientific grand
challenges through the development of relevant and applicable lecture materials,
learning tools and demonstrations.