* 1552642
* CAREER: Digital plasmonics-based nano-tweezing and nano-imaging for nano-particles
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/01/2016,01/31/2022
* Nathan Lindquist, Bethel University
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 01/31/2022
* USD 500,000.00

Light is an extremely powerful tool to probe, image, and even manipulate small
objects. Unfortunately, since light is a wave it is limited by diffraction, or
the tendency of all waves to spread out. As a result very small nano-sized
objects like the basic components of cells, single molecules, viruses, and nano-
devices are too small to beindividually probed, manipulated, and imaged directly
with light. However, the field of 'plasmonics' allows manipulating light with
sub-wavelength precision at the surface of metallic nano-structures. Plasmons
can squeeze their optical energy into ~10 nanometer spaces, an ideal size for
directly interacting with nano-sized objects that are on or near these metallic
surfaces. Precise manipulation of plasmons requires careful illumination with
light, and extremely sensitive optical recording equipment. PI has the
capability of digital and computational techniques to both: (1) excite plasmons
to directly manipulate nano-objects under computer control; and (2) carefully
record the behavior of plasmons to directly image the shape, size, and thickness
of nano-objects. These digital techniques will open up new opportunities for
scientists under precise computer control to directly study, probe, image,
manipulate, and interact with nano-sized objects such as DNA, protein molecules,
quantum dots, viruses, or nanoparticles. Furthermore, since this research is
being performed exclusively with undergraduate students, it promises to inspire,
motivate, and train many new young scientists and
engineers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The emergence of digital techniques that
explicitly model the propagation of light has revolutionized optical imaging and
optical tweezing through 'digital holographic microscopy' and 'computer
generated holography'. These techniques offer many advantages over conventional
optics such as: (1) imaging or generating the full complex wave; (2) fast beam
scanning with no moving parts; (3) dynamic manipulation of trapped objects; (4)
eliminating aberrations and imaging through scattering media; and (5) freedom to
choose any imaging modality, e.g. phase vs. amplitude contrast. Unfortunately,
these powerful digital techniques have not yet been fully realized in near-field
optics, and in particular, with plasmons. Indeed, plasmonic nano-imaging and
nano-tweezing have recently generated immense interest to trap, probe,
manipulate, and image nano-sized objects such as viruses, nanoparticles, and
individual molecules. Therefore, introducing powerful digital optical techniques
into the near-field promises to have a large impact. Specifically, a spatial
light modulator will be used to generate computer-controlled, tightly focused
plasmons for nano-tweezing and high-spatial frequency plasmonic fields for
super-resolution imaging. The phase of the plasmon waves will also be imaged by
designing interferometers directly into the nano-metallic substrates or by
recording a digital hologram of the reflected or transmitted light. These two
techniques will enable significant new capabilities such as: (1) super-
resolution, high-speed plasmonic phase-contrast imaging to image the thickness
of biological structures; (2) trapping and real-time manipulation of nano-metric
objects for nanofabrication or sorting; and (3) optical probing of trapped nano-
objects for spectroscopic characterization of single molecules.