* 1552061
* US/Morocco Workshop on Sensors and Wireless Networks for Smart Cities
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2017
* Driss Benhaddou, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Eyad Abed
* 08/31/2017
* USD 49,992.00

This project supports US researchers' participation in a joint US/Moroccan
workshop on research frontiers in the field of devices and wireless networks for
smart cities. The workshop will bring together experts in a collaborative
framework to discuss current challenges and converge on needed research
directions in sensors and wireless technologies that will enable smart cities.
In the smart cities area, most of the advances have been in deployment of
technologies and mostly in advanced countries. Significant research activities
are still lagging in this field. Morocco is very interested in applying smart
city concepts in the country, and is indeed building a new city envisioned to
include smart electric power grid and other smart city infrastructure. There is
therefore a real and timely need for advancing smart city research globally, and
for helping to establish strong smart city research in Morocco. Through this
workshop, US researchers in the field of sensors, wireless networks, and
computing for smart cities will be able to share experience and research ideas
with their Moroccan counterparts. The researchers will identify complementary
collaborative research projects, as well as ideas for enhancing education and
training. Successful implementation of the workshop recommendations can provide
an important example for other developing nations for planning of smart city
applications. The research challenges addressed by this workshop are global in
nature and there is great potential for broader impacts that address energy
issues and grand challenges and national needs in the arena of smart grid, smart
transportation networks, smart building, human modeling and efficient
development across a range of scales from individual space planning to urban and
regional planning and development. Gathering interdisciplinary experts from
around the world to address these issues presents broader impact opportunities.
The broader impacts and implications of this project stem from the fact that
Morocco is a developing country and there is opportunity to develop new cities
from the ground up whereas US technologies can be broadly applied and
marketed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent technical achievements in sensors and
controls integrated with active systems can allow for the ability to control the
built environment and tailor it to societal preferences, while still maintaining
optimal operation, energy conservation, sustainability and resiliency. With the
use of Wireless Sensor Networks (WSN), cities can move toward the concept of
smart cities. A smart city behaves as a cyber-physical system (CPS) that deeply
integrates sensing, computation, communication, and control. However,
implementation of smart CPSs that are reliable and autonomous face many
challenges, as future CPSs are composed of heterogeneous systems. The workshop
will address research challenges related to the development and implementation
of smart cities and (1) produce a research agenda in sensors and wireless
networks that addresses issues needed to effectively implement smart cities; (2)
foster collaboration between US and Moroccan scientists and engineers; (3)
induce educational progress to match new technology developments through (a)
Participation of US and Moroccan faculty, and (b) Suggestions for changes to
existing education curricula, through brainstorming sessions.