* 1552949
* RAPID: Variations in symbiont diversity in octocoral across seasons and a predicted bleaching event
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2017
* Mary Alice Coffroth, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 09/30/2017
* USD 56,304.00

Within the marine environment microorganisms form one of the most important
marine symbioses in the world: the symbiosis between corals and photosynthetic
single-celled algal symbionts. In nutrient poor waters of the tropics, this
symbiosis maintains the coral's high productivity, allowing corals to flourish
and provides the foundation of the coral reef ecosystem. However, these reefs
are currently threatened by anthropogenic-induced perturbations (i.e., global
warming, overfishing, pollution). In fact, corals and their associated
biodiversity on reefs are being lost at an alarming rate, especially in the
Caribbean, where coral cover has declined by 80% over the last thirty years.
Much of this decline has been attributed to coral bleaching, a loss of these
algal symbionts in response to increase ocean temperatures. Octocorals, in
contrast, do not show this decline and are increasing in relative abundance and
importance in the Caribbean as scleractinian corals decline. Part of this has
been attributed to the fact that bleaching is rarer among octocorals. However,
during recent warming events (2005, 2010 and 2014) bleaching was reported in
many octocoral host species. Although a great deal is known about bleaching
among scleractinian (hard) corals, virtually nothing is known of this phenomenon
among octocorals (sea fans, sea whips, sea feathers, etc.). Their growing
importance on Caribbean reefs and the lack of knowledge of their response to
"bleaching" creates an urgency to understand the dynamics of these algal
symbiont populations within octocorals during periods of scleractinian
bleaching. Bleaching susceptibility varies among host species and this has been
attributed in part to the type of algal symbiont that they contain. In this
project, specific octocoral colonies will be followed over the course of a year
and symbiont type determined using molecular techniques. These data will be used
to determine if bleaching susceptibility is related to symbiont type. This
project will significantly add to an understanding of cnidarian-algal symbioses
that form the foundation of the coral reef ecosystem. Octocorals dominate many
Caribbean reefs and serve as structure and habitat for numerous fish and
invertebrates. These data will contribute to our understanding of how these
symbioses function and allow for a comparative study with bleaching among other
cnidarians. This work will include the training of undergraduate and graduate
students, dissemination of the findings to the general public through a
collaboration with the Aquarium of Niagara, and sharing of an extensive symbiont
culture collection with the scientific community.

Coral bleaching has been an important component of the dynamics on coral reefs
for the past 3 decades. Although a great deal is known about bleaching among
scleractinian corals, virtually nothing is known of this phenomenon among
octocorals. As scleractinian abundance is declining, the relative abundance of
octocorals has remained more constant. Part of that success is likely due to a
seemingly lower sensitivity of these cnidarians to bleaching conditions.
However, the contrast in octocoral bleaching between the 20th century events and
those of more recent years suggests that thermal events of increasing frequency
and/or intensity will affect octocorals as well and that octocoral sensitivity
does vary between species. Thus projecting how octocoral communities will fare
requires a greater understanding of variation in their sensitivity to bleaching
and the basis of that variation. One potential source of that variation is in
the algal symbiont type that these species harbor. Symbiont diversity among
Caribbean octocorals is lower than that of scleractinian species with the vast
majority of Caribbean octocorals harboring symbionts in the B1-ITS2 lineage
which is composed of multiple Symbiodinium species. The aim of this project is
to identify symbiont variation within octocoral species before, during and after
a predicted bleaching event and to compare symbiont type with bleaching
susceptibility. To do this, specific octocoral colonies will be followed over
the course of a year and symbiont density and phylotype determined. Colonies
from three host species, Plexaurella dichotoma, Muricea muricata and Eunicea
flexuosa will be tagged (20 per species at each of 2 reefs) and sampled every 3
months. Symbiont density will be determined through cell counts using a
hemocytometer and symbiont phylotype identified using markers that resolve among
the different symbiont species in the B1 lineage (i.e., Sym15 flanker, ITS and
chloroplast 23S rDNA). If bleaching is not observed in these colonies, these
data will inform the diversity within an understudied group and provide
information on seasonal change in these symbionts and variation within and
between host species. Understanding the dynamics of octocoral bleaching is
important. If octocorals are more resistant to bleaching, this may explain
observations of increasing abundance. As coral cover declines, these species
represent more of the living cover and are often the visually dominant organism
on reefs. Furthermore, octocorals are fast growing and have the potential to
colonize open space and help to stabilize the ecosystem by providing habitat for
other reef organisms.