* 1552743
* CAREER: The Effects of Post-translational Modifications and Histone Variants on Chromatin Fiber Dynamics
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2022
* Jeffery Wereszczynski, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Engin Serpersu
* 05/31/2022
* USD 789,863.00

In plants and animals, DNA is packaged and maintained in chromatin fibers. These
structures are comprised of nucleosomes, which are made up of nucleic acid
molecules wrapped around proteins called histones. Chromatin remodeling factors
alter the nucleosome, thereby regulating the overall structure and stability of
chromatin fibers, and modulating gene expression. In this project, the effects
of two major classes of chromatin remodeling factors will be addressed with
state-of-the-art computer simulations. These studies will reveal the physical
basis by which cells modulate the structure and dynamics of chromosomes, and how
this affects the vital process of gene expression. This project will also expose
students throughout the educational system to cutting-edge biophysics research.
Introductory and advanced courses will be developed that transcend traditional
scientific boundaries and undergraduate and pre-and post-doctoral students will
receive hands-on training. This project will increase participation in research
for students from underrepresented groups, educate future middle and high school
teachers, and provide training to the next generation of scientists.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Eukaryotes package and maintain their genetic code in
chromatin fibers. The fundamental unit of these structures is the nucleosome, a
complex of eight histone proteins that wrap ~147 base pairs of DNA. By altering
the biochemical properties of the nucleosome, the cell regulates the structure
and stability of chromatin and thus influences gene expression. Two of the
primary mechanisms by which this occurs are post-translational modifications of
histone residues and replacement of canonical histones with histone variants.
The effects of these chromatin remodeling factors on the structures and
stabilities of nucleosomes have been extensively studied. However, it is only in
recent years that it has become evident that chromatin exhibits significant
conformational dynamics, the details of which, and how remodeling factors
influences them, remain elusive. The goal of this project is to determine how
post-translational modifications and histone variants affect intra- and inter-
nucleosome dynamics as a means of regulating gene expression. This project will
test the hypothesis that chromatin remodeling factors function by creating local
perturbations that propagate through allosteric networks to induce global
changes in nucleosomes and chromatin fibers. To do this, biomolecular
simulations will be performed to address (1) how the local effects of post-
translational modifications at dynamic hotspots influence global structures and
dynamics, and (2) how the effects of histone variants propagate through inter-
nucleosomal dynamical networks into chromatin fibers. This will be done with
all-atom and coarse-grain molecular dynamics simulations, and will utilize
conventional, enhanced sampling, and free energy methods. This work will be
performed in close collaboration with experimentalists working in the fields of
nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy and small angle X-ray scattering, whose
results will help inform, validate, and guide the development of future
simulations. This project will significantly expand emerging paradigm that
nucleosome functions are closely related to their conformational dynamics and
provide insights into the mechanism by which nature modulates multicomponent
protein/DNA systems.