* 1552296
* CAREER: Breakthroughs in Dynamical Modeling and Control for Reduction of Catastrophic Aviation Accidents
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/01/2016,11/30/2017
* Anshu Narang, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Irina Dolinskaya
* 11/30/2017
* USD 160,897.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project will support fundamental
research in control technology to safely land aircraft in certain adverse
situations. Specifically, a significant number of aircraft accidents occur when
the primary control system is partly or completely lost due to structural or
hydraulic failures. Due to the critical role played by the aviation industry in
transportation, tourism, and economic growth, it is imperative to reduce
occurrences that lead to loss of life or property.The new mathematical
foundations laid down in this research will enable control and recovery in
highly adverse failure conditions using inherent controllability properties of
multiple jet engine configurations. The high pilot workload in emergency
situations coupled with slow engine response makes precise control in general
very difficult to accomplish, therefore this research will be used as the basis
for systems to assist flight crew of all skill levels to successfully carry out
emergency landings. Once the new technology is tested in simulation under
various scenarios, it will be integrated in pilot training modules that will
further help mitigate accidents due to inappropriate crew action. Additionally,
the findings of this research will expand the operational envelope of unmanned
aerial vehicles that are becoming an increasingly important part of the national
airspace. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Multiple engines on a commercial jet can be
used for directional control under emergency situations. However, the engine
response (time constant of 4 seconds or more) is typically very slow compared to
the response of primary controls (with time constant of 0.35 seconds). This
significant lag often leads to a high gain control signal that exceeds physical
limits of the controller. This research addresses this scientific barrier by
deriving a new dynamical modeling procedure that captures the effects of
significant lag between the commanded control signal and the actual applied
control signal on nonlinear systems using concepts from singular perturbation
theory. Using these new mathematical representations the research team will
create an improved performance, stable and robust control architecture. One
major benefit of the derived controller is that the feedback solution is
independent of the large time constant. The research team will also integrate
the controllers with pilot feedback to strengthen pilot/operator training for
automated aircraft and to create enhanced training procedures and pilot
interfaces.