* 1552310
* Collaborative Research: CEDAR: Modeling and Observation of Secondary Gravity Waves in the Thermosphere and Ionosphere Generated from Deep Convection
* GEO,AGS
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2021
* Geoffrey Crowley, Orion Space Solutions (OSS), LLC
* Continuing Grant
* John Meriwether
* 05/31/2021
* USD 156,781.00

This grant will support an effort to enhance the understanding of the formation
processes for ionospheric plasma wave structures seen in regional distributions
of Total Electron Content (TEC) events that exhibit circular patterns. These
events are believed to be generated by deep convective processes within
thunderstorm systems that launch gravity wave structures into the upper
atmosphere region of 60 to 100 km where strong viscous dissipation of these wave
packets occurs. Part of the wave energy of these primary waves is transformed
into the production of secondary waves that are able to propagate higher into
the region of atmospheric heights above 200 km. Here, the interaction of these
waves with the ionospheric plasma (pushing or pulling plasma along magnetic
field lines) would then generate structures called Traveling Ionosphere
Disturbances (TIDs) that are so often seen in TEC data. The primary objective of
the research is to compare the observed concentric TEC perturbations with those
calculated from realistic modeling of the primary and secondary GWs from deep
convection in order to strengthen and validate the models for the calculation of
these TID structures. A secondary objective would be to utilize the amplitudes
and scales of the observed secondary GWs to probe the dynamics of the 'dark'
(but highly variable) region near 125-225 km where most of the primary GWs
dissipate. A satisfactory explanation of these TID events in terms of gravity
wave processes by reference to the successful modeling of the formation of these
structures has never been achieved. Thus, the funded research has a significant
potential for providing an enhanced understanding of the properties of these
circular TID events that relate to the heating and cooling processes associated
with the dissipation and transformation of the primary wave structure into the
secondary wave output.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Significant societal impact and
transformative research outcomes for this award are expected to be achieved as a
result of the success in modeling these circular TID events. Because GWs cause
scintillation and plasma bubbles that can disrupt satellite communication and
GPS signals, this study may lead to better predictions for the occurrence of
these phenomena, which is nationally relevant. In order to enhance scientific
understanding for the general public, the researcher will disseminate broadly
the results via a web site, conference talks, and journal publications. Finally,
this project would support the research of a woman scientist (PI).