* 1552286
* CEDAR: Understanding Day-to-Day Tidal Variability
* GEO,AGS
* 04/01/2016,05/31/2021
* Scott Palo, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Alan Liu
* 05/31/2021
* USD 381,663.00

Variability is a major characteristic of the mesosphere lower thermosphere (MLT)
system (the region between 80 to 120 km), and the sources of this variability
are not very well understood. There are two types of atmospheric wave activity
seen in this region: short wavelength waves called gravity waves (GW) and long
wavelength waves called tidal waves. The science focus of this award work plan
is to achieve improved understanding of the possible physical mechanisms that
generate short-term tidal wave variability in the MLT region. Particular
emphasis in this award research would be placed upon understanding the role of
gravity wave variability producing the resulting variations in tidal propagation
and tidal wave dissipation characteristics. The expected broader impacts on the
space weather community along with the implications for space weather research
and educational outreach including K12 and under-represented groups are
excellent, especially because the research objective of delineating and
understanding short-term tidal variability represents information that is much
needed for predictive space weather modelers, an important task for a
technological society, as emphasized in the Decadal Survey. The funded research
would support a graduate student at Colorado University, Boulder, and second,
the lead scientist has described a sound plan to enhance K-12 STEM education
with the participation of under-represented groups through the University of
Colorado (Boulder) BOLD program, which provides summer courses for high school
students. The Principal Investigator has a successful history of mentoring
students through similar programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award would analyze
and quantify the short-term variability of the diurnal migrating tide in the MLT
region using observations derived from the combined TIMED (Thermosphere,
Ionosphere, Mesosphere Energetics and Dynamics) and Aura/NASA satellite
databases combined with measurements of the observed ionospheric response
determined from COSMIC (Constellation Observing System for Meteorology,
Ionosphere, and Climate) data. Two questions would be addressed in this study:
the first being the identification of the physical mechanisms that drive the
short-term day-to-day variability of the migrating diurnal tide. The second
question is concerned with the overall impact that the day-to-day variability of
the migrating diurnal tide has upon the mesosphere-thermosphere-ionosphere
system. These observational diagnostics would be supported by meteor radar winds
that are in the CEDAR database.