* 1552419
* CAREER: How Birds Lift Weight with Flapping Wings
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2020
* David Lentink, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 06/30/2020
* USD 756,271.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project will help determine the
scientific principles that help explain why birds fly more effectively than
current, similarly-sized aerial robots. In fact, the extremely fast and
efficient flight behaviors of birds enable them to outfly aerial robots in a
wide range of performance metrics. Understanding how birds manipulate air flow
and power their wings has vast societal application, ranging from improved
aerial delivery robots in urban environments to more effective monitoring and
surveillance for national security purposes. The PI's team will study several
bird species in great depth and a larger number of species more generally, to
better understand the biomechanistic trade-offs between specialist versus
generalist flyers. This study will employ some of the world's most advanced
engineering techniques to quantify and relate airflow, aerodynamic lift force,
and body motion using instruments that make 1000 measurements per second. The
research will help answer long-standing questions on how birds are able to
generate lift with their wings, and integrate aerodynamics, behavior, and muscle
physiology to advance our understanding of how flapping bird flight evolved. The
scientific knowledge gained will aid engineers in the development of bird-
inspired aerial robots. The teaching components will stimulate drone
entrepreneurism in Silicon Valley. The outreach components will benefit
underrepresented minority biology students at CSU Fresno, visitors of the
California Academy of Sciences, K12 STEM teachers and their
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This integrative and comparative study of how
birds support weight with flapping wings, is the first to measure aerodynamic
force in vivo for a total of more than 40 species. The research will provide a
modern aerodynamic theory of bird flight that combines seven mechanisms to
understand how bird flight performance evolved. The research team will first
obtain combined aerodynamic force and muscle-strain measurements in vivo. These
measurements will help clarify the unknown role of tendon in generating upstroke
power and, ultimately, flight specialization. The team's field study of
evolutionary biomechanics will represent the broadest in vivo sample of
aerodynamic forces to date. Among other things, the team will outline the
possible convergence of increased upstroke lift in hummingbirds and nectar bats
compared to generalist flyers. The research will be enabled by state-of-the art,
high-speed measurement and modeling techniques including motion capture, stereo
and Tomographic Particle Image Velocimetry, novel aerodynamic force platforms,
an advanced bird wind tunnel, muscle physiology techniques, and OpenSim
musculoskeletal simulation software.