* 1552568
* CAREER: Triazabutadienes as a Versatile Tool in Chemical Biology
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2022
* John Jewett, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Jin Cha
* 03/31/2022
* USD 640,123.00

With this CAREER Award, the Synthesis Program supports the research of Professor
John Jewett of the University of Arizona. Professor Jewett develops new tools
for chemical biology that are designed to transform the investigation of
protein-protein interactions. This research utilizes an underexplored class of
compounds called triazabutadienes; these are structures in which three nitrogens
and one carbon are connected in sequence. Triazabutadienes are chemically
attached to protein amino acids, followed by spontaneous or enzyme-catalyzed
chemical changes which produce a chemical probe. This new chemistry impacts the
fields of polymers and materials science. Professor Jewett develops an
educational outreach program that focuses on mentoring of students from groups
which are underrepresented in science. The project builds connections with a
middle school located in a nearby Native American territory. Professor Jewett
works with teachers and students to develop culturally-relevant science
demonstrations that are shared with younger students. In addition to activities
at the middle school, the CAREER Award supports student visits to the University
of Arizona campus multiple times each year where researchers interact with
graduate and undergraduate chemistry students in science-related activities
related to research in the Jewett group. This impacts recruiting of Native
American students into STEM careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research explores
a unique class of compounds that are designed to interrogate protein-protein
interactions. Triazabutadienes release highly reactive but chemoselective aryl
diazonium ions upon protonation within a physiologically relevant range of pH.
First, the triazabutadienes are structurally modified such that they can be
initially conjugated to proteins. After conjugation, pH-triggered protein-bound
aryl diazonium ions then offer a new way to interrogate protein-protein
interactions. Enhanced reactivity which has been observed upon photochemical
isomerization of the triazabutadiene expands the utility of these protein-
conjugates. Second, the chemistry of triazabutadienes are coupled to cellular
chemistry other than acidification. Enzymatically triggered release of
triazabutadienes enhances their selective biochemical deployment. Finally, a new
class of fluorogenic probes are used to report on the ligation of aryl diazonium
species with electron-rich amino acid side chains containing tyrosine and
histidine. The chemoselectivity and fluorescence properties of these probes are
studied to establish the scope of their utility. In addition to activities at
the middle school, the CAREER Award supports student visits to the University of
Arizona campus multiple times each year where researchers interact with graduate
and undergraduate chemistry students in science-related activities related to
research in the Jewett group. This impacts recruiting of Native American
students into STEM careers.