* 1552849
* CAREER: Super-resolution Raman microscopy for all-optical, label-free nanoscale chemical imaging
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2022
* Renee Frontiera, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Jose Almirall
* 06/30/2022
* USD 601,161.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division
of Chemistry, Professor Frontiera is developing a microscopic imaging technique
capable of probing chemical structure on nanometer length scales. Optical
microscopes have a limit as to how far one is able to "zoom in" on a sample, as
the wavelike nature of light limits the resolution to several hundred
nanometers. However, many important structures, such as the surface of living
cells, have tremendous variation in chemical composition on much shorter length
scales. This nanoscale variation leads to wide range of responses in processes
such as pharmaceutical binding and cellular signaling. Professor Frontiera's
research entails the development and application of an optical microscopy
technique that is capable of examining chemical composition on a nanometer
length scale. After the successful demonstration of the technique, the
researchers plan to probe the response of model cellular membranes to
pharmaceutical molecules, in order to understand how nanoscale variation affects
function. The educational component of this work is to have students lead the
creation of tutorials that are expected to illustrate advanced concepts in
spectroscopy and microscopy, to the public. These techniques are increasingly
used in fields as diverse as health care, food safety, machining, and
pharmaceutical manufacturing. In addition, Professor Frontiera performs in the
"Energy and U" program, a live outreach show about chemistry performed annually
for over 11,000 local elementary students, a majority of whom are minorities
currently underrepresented in science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
project is focused on the development of a super-resolution Raman imaging
technique and its use in determining how nanoscale local environments affect the
function of lipid membranes. Current far-field optical microscopies which break
the diffraction limit require labeling with fluorophores, and thus, the samples
are prone to degradation and the change (as labeling may change the structure or
dynamics of the system). Professor Frontiera and her team combine elements of
stimulated emission depletion microscopy and femtosecond stimulated Raman
spectroscopy to create a broadly useful technique capable of label-free,
chemical imaging on nanometer length scales. The femtosecond nature of the
technique enables far-field sub-diffraction probing of structural changes on the
timescale of nuclear motion. To demonstrate the applicability of label-free
super-resolution Raman imaging, Professor Frontiera and her team determine how
nanoscale composition and fluidity of supported lipid membranes are affected by
the addition of small molecule pharmaceuticals. This nanoscale imaging
technique, which is able to probe how environmental heterogeneities affect
function, may ultimately be applicable in areas such as biomedicine,
pharmaceutical and food safety, photovoltaic and photocatalytic device
characterization, and materials science.