* 1552587
* CAREER: Knowledge Representation and Re-Use for Exploratory and Collaborative Search
* CSE,IIS
* 02/01/2016,01/31/2023
* Robert Capra, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Hector Munoz-Avila
* 01/31/2023
* USD 546,159.00

Modern search systems work well when looking for specific information, but do
little to support exploratory searches that extend across multiple search
sessions and have investigation and learning as primary goals. Current search
systems provide few ways for users to capture, re-use, and resume their search
efforts, little support for discovering structural information about a topic,
and few methods for coordination and knowledge sharing among searchers. As a
result, users often begin searches isolated from knowledge about the domain and
effective search processes that others have already discovered, and groups
working collaboratively on a search must invest considerable manual effort to
communicate and coordinate their efforts using channels outside the search
system. This research will develop and evaluate novel techniques and interfaces
to allow users to capture, save, share, and re-use structured information about
search tasks, search processes, and domain information. A central innovation in
this research will be the integration of template structures (including lists,
hierarchies, two-dimensional grids, and concept maps) into the user interface
and underlying search system in order help users save and organize the
information they discover. This structured information will then be used by the
system to help support the future searches of individuals and groups of users
working collaboratively.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will answer
questions about how search systems can incorporate methods to capture, share,
and re-use knowledge developed during searches to help improve the future search
activities of individuals, collaborating groups, and other searchers working on
similar tasks. The research will explore new search algorithms and interfaces
that leverage structured information about the search to help users with task
resumption, coordination of collaborative efforts, discovery of topic
structures, and knowledge sharing. The results will provide insights about
users' needs for exploratory searches and how systems can best support them.
Specifically, five objectives will be addressed. (1) User studies will be
conducted to understand how information structures are naturally created and
used in different types of search tasks. (2) An experimental search system will
be designed and implemented to support the creation, capture, and use of
structured search information to help users with exploratory search tasks. (3)
Using the experimental search system, studies will be conducted to understand
the benefits of different types of template structures for the purpose of saving
information for different types of search tasks (e.g., learning, planning,
decision-making, collecting). (4) Additional studies will be conducted to
understand how existing structured search information can be used to help
support individual users in task resumption, collaborating groups of users in
coordinating their efforts, and as a form of search assistance for users working
on similar tasks. (5) The final objective of this work will investigate methods
for identifying and ranking searches that are related to the current search
based on the structured search information and other search interaction data.
This research will significantly improve the tools and methods for exploratory
and collaborative search, and will provide empirical results to guide future
search user interfaces and system development. The outcomes of this project will
have substantial transformative impact in helping users to discover new
information and topic structures, make sense of the information they find, and
build from the prior search efforts of others. Results and software developed as
part of the project will be disseminated through papers published in top-tier
conferences and journals, and will be made available on the project website
(http://ils.unc.edu/searchstructures/).