* 1552135
* North Dakota Collaborative STEM Conference 2016
* EHR,DRL
* 11/01/2015,10/31/2016
* Robert Pawloski, University of North Dakota Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Julia Clark
* 10/31/2016
* USD 66,479.00

The Discovery Research K-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the
learning and teaching of science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM)
by preK-12 students and teachers, through research and development of innovative
resources, models and tools (RMTs). Projects in the DRK-12 program build on
fundamental research in STEM education and prior research and development
efforts that provide theoretical and empirical justification for proposed
projects.

This project at the University of North Dakota proposes to conduct a conference
to bring together K-12 teachers of science and mathematics in North Dakota. The
proposed innovative conference would collaboratively combine the annual meetings
of three organizations in the state of North Dakota, all of whom have K-12 roles
in the development of a STEM-literate workforce squarely in their focus. The
three organizations are: North Dakota Science Teachers Association (NDSTA),
North Dakota Math Council of Teachers of Mathematics (NDCTM), and the North
Dakota STEM Network (NDSTEM). The program involves a statewide collaboration of
higher education faculty and staff, state government and local community
leaders, K-12 administrators and teachers, informal educators, and
representatives of local STEM related business and industry.

The conference will involve the major STEM education networks in the state. The
evaluation of the conference will be done by post-conference surveys that will
capture the impact of it on the professional development of teachers and the
awareness and knowledge of higher education, government, along with business and
industry to positively interact and support math and science educators in
preparing their students for the workforce of tomorrow.