* 1552196
* CAREER: Dissecting the Biogenesis and Function of Circular RNA in Simple Eukaryotes
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2022
* Julia Salzman, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Clifford Weil
* 03/31/2022
* USD 650,000.00

This project will study the function of circular RNA, a type of RNA recently
discovered to be common to cells across the tree of life. The basic DNA
instructions for life are shared among plants, animals and even simpler
organisms, as is the basic way DNA is processed into RNA, the functional code of
instructions for all cells. Only very recently, a new feature of this process
was discovered: copies of DNA can be processed into circular RNA molecules,
which are sometimes remarkably abundant in cells, and have features that suggest
they have important functions. Research into circular RNA will benefit the
public by increasing scientific knowledge of basic mechanisms of genome
evolution and function. The research will be disseminated to the public through
seminars, publications and by directly integrating the research projects with
educational programs aimed at high school, undergraduate and graduate students
with a focus on groups that have traditionally been underrepresented in science.
In addition, the integration of experimental, statistical and computational
approaches in this research will serve as a template for development of a core
class aimed at graduate students to teach the principles of statistics to
biologists and the principles of biology to statistically trained
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Circular RNA is a novel class of RNA in different
organisms. It is likely to be generated in a pathway linked to RNA splicing,
suggesting tha suggests that splicing may have functions apart from excising
introns to generate mature mRNAs that code for protein. Compared to other
classes of expressed RNA, circular RNA has been the subject of little attention
and study. This project will directly investigate circular RNA in unicellular
eukaryotes where RNA processing is known to be complex and play important
functional roles. Using the opportunities provided by recent technological
advances in sequencing, the project will entail developing novel statistical and
computational approaches coupled with new experimental designs to increase the
understanding of circular RNA biogenesis and function. The statistical,
computational and experimental methods develop in this project will be generally
applicable to studying circular RNA across a variety of unicellular and
multicellular organisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is co-funded by the
Genetic Mechanisms Program in the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences
and the Division of Emerging Frontiers in the Biological Sciences Directorate,
and by the Statistics Program in the Division of Mathematical Sciences in the
Mathematical and Physical Sciences Directorate.