* 1552610
* CAREER: Discovering the Developmental Genetic Basis for Parallel Evolution of Aerial Respiration in Arthropods
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2016,02/28/2022
* Prashant Sharma, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Anna Allen
* 02/28/2022
* USD 929,989.00

The movement from water to land was a critical evolutionary transformation for
both vertebrates and arthropods (insects, spiders, millipedes, crustaceans,
etc.). Different groups of arthropods used different methods to enable breathing
air, a critical requirement for life on land, a change that occurred separately
in at least 7 groups. The goal of this project is to investigate how an air-
breathing respiratory system evolved separately in multiple arthropod groups.
Did evolution of aerial respiration involve alteration to the same anatomical
structures and genes in each group, or does each arthropod group use a different
solution to the problem of breathing air? To resolve this question, the
embryonic formation of respiratory organs in eight arthropod species will be
investigated. Genes and proteins will be tested to determine whether the same
genes are used in the respiratory system of all arthropods. Genome sequencing
will further test and identify genes that create unique respiratory structures
(e.g., the book lung of spiders). The outcomes of this research will be
integrated into a new laboratory-based course on invertebrate zoology, to be
taught annually through the Department of Zoology, using live specimens. A
museum exhibit will be developed on the movement of arthropods onto land, and
using evidence from fossils, genes, and developmental biology. One postdoctoral
fellow, one graduate student, and ten summer undergraduates will be trained
during the work, emphasizing recruitment of women and underrepresented groups in
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Investigating the parallel evolution of aerial
respiration in Arthropoda has previously been limited to studies of functional
morphology or expression data from a few taxa. Some developmental data suggest
that mandibulate and chelicerate respiratory systems are directly homologous,
whereas a separate set of data suggests that respiratory organs of arachnids
arose independently from modified walking legs. Respiratory systems of Myriapoda
have not been studied in a developmental genetic context at all. To resolve the
origins of internalized respiratory systems of arthropods, the proposed work
will examine positional, genetic, and serial homology of respiratory organs in
eight emerging model arthropod systems. To establish the serial homology of
arachnid respiratory organs, Hox misexpression experiments will be conducted to
derepress appendages in posterior segments. To establish degree of conservation
of the gene regulatory network (GRN) underlying tubulogenesis across Arthropoda,
gene expression assays will be performed for candidate genes known to be
required for establishment of the Drosophila melanogaster tracheal tubule
system. To assess functional correspondence, knockdown experiments will be
conducted in two chelicerate and three mandibulate exemplars for five critical
genes in the Drosphila GRN. To investigate the patterning of the arachnid book
lung, comparative transcriptomic data will be generated from book lung primordia
of spiders and scorpions, toward identifying a set of novel candidate genes
putatively involved in book lung morphogenesis for further functional screening.
This work will directly address the two competing scenarios of arthropod
terrestrialization that persist in the literature, using independent tests of
positional, serial, and genetic homology.