* 1552329
* Collaborative Research:  Multimodel Bayesian Data-Worth Analysis for Groundwater Remediation Design
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2021
* Ming Ye, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Laura Lautz
* 07/31/2021
* USD 271,601.00

Groundwater contaminant remediation involves removing subsurface contaminants so
that they do not pose unacceptable future risks to humans and the environment.
While various remediation methods have been developed, they all face a common
challenge that the groundwater environment is complex and cannot be fully
understood and characterized with limited amount of time and resources. Hence,
given the uncertainty in the characterization of the groundwater environment,
the challenge is to design a remediation strategy that has the maximum
probability of success or equivalently the minimum probability of failure. A
common reason for remediation failure is ignoring model uncertainty. Using a
single model for remediation design may lead to overconfidence in the predictive
capability of the model and thus to increased probability of failure. The
proposed research will reexamine the problem of remediation design under model
uncertainty by using a multimodel-based data-worth analysis. In other words,
multiple models are used to identify and guide the collection of the most
valuable data for model evaluation, improvement, and reconstruction. Because of
the synthesis between models, remediation designs, and data, the proposed
multimodel data-worth analysis for remediation design will provide a
transformative platform for scientists, engineers, and decision-makers to
systematically investigate all components involved in groundwater remediation.
This project will also provide an opportunity for interdisciplinary training of
undergraduate and graduate students in the areas of hydrology, computational
science, and civil engineering. In addition, the project will engage high school
teachers and students in summer schools to gain laboratory and computational
experience for understanding the concepts of groundwater contaminant transport
and remediation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research has two objectives:
to reformulate data-worth analysis for groundwater remediation with
consideration of model uncertainty, and to break computational barriers between
models and model analysis needed for remediation design. To achieve the first
objective, a data-worth analysis will be integrated into a framework of
multimodel analysis (also known as model averaging), which will be developed
into a new procedure for remediation design that will be compatible with the
multimodel data-worth analysis. To achieve the second objective, an accurate but
cheap-to-evaluate surrogate of the models will be developed and then used for
the data-worth analysis and remediation design under uncertainty. The Bayesian
approaches (theoretical and computational) will be used for achieving both the
objectives. While the proposed method of multimodel Bayesian data-worth analysis
is general and can be applied to any remediation method, it will be integrated
with the recently developed engineered injection and extraction method, a
promising technique for in-situ remediation. The proposed methods will be
evaluated in a two-prong strategy using synthetic and real-world modeling
problems. The real-world problem involves uranium contamination at the Naturita
Site, Colorado, and nitrogen contamination at the Indian River County, Florida.
The synthetic study will mimic the real-world problem to the extent possible so
that insights gained from the synthetic study can be used directly for the real-
world modeling. This project will provide scientific support for on-going
environmental remediation and monitoring at the two field sites as well as other
contaminated sites.&lt;br/&gt;