* 1552027
* CEDAR: Atmosphere-Ionosphere Coupling as Revealed in Global Magnetic Field Perturbations
* GEO,AGS
* 05/15/2016,04/30/2020
* Jeffrey Forbes, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* John Meriwether
* 04/30/2020
* USD 343,509.00

The Coupling, Energetics, and Dynamics of Atmospheric Regions (CEDAR) program, a
broad-based, community-guided, upper atmospheric research program, is aimed at
understanding the behavior of atmospheric regions from the lower atmosphere
upward through the ionized upper layers of the atmosphere. Of particular
interest is the coupling of the lower atmosphere to the ionized layer near
100-150 km that is called the "dynamo region". Large-scale wave variations of
winds and temperatures in the lower atmosphere that are called thermal tides are
generated by the heating caused by the daily passage of the Sun overhead or by
the absorption of solar radiation by water vapor or stratospheric ozone at
tropical latitudes. Other large-scale waves called planetary waves (PW) may also
be caused by weather activity within the lower atmosphere. These large-scale
waves may have periodicities as long as 16 days and very large horizontal
wavelengths (thousands of km). These waves will propagate to higher altitudes
where the winds, ionized gas content, and Earth?s magnetic field interact to
generate electric fields and currents. These, in turn, will induce magnetic
field perturbations that may be measured by the global network of magnetometers
(141 sites). The production of PW and tidal waves within the lower atmosphere is
highly variable, and consequently, the winds and temperature profiles associated
with these wave structures will exhibit significant variability from day-to-day
that can be detected through the application of sophisticated analysis
procedures to the global magnetometer data. Part of the research motivation for
this approach is that the electric fields generated within the dynamo region
will map upward into the ionosphere above 250 km and generate variability of
electron density at high altitudes that need to be understood for successful
space weather forecasting, which has been given national priority. The research
supported by this award would determine the ionospheric variability using the
magnetometer data to measure the meridional and zonal components of magnetic
field variations relative to a steady state baseline. The origins of this
variability can then be considered in regard to possible factors to identify
causal relationships. The award represents a strong potential for exciting and
transformative science because the global analysis of ground magnetometer data
will provide new insights into atmosphere-ionosphere coupling by tides and PW in
a way that cannot be achieved by any satellite-based series of observations that
is limited by the nature of local time sampling of the ionospheric variability.
The broader impact of this award is that a woman Egyptian graduate student would
be supported in her PhD work in this award thus enhancing the cultural diversity
of the aeronomy community.

The science motivation for this award is summarized by the following list of
physical processes that need to be fully understood to understand space weather
variability: (1) The dynamo region (ca.100-150 km) of Earth?s atmosphere is
where electric fields are mainly generated through the dynamo action of neutral
winds during daytime; (2) These electric fields have profound influences on the
variability of the whole ionosphere; (3) Dynamo region variability is thought to
originate from solar flux influences on electrical conductivity, and from the
variability imposed by tidal and PW neutral winds, and disturbance winds
associated with geomagnetic activity; (4) This variability has never been
observationally quantified globally in a systematic way; (5) Knowledge
concerning the variability of the dynamo region provides insight into the
sources of variability for the overlying ionosphere; and (6) A global array of
ground magnetometers exists that can provide the above knowledge. Examination of
the global magnetometer data through application of standard time-series
analysis tools would seek to understand the cause-effect factors underlying the
ionospheric variability with the focus being that a major fraction of this
ionospheric variability is likely to be caused by the large-scale waves reaching
into this region from below. These results would be compared with variations of
the standard solar and magnetic field indices to search for evidence of causal
relationships between the tides and PW excited in the lower atmosphere and whose
influences extend into the 100-150 km dynamo region generate electric fields
that then map along magnetic field lines into the F region ionosphere. The
F-region plasma redistributions that they produce carry with them the spatial
and temporal signatures of these tides and PW, and of the processes that
produced or modified them at lower altitudes.