* 1552617
* CAREER: Ferritin-Based Nano-Dendrimers as Platforms for Drug Delivery
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2021
* Jin Xie, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Steve Smith
* 05/31/2021
* USD 510,880.00

Non-technical: This CAREER proposal aims to develop a bio-inspired and
sustainable material called nano-dendrimers. This protein-based technology
allows different types of functional molecules and nanoparticles to be assembled
in a highly ordered fashion. This technology will help advance our basic
understanding on magnetic and plasmonic properties of nanoparticle-based
assembly. The approach will also find wide applications in areas such as drug
delivery, imaging, tissue engineering, and catalysis. Integrated into the
proposal is a vigorous education plan that provides education opportunities at
different levels. It aims to improve higher education by training well-rounded
graduate and undergraduate students in nanobiotechnology. The plan also includes
promoting public science learning by bringing state-of-the-art research progress
to the public in an appealing manner.

Technical: The main research objective of the CAREER proposal is to develop a
novel, bio-inspired assembly technology called nano-dendrimers that allows
specific numbers of nanoparticles to cluster into higher nanostructures. The
central player, ferritin, is a protein nanocage that contains 24 subunits.
Ferritins can be engineered, through either chemical or genetic methods, to
present exactly 24 coupling ligands, such as biotin, on the surface. The
resulting ferritins will go through a unique hybridization approach with native
ferritins to achieve derivatives presenting discrete numbers of coupling
ligands. Using the hybrid ferritins as building blocks (referred to as FBBs),
one can construct different supramolecular structures in a manner similar to
dendrimer growth. Meanwhile, the interiors of ferritins can be loaded with a
wide range of functionalities. Multiple cargos can be loaded into separated FBBs
and then integrated into nano-dendrimers with high accuracy. The approach will
also find wide applications in areas such as drug delivery, imaging, tissue
engineering, and catalysis. The proposed research is highly interdisciplinary
and provides many cutting-edge research opportunities. It will train graduate
and undergraduate students who understand a broad range of multi-disciplinary
approaches and attack problems with a wide range of tools. It also provide
education opportunities to high school and K-12 students with an emphasis on
minority students.