* 1552359
* CAREER: Correlating Organic Radical Structure to Electrochemical and Photophysical Properties: Evolving Energy Storage and Light-Emitting Materials
* MPS,CHE
* 02/15/2016,01/31/2021
* Todd Hudnall, Texas State University - San Marcos
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 01/31/2021
* USD 444,000.00

In this CAREER project funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics & Mechanism B
Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Todd Hudnall of the Department of
Chemistry and Biochemistry at Texas State University is developing new classes
of organic radicals that feature readily tunable electrochemical and
photophysical properties. The goal of this research is to exploit the
characteristics of these organic radicals for the development of organic energy
storage and light-emitting materials. The project lies at the interface of
organic, inorganic, and materials chemistry, and is well suited for the
education of scientists at all levels. Undergraduates and graduate students in
the Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry will have opportunities to
collaborate with experts from chemistry, engineering, and physics. Professor
Todd Hudnall is also well poised to increase the recruitment and retention of
students from underrepresented groups in science, technology, engineering and
mathematics (STEM) as Texas State University is one of the largest Hispanic
Serving Institutes in Texas. Professor Hudnall works with members of local high
schools and children's museums to design science curricula dedicated to
providing problem-based learning experiences through hands-on experimentation in
the chemical and physical sciences. Members of Professor Todd Hudnall's research
team and local high school students design and implement experiments that mimic
the experiences of collegiate level researchers in order to encourage the high
school students to pursue science degrees in college.

The unique electronic configuration of stable organic radicals circumvents
classical quantum mechanical limitations such as the Pauli Exclusion Principle,
making these molecules good candidates for next generation energy/memory storage
and organic light-emitting diode materials. The radical motifs are derived from
singlet carbenes or carbene-inspired moieties that enables the rapid tailoring
of the electrochemical and/or photophysical properties of the resultant organic
radicals. This strategy allows the synthesis of novel organic radical
architectures to develop a dynamic structure-property correlation. These studies
answer the following questions: 1) How do the electronic properties of the
carbene influence the electrochemical and/or photophysical properties of the
radical? 2) To what extent can the electrochemical window be expanded for these
systems? 3) Will neutral radicals obtained by reduction of emissive cations
likewise be emissive? Professor Todd Hudnall also integrates an educational
component inclusive of outreach activities involving K-12 students through
partnerships with local high schools, children's museums, and the Boy Scouts of
America.