* 1552522
* CAREER: Uncoupling Growth and Triacylglycerol Accumulation in Algae
* BIO,MCB
* 12/01/2015,05/31/2022
* Leslie Hicks, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Anthony Garza
* 05/31/2022
* USD 933,245.00

Photosynthetic microalgae show great promise for meeting US demands for
renewable, sustainable, and affordable biofuels. Algae are dynamic living
systems wherein external and internal signals are integrated to produce
metabolic changes over time that can promote the accumulation of lipids, a
component of biodiesel fuels. This CAREER project will determine how internal
signals regulate the flow of carbon from basic functions like cell growth to
alternative pathways such as production of lipids. The focus of this project is
on the TARGET of RAPAMYCIN signaling network that has been characterized
extensively in animals and fungi, but is much less understood in photosynthetic
organisms. This information will provide insights into whether this signaling
network can be harnessed and/or bypassed to improve lipid production. A diverse
population of graduate, undergraduate and high-school students will be trained
in mass spectrometry, proteomics, molecular biology, analytical chemistry and
bioinformatics as part of the research and tightly aligned research-oriented
educational aims of this project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the
regulatory processes governing energy-dense compound production is essential for
controlling carbon capture, partitioning, and storage in photosynthetic
microalgae. In this work, the TARGET of RAPAMYCIN (TOR) signaling pathway in
Chlamydomonas will be elucidated in order to facilitate strategies to decouple
cellular growth from triacylglycerol accumulation. The TOR kinase pathway is a
conserved eukaryotic regulator of growth in response to stress, nutrients and
energy supply. There is only a nascent understanding of its role in
photosynthetic organisms. There is not yet a comprehensive understanding of the
pathway, its coordination, or of the interplay between nutrient deprivation and
kinase-mediated signal transduction. This project will employ an integrative
strategy of genetics, molecular biology, and mass spectrometry to i) identify
direct and indirect substrates of TOR kinase activity in vivo, ii) establish TOR
protein network connectivity through delineation of substrates and effectors,
and iii) develop a research-inspired mass spectrometry curriculum for
undergraduate/graduate education. This systems-level description of TOR
signaling will provide insight into how the TOR pathway can be harnessed and/or
bypassed in order to uncouple the process of cell growth from triacylglycerol
accumulation.