* 1552509
* CAREER: Development of an In Cell Footprinting Method for the Analysis of Protein Structure
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/2016,12/31/2016
* Lisa Jones, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Engin Serpersu
* 12/31/2016
* USD 219,910.00

Membrane proteins are involved in many important cellular functions. Despite
their biological importance, studies with membrane proteins have been hampered
by difficulties involved in purification of these proteins. Since most studies
with membrane proteins require that these proteins to be in a membrane-like
environment, a variety of membrane mimicking systems have been developed, which
adds another layer of complexity. This project will develop a novel and
innovative approach that will significantly advance knowledge in the field of
membrane proteins by providing a method that can characterize them in their
native lipid environment in living cells. The method will first be developed
using a well-characterized cytostolic protein as a model system and then the
membrane protein angiomotin will be used as a model system for the study of
transmembrane proteins. The project will provide a gateway to understanding the
physiology and pathophysiology of membrane trafficking. This project will
provide training for students from Historically Black Colleges and Universities
in an eight week undergraduate summer program to provide STEM research
opportunities. These students will be trained in consecutive summers and become
mentors in their last year. The project will also provide training to pre-and
post-doctoral students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project focuses on the
development of an in cell protein footprinting method coupled with mass
spectrometry for the characterization of protein interactions inside the cell. A
major hindrance in studying protein-lipid interactions is simulating the
membrane environment of the cell. The approach this project develops will lead
significant advances in studies of membrane proteins by providing a method that
can characterize them in their native cellular environment. The method, which
uses "caged hydrogen peroxide", will first be developed using a well-
characterized cytosolic protein as a model system. Parameters of the method will
be systematically optimized and quantitative benchmarks will be used to
determine success. Statistical analysis will be used to validate the
significance in observed changes in protein modification. Then the membrane
protein angiomotin will be used as a model system for the study of transmembrane
proteins. This project will result in the development of a novel analytical
method for the study of proteins in the cellular environment in living cells.
The method will allow for the study of membrane proteins that cannot be studied
by currently available structural methods and provide new insight into membrane
trafficking in cellular environment.