* 1552826
* CAREER: Inviscid Limits and Stability at High Reynolds Numbers
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2021
* Jacob Bedrossian, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 06/30/2021
* USD 418,102.00

In many applications of fluid mechanics, such as those arising in atmosphere and
ocean sciences, aerospace engineering, and high-energy or fusion plasma physics,
understanding the dynamics of fluids and plasmas where dissipative forces (e.g.,
friction) are weak is crucial. For example, the stability of the layer of air
over a wing, and the dissipation of energy nearby, can have major implications
for the aircraft, such as drastically changing the fuel efficiency. The focus of
the project is to better understand dissipation and stability of equilibrium
configurations and related problems in this regime using mathematical analysis.
The project helps lay the foundation for a wider mathematical theory on mixing,
dissipation, and stability in fluid mechanics. As it requires both pure and
applied mathematical innovations, it also presents an excellent opportunity to
train new, versatile researchers who are fluent in both scientific applications
and sophisticated mathematical analysis. Graduate students are included in the
work of the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project aims to further elucidate
basic questions of nonlinear stability, direct cascades, and the dissipation of
enstrophy or energy at small scales in fluids and to expand the rigorous
mathematical theory for understanding these phenomena. The investigator and his
collaborators focus on fundamental questions that will have broad impact due to
intrinsic interest, as will the new tools developed to solve them. Three general
areas are studied: (A) analysis tools for understanding enhanced dissipation and
transient unmixing; (B) linear and nonlinear stochastically forced problems in
order to understand statistically stationary direct cascades in mathematically
accessible settings; (C) estimating the subcritical transition thresholds and
understanding instabilities for laminar flows, such as pipe flow, in infinite
and finite regularity. Finally, natural extensions to hypoelliptic problems,
such as collisionless limits in kinetic theory, may also be considered. The work
is primarily mathematical analysis; however, computer experiments may be
performed in order to provide preliminary insights and to provide accessible
training opportunities for undergraduates in applied mathematics. Graduate
students are included in the research activities.