* 1552304
* CAREER: Departure from Monin-Obukhov Similarity Theory (MOST) using high-resolution turbulence models
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2016,09/30/2022
* Pierre Gentine, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Laura Lautz
* 09/30/2022
* USD 435,444.00

Turbulence controls the rate at which heat, moisture, air, and passive chemical
tracers such as CO2 flow between the land and the atmosphere. Accurate model
representation of such turbulent fluxes from the surface is essential for
precise hydrologic, weather, and climate predictions. Our current model
representation of turbulent fluxes assumes that most eddies transport can be
explained by local observations and parameters in models. Nonetheless
variability in the horizontal (e.g. due to variability in the surface
characteristics) and in the vertical (due to eddies that span an unusually large
vertical extend) directions can invalidate these assumptions. In this proposal
we will test the latter effect using a combination of high-resolution turbulence
models and observations. Our main objective is to better account for the largest
? most efficient ? eddies in our representation of turbulent exchange at the
surface. This should ultimately improve the way we measure surface fluxes and
model them. One flux of special interest is evaporation (the flux of moisture),
which impacts hydrological forecasts (such as streamflow) along with weather and
climate predictions. Along with this research activity, one of the main
educational objectives of this proposal is to provide science exposure and
encourage under-represented groups in Harlem, NY to choose scientific careers
and education through science demonstrations and high-school
internships.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Most current formulations of the surface
turbulent transport laws are based on Monin-Obukhov Similarity Theory (MOST),
which is based on local surface layer scaling. This theory has been shown to be
deficient in recent years. One of the main causes of this deficiency is due to
the presence of coherent turbulent structures, which transport turbulent
properties over large distances from the top of the boundary layer down to the
surface. These structures cannot readily be observed by time-averaging eddy-
covariance technique and may be one of the main reasons of non-closure of the in
situ surface energy budget, which are used to validate our land-surface models.
To address these issues, the research objectives of this proposal are to:
&lt;br/&gt;i) Investigate the role of non-local transport related to the
entrainment at the boundary layer top and its interaction with surface
turbulence using Direct Numerical Simulations (DNS) and Large-Eddy Simulations
(LES),&lt;br/&gt;ii) Derive new surface turbulent laws and profile similarity
accounting for the effect of non-local transport, &lt;br/&gt;iii) Define large-
eddy corrections for eddy-covariance observations of surface turbulent fluxes.
&lt;br/&gt;iv) Evaluate the impact of these new formulations in a coupled land-
surface and weather model.&lt;br/&gt;Consistent with this research activity, the
educational objectives of the proposal are to: a) develop international student
exchange programs, b) encourage and advise under-represented groups to
participate in STEM research and c) develop classes (e.g. land-atmosphere
interactions and turbulence) with a broad vision of the problem geared toward
multiple scientific communities to facilitate cross-disciplinary collaborations
and work.