* 1552975
* CAREER: Formal Methods for Approximate Computing
* CSE,CCF
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2023
* Zvonimir Rakamaric, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Pavithra Prabhakar
* 04/30/2023
* USD 510,511.00

Nowadays, power and energy constraints are the main driving force
of&lt;br/&gt;improvements in computing abilities, and approximate computing has
emerged as a&lt;br/&gt;promising technique for enabling these improvements. The
main idea behind&lt;br/&gt;approximate computing is to trade the accuracy of
computations in order to&lt;br/&gt;enable novel optimizations that improve
performance or energy efficiency. This&lt;br/&gt;leverages the fact that many
applications are resilient to errors to some extent, &lt;br/&gt;and hence do not
require absolute correctness of computations. Clearly, developing
&lt;br/&gt;software for future approximate computing platforms will not be an
easy task: a &lt;br/&gt;developer must introduce as many approximations as
possible, while at the same time&lt;br/&gt;ensuring that correctness and the
results quality requirements of an&lt;br/&gt;application are
met.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project explores automated techniques and tools
to assist developers by&lt;br/&gt;allowing them to explore approximate computing
trade-offs. The techniques are&lt;br/&gt;based around a rigorous, automated, and
precise analysis of program&lt;br/&gt;approximations. The main novelty is to
leverage recent advances in automated&lt;br/&gt;software verification in the
context of approximate computing. The project will&lt;br/&gt;develop an open
platform for the rigorous analysis of approximate programs. &lt;br/&gt;By
focusing on improving developer's experience when writing code for future
&lt;br/&gt;approximate computing platforms, this work has the potential to
achieve significant &lt;br/&gt;impact across a wide spectrum of industries and
applications.