* 1552327
* CAREER: Wave Mechanics of Complex, Correlated, and Driven Quantum Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2021
* Matthew Foster, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 05/31/2021
* USD 483,019.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports theoretical research
and education to advance understanding Quantum materials which hold great
promise for technology. These are compounds in which quantum physics plays an
essential role in enabling exceptional electronic or magnetic properties.
Quantum materials may enable new electronic devices, perhaps based on high
temperature superconductivity or topologically robust quantum circuits.
Superconductors can carry electric current without dissipation while topological
states are new states of electronic matter that may enable quantum computation.
An obstacle to realizing this potential has been the complexity often exhibited
by these systems. This CAREER award supports the investigation of a new
theoretical paradigm to tackle this issue, inspired by so-called many-body
localization. In quantum physics, particles can behave like waves. Many-body
localization is the idea that the interference between quantum waves can
"freeze" the dynamics of interacting electrons, producing different classes of
quantum states with different properties. In this project, ideas from the theory
of localization will be applied to systems of many interacting electrons, with
the view that the statistical classification of different types of excited many-
body states may prove essential for determining properties in complex materials.
This is very different from the usual approaches that stress the properties of
the ground state at the absolute zero of temperature. In particular, if
successful, the statistical approach developed here will provide new theoretical
tools to characterize the complex behavior that arises from the melting of
competing electronic phases. Understanding the latter may be a key to unlocking
the potential of quantum materials for technological applications. The PI will
also investigate the role of strong electron-electron interactions on the
transport of electric charge and heat in quantum materials.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;An educational component of the project aims to make modern
mathematical tools more accessible to undergraduate physics majors by
emphasizing algorithms and visualization. In the U.S., physics majors are
currently taught mathematics developed prior to the 20th century, yet research
now employs many more modern mathematical tools. These can be presented to
undergraduates using an algorithmic, problem-solving, approach. The PI will
create learning modules that will be tested in the classroom and openly
disseminated via a permanent Rice-hosted web repository.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports
theoretical research and education to advance understanding Quantum materials.
The rich variety of collective phenomena exhibited by quantum materials holds
great promise for technology. An obstacle to realizing this potential has been
the complexity often exhibited by these systems. Due to the interplay of
interactions, frustration, and material disorder, many compounds exhibit
competing low temperature phases. These are often found in proximity to quantum
critical regimes that may arise from fluctuations of the many different ordered
states. It is now believed that quantum wave interference can induce the
Anderson localization of a many-particle interacting system, in the presence of
disorder or frustration. This many-body localization suggests a paradigm shift
to the statistical classification of many-particle states, instead of a singular
focus on the ground state. Transport measurements are the primary probe of
quantum interference, but understanding transport in correlated materials
remains a challenge. &lt;br/&gt;Project goals include: bringing statistical
methods developed in one-body Anderson localization physics to bear on quantum
many particle systems, and revealing correlation-dominated transport effects in
non-Fermi liquids. The focus is on low-dimensional quantum critical regimes and
driven topological systems. The goal of the educational component is to make
available more modern mathematical tools to physics and STEM students and
workers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specific research and education objectives are
to:&lt;br/&gt;1) Test the hypothesis that the many-body localization transition
can be continuous, and investigate the physics of the "bad metal" phase
predicted to occur above it.&lt;br/&gt;2) Test the hypothesis that "clustering"
between the probability peaks of different many-body states determines the
relaxation dynamics in the bad metal phase, and investigate competing orders in
the presence of inhomogeneity and one-body state Chalker scaling.&lt;br/&gt;3)
Investigate new transport effects that directly reveal the influence of
correlations, by exploiting novel geometries for edge loop drag and quantum
quench dynamics in 2D topological insulators, and by sharpening the roles of
virtual and real collisions in the thermoelectric transport of correlated
electron fluids.&lt;br/&gt;4) Develop and disseminate virtual learning modules
for topics in modern mathematics accessible to undergraduate physics majors,
emphasizing algorithms and visualization. The PI will create learning modules
starting with Lie algebra representation theory, and these will be tested in the
classroom and openly disseminated via a permanent Rice-hosted web
repository.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ideas germinated from many-body localization
may lead to insight into the interplay of competing orders, disorder, and
frustration in correlated electron systems; however, many fundamental questions
regarding the nature or even the existence of the many-body localization
transition currently are unanswered, particularly in dimensions higher than one.
The approaches will (a) introduce improved models amenable to exact numerical or
analytical solutions, and (b) exploit the proximity of a 2D many-body
localization transition to a special zero temperature Anderson-Mott transition.
Competing orders and critical delocalization will be studied in an interacting
version of an integrable quasicrystal model. The PI's investigation of
thermoelectric transport will be in collaboration with experimentalists who are
experts on graphene, and will help disentangle the roles of hydrodynamics,
quasiparticle and transport lifetimes in marginal Fermi liquids.