* 1552202
* Processes and Rates of Arc Crust Growth and Differentiation in the Southern Sierra Nevada Crustal Section
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2019
* Oliver Jagoutz, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 12/31/2019
* USD 320,000.00

The construction of magmatic arcs at subduction zones plays a critical role in
the creation of new continental crust on Earth. In particular, a number of
different mechanisms in the lower crust (>30 km depth) of arcs are hypothesized
to be critical for the formation of felsic continental crust. However the
restricted number of locations worldwide where rocks formed at these depths are
exposed on the surface is a fundamental limitation to improving our
understanding of the chemical and physical controls on these processes and the
time scales over which they occur. This proposal aims to evaluate these
processes through a detailed study of a relatively little studied exposure of
lower crustal rocks in the southernmost Sierra Nevada batholith, combining field
observations, major, trace element and isotope geochemistry, and high precision
geochronology. The research activities in this project will be integrated with
field and analytical experiences for undergraduates while findings will be
incorporated into undergraduate courses. Through collaboration with the Tejon
Ranch Conservancy, it is planned to help develop outreach programs and education
materials for the Tejon Ranch property. These programs include geologic tours of
the ranch, and will cover both the basics of plate tectonics and arc magmatism,
as well as the geologic history of California. The programs will be available to
the general public, and be specifically targeted to public schools serving the
primarily underrepresented minority populations in the Tehachapi/Bakersfield
region.

The Sierra Nevada Batholith is one of the best-studied examples of continental
arc plutonism, but nearly the entire exposed range samples rocks formed at
shallow to middle crustal pressures, and as a result our understanding of lower
crustal processes in the Sierra Nevada are limited. However, the Sierra Nevada
also contains a unique crustal section, exposing a structurally continuous
section extending from ~7-37 km depth, and containing a suite of igneous rocks
emplaced contemporaneously at ~100 Ma, coinciding with the Late Cretaceous
Sierra Nevada magmatic flare-up event. This section provides an ideal location
to evaluate different models for lower crustal processes including fractional
crystallization and partial melting dominated deep crustal hot zones, cyclic
underthrusting and relamination of buoyant material. The combination of
structurally continuous and contemporaneously emplaced outcrop will allow us to
better characterize these processes and their relevant timescales, and to assess
their importance for the generation of felsic continental crust. These findings
will have additional important implications for our understanding of the
Mesozoic history of the western US, and for validating seismic observations of
continental lower crust.