* 1552245
* Collaborative Research:  CEDAR--Quantifying Ion Drifts in the Mid-latitude Ionosphere and Their Coupling to the Neutral Atmosphere
* GEO,AGS
* 04/01/2016,09/30/2019
* William Coley, University of Texas at Dallas
* Continuing Grant
* John Meriwether
* 09/30/2019
* USD 255,224.00

The Coupling, Energetics, and Dynamics of Atmospheric Regions (CEDAR) program is
a broad-based, community-guided, upper atmospheric research program. It is aimed
at understanding the behavior of atmospheric regions from the middle atmosphere
upward through the ionized upper layers of the atmosphere and into outer space
in terms of coupling, energetics, chemistry, and dynamics on regional and global
scales. The mid-latitude ionosphere serves as the intermediary between the
active ionospheres of the polar and equatorial regions, but it has not been
studied very thoroughly. This Collaborative CEDAR award involving University of
Texas at Dallas, Virginia Tech University, and the University of Colorado is
aimed at developing the first quiet-time empirical model of the ionosphere
electric field distribution to fill in the necessary ground truth needed to
produce a true understanding of the global dynamics of the ionosphere. The
research effort would use 15 years of Air Force Defense Meteorological Space
Plasma (DMSP) measurements of ion zonal flow speeds in the mid-latitude
ionosphere to construct an empirical model of mid-latitude ionospheric quiet-
time electric fields. This data set would be supplemented by ion drift data
obtained from the mid-latitude SuperDARN sites. This database would be made
available to outside users, and thus, would be a valuable ionospheric community
resource. Following the completion of the development of the quiet time model,
observations from storm times will be compared to predictions based upon
application of the new quiet time model. The determined differences would be
analyzed within the guidance and context of the CTIP (Coupled thermosphere
ionosphere plasmasphere)-RCM model runs to understand the underlying physical
mechanisms causing the observed variability relative to the baseline model
established, to quantify the magnitude and extent of storm-time disturbances,
and finally, to quantify the coupling of the mid-latitude ion drifts to the
neutral atmosphere and the transfer of energy between the polar and equatorial
regions. Finally, making use of nearly two decades of DMSP data to understand
and develop empirical models goes to the heart of one of the fundamental
challenges of the CEDAR Aeronomy program, which is to quantify a baseline model
of mid-latitude electric fields. Consequently, the question of variability as a
function of solar phase, geomagnetic activity, and dynamical coupling to the
lower atmosphere and to the magnetosphere regions can be more carefully
assessed. The results achieved would be of great interest and use to the
ionosphere and thermospheric modeling community and also relevant to the CEDAR
mission of "understanding the fundamental properties of the space-atmosphere
interaction region (SAIR); identify the interconnected processes that define the
SAIR's global behavior, evolution, and influence on the Sun-Earth system".
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main goal of this project is to quantify the response
of the ionosphere relative to direct, spectrally separated measurements of solar
extreme ultraviolet (EUV) radiation from the TIMED and SDO spacecraft. This
approach constitutes an immense improvement over previous studies based on
proxies. The C/NOFS and DMSP spacecraft at a range of altitudes will provide
corresponding measurements of ionospheric parameters. This dataset, spanning
more than a solar cycle, allows for the use of advanced statistical analysis
techniques and will be used together with the SAMI-2 model to address
outstanding science questions related to understanding the ionospheric response
to solar EUV variability. Interesting questions to be investigated include the
relative importance of and interaction between the responses in the neutral and
ionized components of the upper atmosphere.