* 1552647
* CAREER: Investigation of Conserved Global Regulatory Systems Using Cross-organism Comparison
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/2016,02/28/2022
* Patrick Curtis, University of Mississippi
* Continuing Grant
* Anthony Garza
* 02/28/2022
* USD 767,103.00

Bacteria are the most abundant life-form on Earth, but much of how bacteria work
on a molecular level is still a mystery. Are there ways that molecular systems
work in bacteria that are similar to systems in higher organisms? Or do bacteria
have their own unique systems? Do some bacteria have systems different even from
other bacteria? In this study, molecular systems in two bacteria, Caulobacter
crescentus and Brevundimonas subvibrioides, will be investigated to determine
how much they have in common with systems found in related bacteria or in higher
organisms. By investigating these systems, the extent to which evolution has
reused the same blueprints to build complexity will be determined. Part of this
research will be performed by college undergraduates in the classroom, allowing
a great many students, who normally would not have the opportunity, to conduct
their own biological research study. Additionally, high school students will be
exposed to the wonders of the biological world as seen through the lens of a
microscope.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Prokaryotic analogs of eukaryotic cellular
systems have been found in a number of bacteria. Yet, how much these systems are
conserved from bacterium to bacterium, how similar these prokaryotic systems are
to their eukaryotic versions, or how much they have been adapted to suit the
unique needs of each organism is largely unknown. This research will study the
GcrA/CcrM epigenetic regulatory system and the DivK/CtrA cell cycle regulatory
system, both of which are conserved throughout the Alphaproteobacterial clade.
These systems will be investigated in the bacterium Brevundimonas subvibrioides
where they display important operational variation from the model organism
Caulobacter crescentus, using modern genetic and cell biology techniques,
including ChIP-Seq and single-molecule sequencing. The comparisons of regulatory
systems between related bacteria will aid in showing how systems evolve to
better suit the needs of different organisms, what fundamental principles must
be conserved between them, and assess just how translatable models can be across
evolutionary distance. Part of this research will be performed by undergraduates
in an upper level class, providing the opportunity for many students to work on
an original research project. This study also includes the development of a
single day program designed to expose high school students to microscopy in
order to visually draw students into STEM fields.