* 1552747
* CAREER: A network-oriented research and education plan to explore links between forest cover and temperature in the eastern United States
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2016,02/28/2022
* Kimberly Novick, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 02/28/2022
* USD 774,845.00

While the vast majority of the surface of the earth has warmed over the past
century, in much of the eastern United States the air temperature has failed to
rise or has even declined. At the same time, forest cover over the region has
increased dramatically, driven by abandonment of poor quality agricultural
lands. This project will test the hypothesis that reforestation in the eastern
U.S. provides the explanation, in that it affects the surface energy balance in
ways that lead to cooling and thus obscures long-term warming from climate
change. Just as human bodies are cooled by sweating or by a fan, forests may be
cooled by greater rates of evapotranspiration and wind-driven movement of heat
energy when compared to the croplands and grasslands they have replaced. Looking
forward, the rate of reforestation will decline over time as available space is
filled, but the types of trees that fill in naturally or are planted will likely
change. Notably, drought-tolerant oaks are currently declining, while drought-
sensitive maples and pines are proliferating. So this work will also test a
second hypothesis that ongoing regional shifts in tree species promote a
reduction in evapotranspiration, particularly during periods of drought, that
will tend to warm the surface. The research will inform the development of
sustainable agro-ecosystem management strategies that mitigate damaging effects
of drought on ecosystem productivity and function. A series of workshops will be
developed, along with a citizen science program aimed at training young
scientists in effective approaches for leveraging and analyzing network
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will be enabled by interactions with a
range of environmental observation networks, which aggregate meteorological and
ecological observations from many ecosystems and thereby enable a big data
approach to environmental science. Project outcomes are relevant to ongoing
modelling efforts to reproduce historic climate trends and predict future
conditions with more confidence. This work will advance network-driven
environmental science by generating a rich collection of leaf- to ecosystem
scale observations that will be shared with existing networks. The research is
motivated by the recognition that, within the study region, ongoing management
activities are driving a transition from forests dominated by species that are
more anisohydric in their water use to forests dominated by more isohydric
species. The concept of isohydry has received much attention in recent years,
and this project will advance this body of knowledge by classifying important
eastern U.S. species along the isohydric-anisohydric continuum, and developing a
model for stomatal conductance that incorporates the isohydric-anisohydric
framework. While this project is focused on ecosystem energy balance, the
project outcomes will also be relevant for efforts to understand regional carbon
and water cycling, and for the development of forest management strategies that
mitigate deleterious effects of drought on ecosystem functioning