* 1552037
* CAREER: Sustainable Chemical Synthesis by Plasma-Enhanced Solar Energy
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2016,01/31/2022
* Juan Trelles, University of Massachusetts Lowell
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 01/31/2022
* USD 519,121.00

The production of fuels and chemicals by sustainable processes is one of key
technological challenges of the 21st century. Carbon dioxide gas generated by
power generation or industrial processes is a potential source of carbon for
fuels and chemicals production. However, carbon dioxide is not very reactive,
and no viable technologies for its conversion into fuels and chemicals presently
exist. The goal of this product is to convert carbon dioxide and water to fuels
and chemical using plasma-enhanced solar energy. In the proposed process, solar
energy heats the carbon dioxide gas to the high temperatures needed to increase
its reactivity. The heated gas is then converted into plasma, also known as an
electrically charged gas, using electrical energy. It is reasoned that the
plasma state of the gas will enhance the rate of carbon dioxide conversion. The
process is potentially sustainable and has a low carbon footprint because it
uses waste carbon dioxide and abundant solar energy, where electricity needed to
generate the plasma is provided by solar photovoltaic cells. The project will
also develop instructional carts for demonstrating energy and sustainability
topics inspired by this research to a broad audience that includes Hispanic K-12
students in the Lowell, Massachusetts area. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall
goal of the proposed research is to develop a fundamental understanding of a new
process for synthesis of chemical and fuels from carbon dioxide and water using
concentrated solar energy to drive the reaction thermochemistry and non-
equilibrium plasma to enhance the chemical reaction kinetics. Plasma-Enhanced
Solar Energy (PESE) combines solar thermochemistry and plasma science
principles. The project will experimentally and computationally investigate PESE
for carbon dioxide, water, and methane decomposition and reforming. The research
will test the hypothesis that the molecular excitation produced by free
electrons in plasmas increases solar photon absorption leading to enhanced
chemical reaction kinetics. Towards this end, the proposed research will seek to
understand non-equilibrium energy transport phenomena characteristic of free
electron and photon systems, with particular focus on processes with comparable
photon and electron energy fluxes. To support the research plan, new reactor
systems equipped with solar energy receivers and non-equilibrium electrical
discharge capability to flowing gas will be developed and characterized. Reactor
experiments spanning the ratio of solar to electrical energy inputs will be
performed at scalable process conditions. New fluid flow and chemical kinetics
models for non-equilibrium energy transport will be derived and experimentally
validated. The research outcomes seek to reveal the specific pathways of energy
conversion during PESE processing and quantify the efficacy of plasma
enhancement. Additionally, the research outcomes are relevant to other fields
where electron and photon transport have essential roles, such as laser
materials processing, semiconductor manufacturing, and combustion enhancement.
The educational goal of the project is to engage students, from middle school to
graduate level, on global energy sustainability topics. To enable the proposed
education program, interactive demonstration carts for the modular teaching and
learning of energy engineering &amp; sustainability will be developed and
assessed.