* 1552958
* CAREER: Spectrally-Encoded Ultrafast Microwave Panoramic Camera
* ENG,ECCS
* 01/01/2016,03/31/2018
* Chung-Tse Wu, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 03/31/2018
* USD 500,000.00

Current microwave radar systems using conventional beam scanning techniques
cannot simultaneously achieve a panoramic field of view (FOV) and high scanning
speed. This is due to intrinsic hardware latencies from mechanical rotors or
electronic phase shifters, or excessive computation time from digital signal
processing. These limitations can fundamentally be overcome by transforming
imaging concepts from optics into microwaves, enabling a microwave panoramic
camera (MPC). The knowledge and understanding of such integration will lead to a
novel category of radars and imaging sensors that can be used for a wide range
of sensing applications. The proposed MPC will be applied, in particular, to
automotive radar to provide driver assistance, making driving safer and more
convenient. The fast sensing speed and panoramic FOV enabled by MPC-based radars
will provide early warning of potential collisions to drivers. Furthermore, the
ultrafast frame rate of MPCs will allow differentiation of objects by detecting
their Doppler signatures. With a panoramic FOV, MPCs can also be used in
autonomous driving systems requiring constant monitoring of road situations. The
educational component of the proposed work will integrate advanced automotive
technologies into undergraduate education by engaging community college students
in the Metro Detroit area. It will be conducted through the University Bound
Program, a State of Michigan King-Chavez-Parks (KCP) Initiative. Community
college students, especially those from underrepresented groups, will be
encouraged to participate in research activities in antenna and microwave
engineering essential for today's automotive radar imaging sensors and
telematics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research is to transform
spectrally encoded confocal microscopy, a fiber-based optical imaging method for
high-speed scanning, into the microwave and millimeter-wave regime. This
integration will enable the proposed microwave panoramic camera with ultrafast
scanning speed and a panoramic field of view. The technical approach relies on
the creation of transmission-line based microwave metamaterials, also known as
composite right/left-handed transmission lines. By tailoring microwave
metamaterials to form a frequency scanned array, a two-dimensional frequency-to-
space mapping mechanism can be realized. Utilizing the two-dimensional angular
mapping scheme along with the range information obtained from the reflected
signal will result in an image of the scene in three dimensions. This research
will demonstrate the capability to capture a three-dimensional microwave image
with 180-degree FOV in both azimuth and elevation, with a frame-rate speed of 1
MHz. The fast frame refresh rate will allow any Doppler and micro-Doppler
effects of moving objects to be captured and exploited for target recognition
and identification. Furthermore, by engineering the dispersion characteristics
of microwave metamaterials, the proposed MPC can be designed to work in multiple
bands, making it feasible to perform dual-band operations for radar systems,
such as 24 GHz and 77 GHz automotive radar sensors.