* 1552721
* CAREER: Revisiting the operation of mate acquisition
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2024
* Hope Klug, University of Tennessee Chattanooga
* Continuing Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 03/31/2024
* USD 666,389.00

Acquiring mates is one of the most fundamental steps to successfully reproducing
in many animals. Individuals vary widely in how many mates they acquire, and as
a result, how many offspring they produce. Understanding why such variation
exists and how it is linked to traits of he organisms is essential for
understanding variation between the sexes, populations, and species.
Surprisingly, scientists are often unable to predict the conditions under which
strong variation in mate acquisition will exist and which traits improve mate
acquisition. This research will theoretically and empirically identify a range
of understudied ecological factors that influence mate acquisition, thereby
transforming our understanding of how animals successfully reproduce. The
principle investigator's proposed educational activities will be integrated
seamlessly into the project and facilitate training of diverse K-12 students and
teachers, as well as undergraduate and graduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Enhanced understanding of mate acquisition
necessitates that we 1) determine the relative importance of various factors
affecting mating, 2) assess how such effects are manifested in nature, and 3)
merge theoretical predictions with empirical data to explore how well we
understand the operation of mate acquisition. To accomplish these goals, the PI
will use an integrative approach that employs empirical and theoretical tools to
1) assess the effects of resource availability, chance, life history, and more
well studied factors on mating dynamics and 2) empirically explore the
relationship between such factors and phenotypic traits that increase mating
success in a range of fish species. Students will be involved in all aspects of
the research and the PI will lead K-12 outreach activities. The project also
involves collaborative research in Finland, Switzerland, and the United Kingdom.
Funding supporting the international component was provided by the Office of
International Science and Engineering.