* 1552848
* CAREER: Evolution of Morphological Diversity in Primates as revealed by 3D Digital Data, Comprehensive Datasets, and Automated Phenotyping
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2023
* Douglas Boyer, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* John Yellen
* 05/31/2023
* USD 548,085.00

In this CAREER award Dr. Doug Boyer, along with collaborators, will collect data
on primate skeletons in the form of 3D digital imagery of museum specimens and
apply newly developed algorithmic methods to analyze and interpret the
evolutionary meaning of those data. This research will address fundamental
questions about how modern primate diversity came to be, work to refine
understanding of the incremental processes that differentiated humanity from its
closest relatives. As a result of this research 3D digital models will be added
to Duke?s virtual museum (www.morphosource.org), which is accessible to all
researchers and the public; the bioinformatics analysis tools his team is
developing will enable researchers to analyze and interpret data on
geometrically complex aspects anatomical diversity. Boyer will simultaneously
work with education scientists connecting this virtual museum to educators and
students in ways that emphasize STEM learning and Next Generation Science
Standards. In addition, the virtual museum -- open to contributions from any
scientist -- will provide a forum where researchers can easily disseminate their
data (and theoretical advances stemming from it) to educators and
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In Boyer's 5-year project he will execute studies
targeting hypotheses central to perceptions of how primates evolved: 1)
Influence of dietary ecology on primate characteristics: mechanical properties
of tooth geometry will be quantified and their evolutionary tempo and mode will
be modeled across living and fossil primates to see whether a diet of insects or
herbaceous material has driven various episodes of diversification. The team
will also evaluate whether certain other distinctive features of primate
skeletons can be related to dietary needs or other biological roles by assessing
patterns of covariation among all traits of interest. 2) Influence of functional
constraints on patterns of evolution: Boyer and his team will determine how
anatomical solutions to ecological problems in ancestral primates have affected
subsequent paths of diversification by running analyses that compare magnitudes
and patterns of variation among different regions of the skeleton across
primates. This project will contribute multiple studies introducing a new
paradigm for testing evolutionary hypotheses. Additionally, it creates a novel
bioinformatics infrastructure that democratizes access to morphological datasets
and enables a broader community of researchers to analyze such data, setting the
stage for synchronizing morphological studies with genomic ones, and will
ultimately maximizing the explanatory power of research utilizing morphology to
gain insight on evolutionary processes. In particular, molecular and
evolutionary-developmental biologists will be able to evaluate the significance
of morphological variation associated with genetic and gene-expression data, and
biomedical engineers will be able to automate measurement protocols and evaluate
variation in their data more rapidly and efficiently.