* 1552448
* CAREER - The Winding Roads to Effective Teaching: Characterizing the Progressions in Instructional Knowledge and Practices of STEM Faculty
* EDU,DUE
* 03/01/2016,05/31/2020
* Marilyne Stains, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Continuing Grant
* Dawn Rickey
* 05/31/2020
* USD 959,849.00

National initiatives to improve undergraduate science education build upon
decades of research on and development of effective teaching practices. These
evidence-based instructional practices (EBIPs) promote students' conceptual
understanding and favorable attitudes about science, technology, engineering,
and mathematics (STEM), with the greatest impacts observed among women and
members of underrepresented groups. By improving retention rates and attracting
a more diverse student population to the sciences, these research-based ways of
teaching science can help address the national need to educate STEM-literate
graduates and advance workforce development goals. The challenge is fostering
the effective use of these teaching practices on a national scale. STEM faculty
members are at the core of any successful instructional reform, yet surprisingly
little is known about them with respect to their teaching. As extensive
resources and efforts are currently focused on transforming STEM instructional
practices at the college level nationally, there is a critical need to
characterize STEM faculty members' knowledge base for teaching, instructional
practices, relationships between the two, as well as progressions of this
knowledge and these practices over time. Moreover, there is a need to
characterize these progressions under varying reform environments (short
workshops versus semester-long professional development; different departmental
and institutional culture around teaching), as well as for faculty at various
points of their academic career. Results of this foundational research will
provide critical insight into the diverse progressions of STEM faculty members'
knowledge base for teaching and instructional practices, which will inform
current national and local reform efforts that aim at the widespread
implementation of EBIPs in STEM courses in college
settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This NSF Faculty Early Career Development project
will address a wide gap in the discipline-based education research literature
about STEM faculty members' knowledge base for teaching and instructional
practices. Specifically, the project will characterize how STEM faculty members'
practical theories and their integration with instructional practices evolve in
the contexts of different (a) levels of experience as faculty members; (b)
climate, culture, and rewards structures of departments and institutions; and
(c) formal and informal professional development experiences. The research is
grounded in the Teacher-Centered Systemic Reform Model, which describes faculty
members' decision-making processes about teaching and influences impacting these
processes. A convergent, longitudinal mixed methods design will be implemented
to address the research questions. Quantitative data will include surveys,
classroom observations, and course artifacts. The qualitative component will
consist of an embedded collective case study. Data collected will include
interviews with faculty and course artifacts. These research activities will
result in an enhanced understanding of STEM faculty members' a) pedagogical
content knowledge (PCK) elements, b) orientations toward teaching and beliefs
about teaching, and c) instructional practices, as well as d) alignment among
these three constructs under various contexts (e.g., faculty at different levels
of their academic career, faculty experiencing different types of departmental
and institutional climate, and faculty participating in different types of
formal and informal professional development). This foundational research will
further inform the theoretical framework and provide critical insights on
effective practices for STEM faculty professional development to the STEM
community at large. The research and education program will be fully integrated:
one component of the education program, a professional development program for
STEM faculty at the University of Nebraska-Lincoln (UNL), will serve as the
context for part of the study; in turn, the results of the study will inform the
design and implementation of the professional development program but will also
provide opportunities to offer one-on-one teaching consultations with UNL STEM
faculty and will inform the design of a graduate-level curriculum on reformed
instructional practices.