* 1552692
* CAREER:  Empirical Studies on the Role of Cities in Influencing Health and Economic Growth in the Long Run
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2016,02/28/2022
* Walker Hanlon, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 02/28/2022
* USD 416,435.00

The goal of this project is to improve our understanding of cities and how their
characteristics can influence welfare and economic growth over the long-term.
The project focuses on two areas where new research methods and results are
needed in order to inform ongoing policy debates. One strand of research focuses
on improving our understanding of local networks of buyer-supplier
relationships. Specifically, the PI studies how local buyer-supplier networks
can improve firm performance, and the role that they play in spreading shocks
across local economies. Improving our understanding of these issues can help us
anticipate the impact that shocks to important local firms can have on the
larger economy. The second research strand studies the tradeoff between
encouraging industrial growth in cities and protecting the local environment,
which has implications for the health of city residents, city growth, and
population sorting. To make progress on these important issues, this project
combines data tracking the economic development of cities over the long-run
(across a period of 150 years) with new theoretical and econometric tools. The
primary data set describes the evolution of city employment, by industry, for
all industries in 31 cities. Additional information covers aspects of city
health, education, marriage and fertility patterns, firm bankruptcies, etc.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More analytically, the first strand of research in this
project draws on these new data in order to understand (1) how inter-firm
networks influence the long-term growth of cities and (2) the role that these
networks play in the propagation of shocks through local economies. This
involves adapting standard economic theories to the empirical setting, deriving
theoretically-grounded estimating equations, and applying them to the data. This
research stream can contribute to our understanding of cities and can help
improve local industrial policy decisions, including the $80 billion in tax
incentives that local and state governments in the U.S. use each year to attract
industries.&lt;br/&gt;The second strand of research in this project tries to
estimate the impact of local environmental degradation on local economic growth
over the long run. Standard urban economic theories predict that local pollution
will slow down economic growth by (1) making it more difficult for firms to
attract and retain workers, and (2) by lowering the productivity and quality-of-
life of workers by affecting their health. In this strand of work, the PI
incorporates local pollution into a standard urban economic model. The model is
then used to develop a theoretically-grounded estimation approach for measuring
the impact of local pollution on local employment growth over the long-run. The
PI also studies the long-term health effects of local pollution. The results can
help improve our understanding of the economic costs of local industrial
pollution and the economic impact of local environmental regulation.