* 1552131
* CAREER:Information-Theoretic Foundations of Community Detection and Graphical Channels
* CSE,CCF
* 02/15/2016,01/31/2022
* Emmanuel Abbe, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 01/31/2022
* USD 500,000.00

The main goal of this project is to establish the fundamental limits of
community detection. In virtually all applications dealing with networks and
large data sets, one wishes to extract sub-groups of data points that are
similar, i.e., communities. While community detection techniques are expanding
daily with practical successes, relatively less attention has been paid to the
fundamental limits, and consequently to where current algorithms stand. By
establishing the fundamental limits of community detection, this project offers
a novel take on community detection algorithms, and expands information theory
in a prominent area where it can naturally flourish. The project will work with
real data sets from social and biological networks. In particular, it develops a
new initiative to extract communities in Hi-C genomic data, contributing to
unveil the 3D folding structure of DNA.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
focus in particular on the stochastic block model, a canonical model for
community detection. The investigator's recent work leverages information theory
to provide the first necessary and sufficient conditions for exact recovery in
the stochastic block model, and an efficient algorithm achieving the limit. This
opens the door to a new perspective on community detection, which is developed
in this project by casting community detection as unorthodox error-control
coding problems. In this context, new types of f-divergences are expected to
play a key role, analogous to the Kullback-Leibler divergence in Shannon's
channel coding theorem, while other weaker recovery requirements may rely on
unorthodox broadcasting problems, graph entropic inequalities, and information-
estimation problems. This makes the study of community detection a rich area
connecting information theory, machine learning and networks; less focused on
ergodic results; and more interlaced with graph theory and spectral analysis. In
particular, this project will show how these problems, as well as more general
low-rank approximation problems, can be studied under the novel and unifying
theme of graphical channels.