* 1552017
* Collaborative Research:  CEDAR--Midnight Temperature Maximum and Its Impact on the Ionosphere-Thermosphere System
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Carlos Martinis, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Carrie E. Black
* 08/31/2019
* USD 58,881.00

In this project, phenomena in the thermosphere and ionosphere will be studied
combining the analysis of observations and modeling. The midnight temperature
maximum (MTM) in the thermosphere and related ionospheric phenomena have been
observed by multiple instruments but have not been successfully simulated by a
physics-based model. This study will improve our knowledge of dynamical and
electrodynamical processes in the ionosphere at low latitudes. It will also
serve to validate and improve the climatology of wind velocity, neutral
temperature, electron density, and electric fields in the whole atmosphere model
(WAM). This model will be transitioned into operation for upper atmosphere
forecasting and space weather prediction in the near future. A summer student
participating in the project will gain experience in data analysis of
observations and basic physics of the upper atmosphere.

The WAM is the first comprehensive model that is able to internally generate an
MTM of a realistic magnitude. Through simulations using the fully coupled WAM
and global ionosphere and plasmasphere model (GIP), this study aims to gain a
better understanding of the climatology and morphology of MTM and to investigate
its impact on the nighttime ionosphere-thermosphere system. Simulations will
provide useful information on MTM in order to interpret the various
observations. Multiple ground-based and satellite measurements will be analyzed
to infer the longitudinal, latitudinal, seasonal, and solar-cycle variations of
MTM and compared with simulation results. Furthermore, ion-neutral coupling
between the thermosphere and ionosphere at nighttime will also be investigated.