* 1552535
* CAREER: Multilevel Mediation Models to Study the Impact of Teacher Development on Student Achievement in Mathematics
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2023
* Benjamin Kelcey, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Finbarr Sloane
* 08/31/2023
* USD 679,105.00

This is a Faculty Early Career Development Program (CAREER) project. The CAREER
program is a National Science Foundation-wide activity that offers the most
prestigious awards in support of junior faculty who exemplify the role of
teacher-scholars through outstanding research, excellent education and the
integration of education and research. The intellectual merit and broader
impacts of this study lie in two complementary contributions of the project.
First, the development of the statistical framework for the design of multilevel
mediation studies has significant potential for broad impact because it develops
a core platform that is transferable to other STEM (science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics) education areas and STEM disciplines. Second, the
development of software and curricular materials to implement this framework
further capitalize on the promise of this work because it distributes the
results in an accessible manner to diverse sets of research and practitioner
groups across STEM education areas and STEM disciplines. Together, the
components of this project will substantially expand the scope and quality of
evidence generated through mathematics professional development and, more
generally, multilevel mediation studies throughout STEM areas by increasing
researchers' capacity to design valid and comprehensive studies of the theories
of action and change that underlie research programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will develop a comprehensive framework to inform and guide the analytic
design of teacher professional development studies in mathematics. The proposed
framework incorporates four integrated research and education components: (1)
develop statistical formulas and tools to guide the optimal design of
experimental and non-experimental multilevel mediation studies in the presence
of measurement error, (2) develop empirical estimates of the parameters needed
to implement these formulas to design teacher development studies in
mathematics, (3) develop free and accessible software to execute this framework,
and (4) develop training materials and conduct workshops on the framework to
improve the capacity of the field to design effective and efficient studies of
teacher development. An essential goal of the research is to advance a science
of teaching and learning in ways that traverse both research and education.