* 1552481
* CAREER: Checking Dynamic Policies in Stateful Next-Generation Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 04/15/2016,03/31/2022
* Vyas Sekar, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 03/31/2022
* USD 612,563.00

The security, performance, and availability of our critical network
infrastructures relies on the correct implementation of different policy goals.
Network operators realize these goals by composing and configuring diverse
network appliances such as routers, firewalls, intrusion prevention systems, and
web proxies. Unfortunately, this process of managing networks is extremely
challenging, error-prone, and entails significant manual effort and operational
costs. Configuration and implementation errors could have significant
consequences as it can degrade network performance, induce downtime for critical
infrastructures, and cause violations of key security postures. Systematically
identifying and diagnosing potential violations has been, and continues to be, a
fundamental challenge. This project will develop a principled framework to check
if a network setup correctly implements a given suite of policies and to help
operators proactively and automatically diagnose and localize the sources of
policy violations. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Checking policy violations is hard
even for simple reachability properties (e.g., can A talk to B) in today's
networks. Furthermore, next-generation technologies such as software-defined
networking and network functions virtualization are poised to enable richer
dynamic policies (e.g., if a host generates too many connections, subject it to
deeper inspection) and also introduce new sources of complexity (e.g., elastic
scaling, software bugs). Existing approaches in network testing and verification
have fundamental expressiveness and scalability challenges in tackling dynamic
policies and stateful elements. To address these challenges, the research will
include developing a model-based testing framework that will lead to fundamental
advances in network semantics, modeling, testing, and diagnosis. To this end,
the project will design: (1) new formal semantics to express dynamic policies
over stateful networks; (2) expressive-yet-efficient abstractions for modeling
the behavior of advanced network functions; (3) techniques to synthesize models
of network functions; (4) scalable symbolic execution algorithms to generate
test cases; and (5) efficient diagnosis algorithms to validate tests and
localize violations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The proposed
research and education activities will develop testing tools and abstractions,
which is a new capability that bolsters networking education, research, and
practice. The project will inspire future educators and practitioners to apply
systematic network testing as an integral part of their workflow to guarantee
the security, performance, and availability our critical infrastructures. The
project will develop new educational modules that will be integrated into the
research with undergraduate and graduate-level classes and undergraduate
capstone classes. The research and education efforts will engage undergraduates
and underrepresented communities. The project will create unique opportunities
for interdisciplinary training of the future workforce across the domains of
networking, security, programming languages, and formal verification. The
project will also design novel security games and education modules for K-12
students and teachers to highlight the importance of network testing for
securing our critical infrastructures. Finally, the project deliverables (code,
models, and education modules) will be released under open-source licenses as
enablers for other researchers and educators, and to help transition the ideas
from research to practice.