* 1552235
* CAREER: Investigating how Conical Intersection Topography Drives Photochemistry using High-Sensitivity Femtosecond Spectroscopy
* MPS,CHE
* 02/15/2016,01/31/2020
* Bart Kahr, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Colby Foss
* 01/31/2020
* USD 663,000.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms
(CSDM-A) Program of the Division of Chemistry, Professor Daniel Turner of New
York University and his research group conducts experimental studies aimed at
understanding how certain coordinated motions of the nuclei and electrons in
molecules determine the outcomes of photochemical reactions. The research
improves the fundamental understanding of several light-driven processes,
including mechanisms of solar energy conversion. The activities enhance
secondary education, enable mentoring by retired scientists, promote science to
the public, and produce scientists equipped to apply technical and quantitative
skills in research, industry, and education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
focuses on the detection of conical intersections and extraction of topographic
information from femtosecond spectroscopy experiments. By clarifying the role of
conical intersections in condensed-phase photochemistry, the proposed
experimental studies not only resolve questions about conical intersection
topography that have been postulated by computational work, but also guide and
motivate future theoretical efforts. The molecules to be measured, oxazines and
phytochromes, serve as model systems for studying how conical intersections
mediate nonradiative decay and drive photo-isomerization reactions,
respectively. The broader impacts include training young researchers for
scientific careers, disseminating science to the general public through a
partnership with The Huffington Post, creating a website that captures the
expertise of retired scientists to fill in the gaps created by generational
turnover of research trends, and, through a partnership with high school
teachers, developing feasible science labs for underprivileged schools.