* 1552161
* CEDAR: Traveling Ionospheric Disturbances (TIDs) Excited by Tropospheric Phenomena and their Effect on Plasma Instabilities
* GEO,AGS
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2020
* Cesar Valladares, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Alan Liu
* 08/31/2020
* USD 374,080.00

In this project, features in the Earth's ionosphere called traveling ionospheric
disturbances (TIDs) will be studied by analyzing ground- and satellite-based
measurements. The ground-based measurements include total electron current (TEC)
measurements collected by a few hundred ground-based GPS receivers distributed
across South and Central America and the Caribbean region in the LISN network
(Low-Latitude ionospheric sensor network). It also includes ionosondes, Fabry-
Perot Interferometers, and the incoherent scatter radars at Jicamarca and
Arecibo. The outcomes of this research will be a better understanding of the
variability and characteristics of medium-scale TIDs (MSTIDs) and TEC depletions
during different ionospheric and thermospheric conditions. The study also aims
to resolve whether there exists a link between tropical storms and the formation
of MSTIDs. The occurrence of plasma irregularities poses a prominent natural
hazard to communication, navigation and high precision pointing
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The conjugate properties of MSTIDs and plasma
structures seen at mid-latitudes under a variety of different ionosphere and
thermosphere conditions and for magnetically quiet and active conditions will be
investigated. Specifically, the following questions will be addressed: What is
the control that the latitudinal variability of the plasma conductivity and the
propagation direction of atmospheric gravity waves exert on the MSTIDs? What is
the initiation mechanism of mid latitude depletions? Do MSTIDs map to conjugate
locations during disturbed conditions? Can MSTIDs or TIDs influence the
latitudinal (and then altitude) extension of equatorial plasma bubbles? During
special events, such as large magnetic storms, TEC values collected by the
majority of GPS receivers that exist in North America will be also be used to
study poleward expansions of TEC depletions and MSTIDs. Electric fields and
density observations gathered with several instruments on-board C/NOFS, DMSP and
SWARM satellites will complement the observations.