* 1552471
* CAREER: FAST methods for protein folding and design
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2022
* Gregory Bowman, Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Jaroslaw Majewski
* 05/31/2022
* USD 680,279.00

Title: CAREER: FAST methods for protein folding and
design&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proteins are molecular machines that are largely
responsible for processes as varied as digestion of food to building new
components of cells. Many proteins are capable of spontaneously folding from an
extended chain into compact, functional machines. Once folded, proteins continue
to undergo motions that are related to their stability and function.
Understanding the functional relevance of these motions remains extremely
challenging because it is difficult to observe movement on the atomic scale and
provide the necessary structural detail to connect these motions with a
protein's function. The objectives of this project are 1) to develop powerful
algorithms for simulating these protein motions, 2) apply these algorithms to
understand how proteins fold, and 3) to combine these algorithms with
biochemical experiments to design proteins that are more stable than their
natural counterparts. Completion of this research will lay the foundation for
future efforts to understand the role of protein motions in processes like
cellular communications and to design proteins for applications such as the
synthesis of biofuels. In concert with these research objectives, the PI will
develop a python programming boot camp to teach students in biology the basic
programming skills required to analyze their own data, providing a starting
point for more sophisticated integration of computation and experiments and
opening new job opportunities in the STEM fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will identify general properties of free energy landscapes of proteins
from simulation datasets created with specialized hardware and leverage them to
empower similar studies with commodity hardware. This work will be guided by the
hypothesis that leveraging ideas from optimization theory regarding
exploration/exploitation tradeoffs will allow efficient conformational searches.
Based on preliminary analyses, the PI's lab has already begun to prototype a new
algorithm, referred to as fluctuation amplification of specific traits, or FAST.
Further developing this algorithm, demonstrating its power, and disseminating it
to the broader scientific community will lay a foundation for understanding and
designing protein's conformational ensembles. Specific goals include: 1) develop
the fluctuation amplification of specific traits (FAST) algorithm to efficiently
explore a protein's conformational space, 2) test whether FAST can fold
proteins, and 3) test whether FAST can reveal opportunities for designing
stabilized proteins without perturbing their
functions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the Molecular
Biophysics Cluster in the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences in the
Directorate for Biological Sciences and the Physics of Living Systems Program in
the Division of Physics in the Directorate of Mathematical and Physical
Sciences.