* 1552718
* CAREER: Expanding Protein Chemistry through the Evolution of Orthogonal Non-Natural Heme:Enzyme Pairs
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Eric Brustad, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Robin McCarley
* 08/31/2020
* USD 722,000.00

Expanding Protein Chemistry through the Evolution of Orthogonal Non-natural
Heme:Enzyme Pairs&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this CAREER award, the Chemistry of
Life Processes Program in the National Science Foundation's Division of
Chemistry is funding Dr. Eric Brustad from the University of North Carolina at
Chapel Hill to expand the possibilities for protein (enzyme) engineers to create
new and versatile catalysts for chemical synthesis. Such protein engineering is
of growing importance to academic and pharmaceutical research due to the mild
and green conditions under which the biological world operates. Therefore the
goal of this work is to combine engineering and evolution to create enzyme
scaffolds that assemble in cells and which can incorporate building blocks not
typically found in nature. This research expands the chemical diversity and
reaction landscape available to protein engineers and generates new tools with
broad applications in biotechnology and biomedical imaging, as well as chemical
synthesis. Dr. Brustad has developed a symposium for biotechnology research to
foster communication and collaboration between local scientists and students.
This symposium is now expanded to promote diversity by reaching out to
Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCUs). Dr. Brustad is also
developing a hands-on educational modules for K-12 populations in rural North
Carolina, serving primarily young African American and Hispanic
populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research introduces a new paradigm for
the construction of non-natural metallocofactor proteins in cells through the
creation of orthogonal heme/enzyme pairs. An orthogonal heme:enzyme pair is
composed of two key components: 1) a non-natural, synthetic cofactor that is
similar to heme but does not interact with existing heme enzymes, and 2) an
evolved heme-binding protein that recognizes only the non-natural cofactor. This
"orthogonality" creates a new cofactor:enzyme system that can interact self-
sufficiently in cells without disrupting endogenous cofactors or enzymes. A
significant advantage of this approach is that it simply builds on (and adapts
to) existing cofactor-binding motifs in nature to construct binding sites for
metals and cofactor catalysts not typically found in nature. Scaffolds
identified from this study provide robust and systematically adaptable
artificial metalloproteins for green chemical synthesis as well as metal-based
imaging applications. In addition, this program is focused on broadening the
impact of biotechnology research by expanding education outreach to young
underrepresented minorities and undergraduates students as well as fostering
increased scientific communication among research institutions across the state
of North Carolina.