* 1552591
* CAREER: SusChEM: Cooperative Small-Molecule Activation by Ambiphilic Pincer-Type Complexes Featuring Metal/Main-Group Bonds
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2023
* Matthew Whited, Carleton College
* Continuing Grant
* George Richter-Addo
* 05/31/2023
* USD 400,000.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Synthesis Program of the Chemistry
Division, Professor Matthew T. Whited of Carleton College works with a research
group of undergraduate students to investigate the preparation and reactivity of
new complexes featuring transition metal/main-group bonds with acidic and basic
sites. In these systems an electron-rich transition metal works synergistically
with an electron-poor main-group to facilitate difficult reactions. This allows
the development of new selective transformations of industrially and
environmentally important molecules such as carbon dioxide and hydrocarbons.
This project is developing earth abundant metal catalysts to convert carbon
dioxide into chemical feedstocks. This is important contribution to achieving
sustainability. As such the project contributes to the Sustainable Chemistry,
Engineering, and Materials (SusChEM) effort. Professor Whited is also developing
course-based undergraduate research experiences (CUREs) at Carleton College and
working with an outreach program to bring local high-school students into
Carleton College chemistry laboratories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks
to understand and develop reactions around late-metal/main-group interactions
using complexes featuring constrained metal-silicon single and multiple bonds as
prototypes. In order to constrain the metal-silicon linkage, the silyl group is
tethered into an easily modified pincer-type ligand. The "electronic
frustration" resulting from the disparity between electron-rich late metals and
electropositive silicon, combined with the kinetic lability of bonds to each,
allows the development of a cooperative approach to strong-bond activation with
applications in catalytic hydrocarbon oxidation and carbon dioxide reduction.
Spectroscopic and reactivity studies of metal/silicon systems motivate the
expansion of this research to include pincers with boryl and carbyl/carbene
donors as well as to catalysis with earth-abundant metals. The project provides
a training ground for undergraduate researchers and supports the expansion of
both college- and high-school education efforts related to Dr. Whited's
interests in inorganic synthesis and X-ray crystallography.