* 1552534
* Consortium for Advanced Manufacturing Foresights: Defining the Critical Needs of the Advanced Manufacturing Research Community
* ENG,EFMA
* 09/15/2015,12/31/2020
* Lawrence Molnar, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Cooperative Agreement
* Bruce Kramer
* 12/31/2020
* USD 5,809,796.00

The revitalization of the U.S. advanced manufacturing industry requires that
promising discoveries, innovations and inventions made in U.S. are matured and
manufactured in the U.S. Achieving this goal requires the creation of a
mechanism for identifying emerging advanced manufacturing technologies and
maturing them through public-private investments in translational and
interdisciplinary research and development. The Consortium for Advanced
Manufacturing Foresights (Consortium) serves as a "think-and-do tank" to
forecast which nascent technologies will most enable future U.S. leadership in
advanced manufacturing by leveraging industry knowledge with federal investments
in basic and applied research. Technologies will be prioritized based on
economic impact, job growth, likely co-investment by the private sector, impact
on multiple industry sectors, and the likelihood of the U.S. gaining a first-
mover advantage. The Consortium will provide technology roadmaps and reports to
the federal government outlining projections for technology development,
application, and economic impacts. The Consortium will also identify and report
on best practices in technology commercialization and workforce development to
guide future investments. Outreach efforts will enhance public knowledge by
conveying high-technology career opportunities in advanced manufacturing and the
benefits of advanced manufacturing to the economic, energy, health and national
security sectors. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Consortium will: 1) Serve as a
formal mechanism for soliciting input from across the broad manufacturing
community and its supply chains to identify opportunities for federal
investments in next generation advanced manufacturing technologies; 2) Convene
national thought leaders to prioritize among nascent technologies 3) Articulate
visions for aligning advanced manufacturing research, workforce development, and
outreach with national priorities and challenges, and; 4) Ensure that key
stakeholders and broader audiences are made aware of the criticality and the
benefits of advanced manufacturing via an integrated communications strategy.
The Leadership Council of the Consortium consists of 30 thought leaders across
multiple industry sectors, academia, key manufacturing associations and think
tanks representing over 30,000 manufacturing and technology experts.
Identification of technologies will incorporate contextual search of
publications, datasets and federal research programs and solicited input from
industry experts, entrepreneurs, venture capital community, academic researchers
and federal technology leaders. The Consortium will produce detailed reports on
selected emerging technologies and provide responses to requests for information
by federal agencies.