* 1552833
* CAREER:3D nanosensors array for elucidating the electrical activity of induced pluripotent stem cells derived cardiomyocytes
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2022
* Tzahi Cohen-Karni, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 03/31/2022
* USD 521,000.00

PI: Cohen-Karni, Tzahi&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1552833
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Stem cell derived neurons (brain cells) and cardiomyocytes
(heart cells) are induced in a laboratory setting to create small scale cellular
assemblies for various reasons, including therapeutic applications. It is
desirable to monitor the development using methods so that we understand their
functionality and their character. This project attempts to develop methods that
will enable monitoring of the cells and cellular assemblies in three dimension.
This is the first time attempts will be made to measure at a cellular level in
cellular assemblies with high time resolution. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal is
to develop nanomaterials-based platforms for enabling measurement and
understanding of electrical signals transduction within cellular assemblies,
such as cardiac and brain tissue. In order to do so, the specific focus of the
proposed work is on understanding signal propagation in 3D microscale cellular
assemblies such as induced pluripotent stem cells derived neurons and
cardiomyocytes (iPS-CM). In pursuit of this goal of using a 3D nanosensor array
platform will enable the testing of the hypothesis that the development of
electrical activity is correlated to the maturation of induced iPS-CMs. The
approach will be to exploit both the bottom-up and top-down synthesis and
assembly of nanomaterials to develop a 3D sensor array. This would enable
electrophysiology studies of complex cellular assemblies and will shed light on
electrophysiology related disease deficiencies such as Parkinson?s disease and
cardiac arrhythmias by allowing multisite and scale intracellular measurements.
The research is expected to provide high spatial-temporal resolution interfaces
with cells, multiplexed communication, and complex materials assemblies that
form the interfaces. Knowing how electrical information propagates in a tissue
will provide an understanding of how signals are transduced in 3D cellular
assemblies. This will shed light on the relationship between electrical signals
and reported diseases such as arrhythmias, and Parkinson's disease, and will
enable us to develop tools to amend either injured neurons or heart muscle
tissue. It is planned to synthesize nanomaterials and design 3D nanosensors
measurement platforms that will enable the first investigation into these
processes. Specifically, research effort will focus on: (i) Defining the
fundamental materials- properties to form the 3D organization of a nanosensor
array. (ii) Investigating the interface between the nanosensors and the
microscale cellular assembly and manipulating the interface, and (iii) Achieving
multi-site electrical interfaces both intra-cellularly and extra-cellularly and
determining the development and maturation of iPS-CM. The proposed research is
the critical first step in measuring electrical activity in 3D. This novel
measurement platform will potentially be transformative and will help us address
broader challenges in such fields as stem cells, cardiomyocytes and neuronal
cells electrical activity. The educational goal is to advance and promote
teaching and research of nanosensing and nanoelectrical-biosensors at Carnegie
Mellon University (CMU), especially for students majoring in engineering, and
natural sciences programs. In pursuit of this goal, the educational objective is
to use nanomaterials and nanosensing as tools in STEM education and spur
grassroots innovation in bio-nanosensing. The educational approach is to (i)
integrate the concepts of nanosensing into graduate and undergraduate class.
(ii) teach and inspire high school juniors in underprivileged communities of
greater Pittsburgh area, (iii) mentor undergraduate and graduate student in
electrical nanosensing.