* 1552113
* CAREER: Dynamic Regulation of Protein Quality Control
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/2016,07/31/2019
* Richard Page, Miami University
* Continuing Grant
* Engin Serpersu
* 07/31/2019
* USD 486,995.00

Title: CAREER: Dynamic Regulation of Protein Quality Control

The three-dimensional structures of proteins determine the roles and functions
proteins play within cells. Upon exposure to chemical or mechanical stresses,
proteins can misfold, resulting in large changes in three-dimensional structure
and loss of protein function. To survive, cells have developed quality control
systems that guide misfolded proteins towards pathways that lead to them either
being repaired or discarded. This project will determine the biological
principles that allow cells to respond to protein misfolding by directing
misfolded proteins for destruction. Another goal of this project is to develop
techniques that will enable further investigations into how cellular responses
to protein misfolding can be controlled. The integrated education objective of
this CAREER project is to increase retention of underrepresented minorities in
STEM through direct outreach at the high school and undergraduate levels via
hands-on research experience and through different outreach programs. The
project will integrate research directly into graduate and undergraduate courses
with an emphasis on hands-on interpretation of real data and attention to
development of visual, verbal and written communication skills.

The requirement for cells to respond to mechanical, thermal or chemical stresses
is ubiquitous in biology. The E3 ubiquitin ligase CHIP and the 70 kilodalton
heat shock protein, Hsp70, play pivotal roles in the response to cellular stress
through the convergence of refolding and degradative pathways. The research will
forge connections between dynamics on the picosecond to millisecond timescales
and the biological function of chaperoned ubiquitination complexes. The
incorporation of gain-of-function mutants developed using insights from high-
resolution X-ray crystallographic information will identify the effects of
enhancing the CHIP/Hsp70 interaction. The project will redefine how the protein
quality control field views the role of interactions between Hsp70 and CHIP in
regulating how cells respond to protein misfolding by employing either refolding
or degradative approaches. The combination of NMR, SAXS, and EPR with biolayer
interferometry will generate advances in the use of hybrid methods for
structural biology. A novel real-time ubiquitination assay will demonstrate the
utility of biolayer interferometry for rapid and sensitive monitoring of a
processive post-translational modification.