* 1552518
* CCF AF:EAGER:ASSESSING PRACTICALITY OF A NEW FRAMEWORK FOR SOLVING CONIC OPTIMIZATION PROBLEMS BY FIRST-ORDER METHODS
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2015,02/28/2018
* James Renegar, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Jack S. Snoeyink
* 02/28/2018
* USD 100,000.00

A key component of Analytics, the scientific process of transforming data into
insight for better decisions, is Optimization, which produces the best solution
satisfying given constraints -- the solution that maximizes a chosen "objective"
function. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective and constraints together form "an
optimization model." The difficulty of solving a model depends on the types of
objective and constraint functions, and on the number of variables in the
functions. Since huge, complicated, real-world models can have many variables,
the amount of computer memory needed becomes the bottleneck for solutions by
classical algorithms. Modern algorithms avoid this bottleneck by calculating
fewer structures that have to be stored in memory. For example, some modern
algorithms evaluate only first derivatives of functions, whereas older
algorithms also stored second derivatives in memory. These modern algorithms are
known as "first-order methods" (meaning, roughly, "algorithms using only first
derivatives"). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;First-order methods can handle complicated
objective functions, but it has been unknown how to handle complicated
constraint functions. The focus of the project is a new framework that allows
many optimization models with complicated constraints to be easily transformed
into equivalent models with only simple constraints, so that existing first-
order methods can be applied. The goal of the project is to thoroughly test
whether, using the new framework, important huge models that were previously
unsolvable can now be solved routinely. If so, entities relying on Analytics
could benefit, in that their huge models involving complicated constraints might
actually become solvable by existing first-order methods.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The new framework transforms any convex, conic
optimization problem into an equivalent optimization problem whose only
constraints are linear equations, one more equation than for the original
problem. Virtually any subgradient method can be applied to the equivalent
problem. Moreover, for a wide class of conic optimization problems (hyperbolic
programs), the objective function for the equivalent problem can be "smoothed,"
thus allowing for application of accelerated gradient methods. The goal of the
project is to thoroughly test practicality of the new approach in applying
first-order methods to solve large, general, conic optimization
problems.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;PhD students will test this framework as part of
their careers formation, in consultation with optimization experts from both
academia and industry. The result should be better analytics in business,
government, healthcare and education for making decisions based on data.