* 1552456
* CAREER: Engineering a Target-Selective Biological Photocatalyst for Water Disinfection
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2016,02/28/2023
* David Wendell, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 02/28/2023
* USD 432,818.00

1552456&lt;br/&gt;Wendell&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Disinfection, an essential part
of water quality engineering, is a process that has remained largely unchanged
in the US for over century. Alternatives were only considered after the
discovery of chlorine's organohalogen byproducts in the 1970s. Thus, there is a
critical need for a safe, more efficient disinfection technology that is capable
of destroying contaminants while minimizing disinfection byproducts and
operational costs. The overarching goal of this project is to create a new
paradigm of protein-based materials for water quality
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work will advance fundamental
knowledge in the field of photocatalytic oxidation and disinfection, as it
represents the first selective, metal-free, protein photocatalyst. The research
will help inform future work by providing operating metrics and theory of
catalytic function. Since the design is modular, a suite of future protein
catalysts targeting other biohazards could easily be derived. Engineering a
protein reactive oxygen photocatalyst that is target-specific will enable lower
catalyst loadings, limiting disinfection byproducts and application costs. This
project will advance the application of synthetic biology to environmental
engineering and provide a foundation for designing future protein-based
materials. The scientific objective of the proposed work is to experimentally
elucidate the fundamental behavior of the photocatalyst and use these insights
to inform the design of a modular protein-based disinfection technology. This
technology will be validated against a chemically-resistant human pathogen,
Cryptosporidium. The proposed research consists of three tasks: 1. Construction
of enhanced protein photocatalysts for improved quantum efficiency and reactive
oxygen production, 2) Examination of reactive oxygen speciation and generation
rate to understand and optimize catalytic function, and 3) apply the biological
photocatalysts to the most resistant water borne pathogens such as cyst-forming
protozoa. Blending molecular biological tools with the environmental engineering
field of advanced oxidation requires is paramount to advancing the area of
disinfection. More broadly, the research will provide fundamental insight into
how the catalyst works, leading to future variants with a range of disinfection
applications. The new knowledge produced will serve as the basis for protein
photocatalyst applications that will clean environmental and engineered waters
and improve human health. The education and outreach components will enable
opportunities for under-represented groups and minorities to learn the latest in
synthetic biological engineering skills. Biological engineering relies on a
variety of online tools, and as a result, the principal investigator's (PI's)
present course curricula integrate tablets into the classroom. Using a real-time
classroom web platform that the PI developed for mobile devices, this model
could be implemented in science classrooms across the country. The PI will
continue working with Research Experiences for Teachers which involves mentoring
the construction of a bioluminescent water quality exhibit for the Newport
Aquarium. This exhibit will provide a new teaching tool for the aquarium's
education outreach WAVE foundation and high school classrooms.