* 1552556
* CAREER:  A continuum model for simultaneous prediction of granular flow and size-segregation in general geometries
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2016,01/31/2022
* David Henann, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* William Olbricht
* 01/31/2022
* USD 507,834.00

CBET - 1552556&lt;br/&gt;PI: Henann, David L.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of
this CAREER project is to develop a theoretical model that describes the
behavior of flowing granular materials. Granular materials are ubiquitous - they
include naturally-occurring materials such as sand, soil, and snow, as well as
industrial and agricultural materials such as pharmaceutical pills and capsules,
food grains, and catalyst particles. Predicting the behavior of these materials
during flow poses special challenges, especially when the granular material
consists of particles of different sizes. In this case, the flow causes the
particles to segregate according to size, which, in turn, affects the flow of
the material as a whole. The theory developed in this project will use nonlocal
modeling to describe a representative granular material consisting of particles
of two different sizes - called bidisperse. The resulting model will predict the
flow behavior of this bidisperse system in several prototype flow geometries,
and the results will be compared with corresponding experiments conducted as
part of the project. A variety of educational activities are also planned,
including the development of new modules illustrating computational methods in
solid mechanics. The project will enlist undergraduates to participate in the
research, and workshops will be conducted to disseminate results and engage
broad technical communities.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;A predictive continuum
theory, based on nonlocal modeling, will be developed that simultaneously
predicts size segregation and flow in bidisperse dense granular systems composed
of spherical particles. Preliminary tests have demonstrated that this approach
produces a model that can predict coupled flow fields and segregation patterns.
A systematic set of discrete-element calculations will be performed to isolate
shear-strain-rate-driven and gravity-driven mechanisms of segregation, which
will clarify the two-way coupling between flow and segregation. The model will
then be generalized to three-dimensional flows using a continuum thermomechanics
approach, and a finite-element implementation of the non-local, coupled theory
will be developed. Predictions of the model will be validated by comparing with
experiments of bidisperse granular systems in representative flow
configurations.