* 1552321
* CEDAR: Characterizing Electron Loss to the Atmosphere Using Multi-point Measurements From Riometers and Spacecraft
* GEO,AGS
* 03/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Yuri Shprits, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* John Meriwether
* 08/31/2020
* USD 320,165.00

The Coupling, Energetics, and Dynamics of Atmospheric Regions (CEDAR) program, a
broad-based, community-guided, upper atmospheric research program, is aimed at
understanding the behavior of atmospheric regions from the lower atmosphere
upward through the ionized upper layers of the atmosphere and into the
magnetosphere region of outer space. The research funded by this award would
analyze the absorption data collected over the past 25 years by a network of 13
riometers located distributed across central Canada with a typical spatial
separation of 500 to 2000 km between adjacent sites. These instruments operate
at 30 MHz and measure at multiple locations the signal absorption of
extraterrestrial cosmic noise radiowave caused by electron production in the
altitude range of 75 to 115 km (upper D- and lower E-regions). Two sources of
electron production exist in this height range: 1) photoionization and 2)
impact-ionization associated with the precipitation of ions and electrons of
magnetospheric origin. The loss of the radiowave power received above the
Earth's surface at any one time relative to a Quiet Day Curve (which is
associated with photo-ionization) is a measure of the absorption to be
associated with the precipitation of particles into this ionized region.
Calibration of the riometer absorption measurements would be achieved by using
measured fluxes of precipitating electrons and measured populations of trapped
electrons observed in the radiation belts. This calibration would be based upon
the magnetosphere detector measurements derived from tracing the positions of
satellite particle energy detectors onboard the Van Allen Probes and the five
THEMIS satellites using a sophisticated field-line model of the Earth's magnetic
field distribution to determine the magnetospheric footprints of these
satellites in situ measurements at various spatial locations across central
Canada. The process of selection of riometer absorption data for this
calibration process would extract those absorption values associated with the
coincidence of the footprint positions with the riometer field of view. The
riometer absorption data collected would be analyzed in a statistical sense to
establish possible causal relationships between the absorption signature
regarding size and shape of absorption and the particular energy band
responsible for the particle precipitation into the 90 km region for each
riometer site. One relationship that would be searched for in this research is
the development of a possible proxy for the extent of magnetospheric wave
activity causing the particle precipitation. Another relationship would be the
determination from the observed absorption the fractional loss of energetic
electrons in the range of tens of keV to MeV energies to the upper atmosphere. A
broader impact of this award would be the enhancement of a riometer network as a
useful tool with a strong potential for successful application in terrestrial
and space weather forecasting.

Comparing riometer absorption with satellite measurements of precipitating
electrons will provide for the development statistically of a relationship
relating the size and shape of riometer absorption signatures with the energy
spectrum of the precipitating particles. The absorption signature results for
the different riometers within the network would be used to develop maps of
latitudinal and magnetic local time (MLT) distributions of precipitation.
Comparison of these signatures with trapped population measurements will
quantify the importance of the electron energy loss to the atmosphere, which
will help understand the role of energetic electron precipitation in the global
system. This study would be coincident with the declining phase of the current
solar cycle and will help to demonstrate how low-cost remote sensing of
ionospheric precipitation can help understand processes that directly affect the
terrestrial and space weather climate.