* 1552022
* NSF Workshop on Future Directions in Cyber Physical Systems, Robotics and Autonomy
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2016
* Gregory Hager, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Jie Yang
* 09/30/2016
* USD 41,308.00

This project is to support a one-day workshop to bring together leading experts
to evaluate the impact of the National Robotics Initiative (NRI) and Cyber
Physical Systems (CPS) initiative, explore possible overlap and synergies
between the NRI and CPS, and identify future drivers and opportunities for both
areas. An additional goal of the workshop is to explore the extent to which the
science of autonomy and autonomous systems, another area of national importance,
could be complementary to these initiatives. The workshop provides a short
report with vignettes that illustrates the differences and the synergies between
these three areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent multi-agency initiatives in
robotics and cyber physical systems have successfully catalyzed many exciting,
high-impact educational and research projects. The need for this workshop stems
from the focus on intellectual similarities and differences between the NRI and
CPS initiatives, and what should they be going forward. The workshop focus
consists of a comprehensive analysis of three important growth areas: robotics,
autonomy, and cyber physical systems. Each of these three areas is expected to
significantly impact virtually all sectors of our economy including healthcare,
manufacturing, construction, mining and agriculture. An ambitious education and
research agenda in these areas has the potential to improve our quality of human
life. This workshop assembles the top researchers in the fields of robotics,
autonomy, and cyber physical systems to discuss the underlying challenges and to
produce a report to help inform future education and research investments by
academia, government and industry.