* 1552563
* CAREER: Cognitive Diagnosis in E-Learning: A Nonparametric Approach for Computerized Adaptive Testing
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/2016,11/30/2022
* Chia-Yi Chiu, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Finbarr Sloane
* 11/30/2022
* USD 731,165.00

This is a Faculty Early Career Development Program (CAREER) project. The CAREER
program is a National Science Foundation-wide activity that offers the most
prestigious awards in support of junior faculty who exemplify the role of
teacher-scholars through outstanding research, excellent education and the
integration of education and research. The investigator will develop a Cognitive
Diagnostic Computerized Adaptive Testing (CD-CAT) system to support the learning
of introductory statistics at the university level. The work represents a
significant advance in educational testing to provide personalized assessments
which in turn generate diagnostic information based on students' proficiency
profiles, as opposed to an abstract overall test score.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research deals specifically with difficulties such as
the requirement of large samples, underdevelopment in identification of the
underlying model, and possible technical complexity limiting the availability of
the model-based CD-CAT to educational practitioners; especially teachers and
their students in smaller instructional settings. In light of these
considerations, the project first proposes an innovative general nonparametric
classification (GNPC) alternative, which is a general version of the
nonparametric classification (NPC) method. The GNPC method can be used to
analyze not only large- but also small-scale data, such as course-based data,
conforming to a broad range of cognitive diagnostic models, an advantage that
makes cognitive diagnosis analysis accessible to those who are in its highest
need. The development of this ready-to-use heuristic method then moves the field
further toward the routine use of the nonparametric CD-CAT within educational
micro-environments. The proposed algorithms will be applied to online statistics
courses, where high-performance formative assessments are employed to provide
useful and timely feedback on how well students perform. The proposed line of
inquiry integrates research and education through the development of an online
CD-CAT system to support the learning of statistics. The education activities
include both teaching at the graduate level and professional development
activities for teachers and researchers.