* 1552580
* CAREER: Dynamic transcription factor activity profiling for investigating mechanisms guiding early stage ovarian folliculogenesis
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2016,02/28/2021
* Ariella Shikanov, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie George
* 02/28/2021
* USD 500,000.00

PI: Shikanov, Ariella &lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
1552580&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Young women and prepubescent girls undergoing toxic
treatments for cancer or autoimmune diseases have limited options to preserve
their fertility. Fertility preservation is especially challenging in female
patients, because females are born with an ovarian reserve comprised of a finite
number of follicles that carry immature eggs. Cryopreservation of ovarian tissue
prior to toxic treatments and subsequent culture of immature follicles is a
promising and novel way to preserve fertility. The challenge is that follicles
have low survival and maturation rates in culture, which are attributed to the
complex and poorly understood signaling and interactions between the cells in a
follicle. The central objective of this CAREER proposal is to discover the key
signaling factors involved in the early stage development of ovarian follicles
by using systems biology approach. This system will lead to the development of
culture conditions for successful follicle culture to be translated to human
follicles for fertility preservation, serve as a platform to screen therapeutic
compounds, identify pathways with aberrant activity that could be targeted for
therapy, or design environments that promote specific cellular processes in
regenerative medicine and toxicology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
research will identify numerous transcription factors and establish their role
in the growth of early-stage ovarian follicles in vitro. These fundamental
studies might provide the foundation for the development of a culture system
that can support the development of early stage follicles. In the bench-to-bed
translation, this knowledge may be used for fertility preservation in young
female cancer survivors suffering from chemotherapy-induced infertility. Our
overall research objective is to: (a) establish the dynamic activity of
transcription factors during early-stage follicle development in vitro; (b)
identify signaling pathways that are responsible for promoting follicle survival
and growth through follicle-follicle and follicle-support cells interactions;
(c) determine the secretome of cultured early-stage follicles in conditions that
allow follicle-follicle and follicle-stroma interactions and correlate the
functional paracrine signaling factors with the activity of transcription
factors (TFs) to identify the key factors and processes driving successful
folliculogenesis. To achieve this objective, we will employ a systems level
approach utilizing quantitative experimental characterization with multivariate
analysis and modeling. Previous investigator's work has already demonstrated how
optimizing biomaterial design can enhance follicle survival rates. We will build
upon this system and use the new TRACER technology (TRanscription Activity CEll
aRray) to discover the identity, timing and activity pattern of TFs and secreted
growth factors involved in folliculogenesis. The key transcription and secreted
factors during the development of primary follicles will be investigated in
vitro and compared to what is already known for in vivo development. The
generated network of transcription factors predicted to be located downstream of
the identified secreted factors will describe currently unknown signaling
pathway active during early folliculogenesis. The broader research impact of
this work will result in culture systems that can maximize ovarian follicle
development and provide high quality oocytes for fertility preservation and
toxicology screening. This approach has a strong potential to shed light on the
mechanism of biological processes of ovarian follicle maturation, which are
largely unknown and might benefit basic biologists, bioengineers, clinicians and
women facing infertility altogether. The educational outreach program of this
proposal integrates middle and high school students with undergraduate and
graduate students to the benefit of both groups. The program will incorporate
reproductive tissue engineering and biomaterials-related content and projects
and will inspire K-12 students to pursue science and engineering careers through
conducting K-12 outreach. The investigator is also committed to support women
and minority retention in science and engineering through organizational
activities and one-on-one mentoring.