* 1552126
* CAREER: Elucidating the Targets and Functions of Mammalian tRNA methyltransferase orthologs
* BIO,MCB
* 12/01/2015,11/30/2021
* Dragony Fu, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* Arcady Mushegian
* 11/30/2021
* USD 1,085,861.00

The goal of this research is to understand how ribonucleic acid (RNA) molecules
influence cell growth, development, and response to the environment. Current
evidence shows that RNA function can be regulated by the presence of chemical
groups (modifications) that are added to the RNA by specific enzymes. However,
much remains to be learned about how the enzymes find their target RNAs, how the
modifications change RNA functions, and how the modified RNAs regulate critical
cellular processes. This research will address those questions, while providing
a dynamic research environment to foster the scientific training and development
of underrepresented groups in science such as minorities and women. To share new
technical approaches developed during the research, students will produce video-
based tutorials to serve as a teaching and training resource for the scientific
community. The project will also provide educational workshops for underserved
high school students to encourage curiosity and experimentation in the field of
biology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mammalian genomes are predicted to encode a
diverse number of transfer RNA methyltransferase (Trm) enzymes, but the cellular
functions for the majority of Trm proteins remain unknown. The following project
aims to elucidate the biological roles of the numerous uncharacterized mammalian
Trm enzymes by: 1) establishing the protein interaction networks of human Trm
enzymes, 2) identifying the cellular targets of Trm proteins, and 3) determining
the cellular processes modulated by Trm proteins. The goals will be achieved
through an integrated biochemical, molecular and genetic approach involving
proteomic analysis of Trm complexes together with global transcription and
translation profiling of human cells with altered Trm proteins. Through these
discoveries, the work promises to lay a foundation of new understanding of how
the RNA modifications catalyzed by diverse Trm enzymes translate into
physiological outputs that help cells respond to various environmental
conditions.