* 1552412
* Dimensions: Functional, genetic, and taxonomic diversity of plant-fungal interactions along climatic gradients and their role in climate change driven species migrations
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2015,08/31/2016
* Richard Lankau, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 08/31/2016
* USD 139,354.00

Climates are currently warming at unprecedented rates. Species must move to
track the changing climate or evolve to tolerate warmer conditions; those that
fail to do so face extinction. Most plant species, especially forest trees, rely
on intimate associations with microbial species living in soil in order to
capture the resources they need for proper growth. Little is known about how
these invisible, but very important, soil microbes are distributed across the
continent, and how they will respond to climate change. In this project, the
genetic, taxonomic, and functional biodiversity of soil microbial communities
from forests across the eastern US will be characterized to test for parallel
latitudinal patterns with respect to climate. Trees and soil microbes will
likely not move at equal speeds as climates change. Therefore, experiments will
test the functional consequences for tree growth for situations where microbial
species migrate slower or faster than trees. This research will allow for more
precise predictions about how forests will change as a function of the changing
biodiversity of the fungal symbiont community during climate warming. This
research will have several broader impacts for society at large. The project
will incorporate citizen scientists from across the eastern US in collecting
samples for the soil survey, in order to connect the public with original
research. Undergraduate students (including women and underrepresented
minorities) will be mentored in hands-on research experiences during the project
and encouraged to develop independent research projects. By helping to improve
our ability to predict ecological changes in response to climate change, this
research will increase our ability to mitigate and adapt to the undesirable
consequences of a rapidly warming world.