* 1552871
* CAREER: Light Manipulation in Metal-Dielectric Multilayer Metamaterials with Large Anisotropy
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2023
* Xiaodong Yang, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Yaroslav Koshka
* 05/31/2023
* USD 500,516.00

Nontechnical Description: Metamaterials are artificially structured composite
materials with properties significantly different from those of the natural
materials. The permittivity of an optical material is an important measure of
its ability to store electromagnetic energy and to convert electromagnetic
energy into heat. The permittivities of the most common optical materials are
usually isotropic (i.e., the same value in all directions), with positive values
for dielectric or transparent materials such as glass and water. By placing
dielectric and metallic thin layers in alternative order, new types of optical
metamaterials, namely metal-dielectric multilayer metamaterials, are created
with permittivities that could not be realized using natural materials: with
permittivity values designed to be very large, or very small, and different in
different directions of the materials. In this research multilayer metamaterials
are utilized to study novel phenomena of light propagation and manipulation and
to address current challenges in optical metamaterials. This research paves the
way for advances of multilayer metamaterial-based applications in optical
communications, imaging processing, sensing, solar energy harvesting and
adaptive optics. The research effort is integrated with education and outreach
activities, including training students in metamaterials, development of optics
learning modules in undergraduate and graduate courses, and organizing a
nanotechnology workshop for public audiences, including K-12
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: The goals of the research
component of this CAREER award are to study extraordinary light manipulation
using metal-dielectric multilayer metamaterials with large anisotropy, including
epsilon-near-zero, hyperbolic, and epsilon-very-large metamaterials, and to
explore new optical physics phenomena using these metamaterials. Combined
approaches of theoretical analysis, numerical simulation, materials fabrication
and experimental characterization are used in the research to gain fundamental
understanding of light-matter interactions in multilayer metamaterials. The
research includes the following components: (i) accurate determination of the
effective permittivity of metamaterials by probing the reflectance and
transmittance, in both amplitude and phase, via an advanced optical vortex
spectroscopic technique; (ii) exploring optical nonlocalities in periodic and
quasiperiodic multilayer metamaterials for realization of Dirac physics via
Zitterbewegung and Klein tunneling effects; (iii) design of patterned multilayer
hyperbolic metamaterials for the generation of complex optical vector vortex
beams to explore structured light manipulation; and (iv) verification of a novel
concept of loss-anisotropic metamaterials, to demonstrate counterintuitive
phenomena of absorption loss induced transmission and beam propagation.