* 1552065
* CAREER: Mathematical modeling of angiogenesis signaling and crosstalk in tumor cells
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2016,02/28/2023
* Stacey Finley, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 02/28/2023
* USD 513,200.00

1552065&lt;br/&gt;Finley, Stacey &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
identify novel strategies needed for inhibiting cancer cell growth by targeting
angiogenesis signaling pathways. Angiogenesis is the formation of new blood
vessels from pre-existing vessels and is critical to tumor growth and
development. There are many interactions between the angiogenic factors, which
tumor cells must interpret and respond to. The PI proposes to apply mathematical
modeling to address fundamental questions regarding the dynamics of angiogenesis
signaling in tumor cells and the effects of crosstalk and cell heterogeneity.
Ultimately, a detailed understanding of the signaling events involved in
angiogenesis pathways can lead to effective strategies for altering angiogenesis
in a range of normal and diseased conditions, including cancer. The research
objectives are tightly integrated with a multi-year outreach and educational
training plan to impact students ranging from K-12 through graduate school. The
PI will develop a hands-on, interactive curricular resource called 'DrEAMM'
(Driving Enthusiasm About Mathematical Modeling) that brings to life
mathematical concepts and engages students in computational thinking.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research objective of this proposal is to provide a
predictive computational model of angiogenic signaling pathways in tumor cells.
A quantitative and molecular-detailed description of these signaling networks is
required to understand and inhibit tumor growth. To accomplish this goal, the PI
will construct the first mathematical model to specifically identify the
concentration profiles of the angiogenesis signaling molecules involved in cell
proliferation and apoptosis in tumor cells. The model will establish, for the
first time, a quantitative description of the balance of pro- and anti-
angiogenic factors and the implications of their crosstalk in cancer cells. The
PI will use sensitivity analyses to explore the parameter space and a robust,
data-driven parameter estimation technique to fit the model to experimental
measurements, including new data generated by the PI. The model will predict the
average angiogenesis signaling dynamics of a population of cells, as well as the
responses of individual cells. As such, the project will include both
deterministic and stochastic simulations. The model will be applied to identify
the mechanisms that enable precise shifting of the angiogenic balance in favor
of anti-angiogenic signaling species that promote cell death. The expected
outcome of completing the proposed research objectives is a molecular-detailed
description of novel strategies that lead to tumor apoptosis by targeting
angiogenesis signaling. More broadly, this work can lead to breakthrough
strategies needed for inhibiting cell growth by targeting angiogenesis signaling
pathways in a range of cell types and conditions. The PI will pursue a multi-
year outreach and educational training plan closely integrated with the proposed
research. The proposed activities will bring to life mathematical concepts for
students ranging from K-12 through graduate school and engage the students in
computational thinking. The goals for the educational plan are to spark and
cultivate enthusiasm in STEM fields among K-12 students from under-represented
groups and enliven concepts presented in undergraduate and graduate level
systems biology classes.