* 1552538
* CAREER: FIREFLY - Rich Explanations for Database Queries
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2023
* Sudeepa Roy, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Wei Ding
* 07/31/2023
* USD 566,000.00

With the recent popularity of Big Data, a range of people including data
analysts, scientists, decision makers, and ordinary Internet users are
increasingly seeking high level explanations for trends and anomalies in
available datasets. Such a user typically runs queries on the datasets, computes
aggregates, plots the answers on a graph, and looks for explanations for what
she observes. For example, she may ask: "Why are two graphs similar or
different?", "Why is a sequence of points increasing or decreasing?", "Why is
there a sudden spike or dip in a graph?", and so on. Existing data analysis
systems focus on large-scale statistical analytics, multi-dimensional data
aggregation, interactive data exploration, and sophisticated visualization
support. However, there are no tools currently available that offer semantic
explanations to users. This project develops a toolkit named FIREFLY (Formal
Interactive Rich Explanations On-The-Fly) that provides fast, rich, insightful
explanations in response to such 'why' questions asked by users. The automatic
explanations provided by this tool will help users harness Big Data more
effectively, and the research findings of the project will enrich Big Data
analytics techniques. Furthermore, the courses developed in conjunction with
this project and the research experience that it will provide students at
various levels will help train them to be future researchers. Special attention
will be paid to supporting diversity in this process.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This
project introduces a new perspective in data analysis principled upon the
notions of causality, counterfactuals, and interventions. FIREFLY aims to find
synopses of properties on input tuples as explanations, such that by restricting
the database to tuples that entail a different value of these synopses, the
answer to the query and the observation of the user changes, thereby explaining
the observation. In order to efficiently return meaningful synopses as
explanations, this project will develop theory, algorithms, and optimizations
along three main research directions: (1) a rich framework will be established
to support meaningful explanations, large classes of database queries, and a
variety of questions asked by the users, (2) an interactive tool with a
graphical user interface will be built to help users run queries, ask questions,
and explore the explanations returned by the tool, and (3) new techniques will
be developed to handle uncertainty in the input data and in the explanations
themselves.