* 1552690
* CAREER: Bioinspired Adaptively Reconfigurable Material Systems  for Programmable and Autonomous Metal Ion Separations
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2016,02/28/2017
* Ximin He, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Angie Lueking
* 02/28/2017
* USD 515,947.00

CAREER 1552690 - He&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The efficient extraction of molecules
from fluid mixtures is vital for applications ranging from chemical analysis in
water treatment to toxic or rare metal removal and recovery. Current methods for
this rely on multi-step and high energy consumption operations. Inspired by the
efficiency of biological separation processes that seamlessly capture and
transport selective biomolecules, this project seeks to achieve a concerted
"catch and release" of target molecules from a liquid mixture using responsive
polymer-based material systems. The innovation arises from the programmed one-
step sorting with low turnaround times. The modular design of the hybrid
material system is highly customizable owing to its broad choice of chemistries,
tunable mechanics, and physical simplicity. This project's career development
plan provides the foundation for a long-term research program in highly
efficient capture and isolation of molecules in flowing fluids. Ultimately, this
technology platform may lead to the next-generation in-line separation, sensing,
and monitoring technologies and be translated into broader areas of smart
technology, robotics, bioengineering, and other autonomous systems. A variety of
integrated research and educational activities are planned to develop
bioinspired engineering curriculum by integrating the research and online media
at the K-12, undergraduate, and graduate levels and to increase public awareness
of bioinspired technologies and their societal impacts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
goal of this research is to apply the bioinspired strategy that seamlessly
separates biomolecules in a single step to innovate adaptively reconfigurable
material systems based on stimuli-responsive hydrogels and to realize continuous
"catch and release" of target molecules from a liquid mixture. This research
explores fundamental questions of molecular binding affinity in different
chemical environments that would facilitate the discovery of new adsorbents. To
assess the separation performance of the system, quantitative sorting efficiency
evaluation, system robustness examination with amenability to multiple
separation cycles, and optimization will be conducted. Practically, the systems
encompass significant modularity and design flexibility to permit integration
and upscaling for broad applications. This research integrates the disciplines
of chemistry, materials, and chemical engineering. Diverse education and
outreach activities are planned to promote research, education, and awareness
related to bioinspired engineering and separation research fields. These include
the development of a bioinspired engineering course on campus integrated with an
online channel, and female undergraduate, graduate, and K-12 students
participation in the research project, using existing infrastructure in the ASU
High School Summer Academy, the Fulton Undergraduate Research Initiative
program, and public media.