* 1552097
* CAREER: Pursuing New Tools for Approximation Algorithms
* CSE,CCF
* 03/01/2016,02/28/2022
* Shayan Gharan, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 02/28/2022
* USD 400,000.00

Many of the large-scale industries are now employing sophisticated algorithms to
solve variants of fundamental optimization problems. For example, Amazon uses a
variant of the Traveling Salesman Problem (TSP) known as the vehicle routing
problem for routing Amazon-Fresh Trucks. Uber solves a variant of TSP to route
its shared-ride services. Many of the social networks including Facebook and
Google+ solve variants of constraints satisfaction problems for their social
targeting tasks. These optimization problems have ubiquitous applicability but
they are computationally challenging in the sense that many are known to be NP-
hard. This means that under standard assumptions they cannot be solved optimally
by algorithms which terminate in reasonable time. The field of approximation
algorithms attempts to develop efficient algorithms that find solutions close to
the optimum. These approximation algorithms have found many applications in the
real world. The project will advance state-of-the-art in approximation
algorithms which will not only have impact on industry but also contribute to
our fundamental understanding of P vs NP issue, which is at the core of computer
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to develop new tools and
techniques to obtain improved approximation algorithms for fundamental
optimization problems, including the TSP and Constraint Satisfaction problems.
The project intends to prove new algebraic properties of stable polynomials and
use them to study graphs from an algebraic point of view. These tools will lead
to design a new class of approximation algorithms. These new tools coming out of
this project will be incorporated in the next generation of courses in
approximation algorithms that focus on algebraic techniques. Although grounded
in computer science theory, the project will also attract many graduate students
outside of theory from applied fields like machine learning and artificial
intelligence forming basis for interdisciplinary research.