* 1552428
* CAREER: Investigating Fifth Grade Teachers' Knowledge of Noticing Appalachian Students' Thinking in Science
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2023
* Melissa Luna, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Ford
* 06/30/2023
* USD 790,528.00

This is a Faculty Early Career Development Program (CAREER) proposal responsive
to Program Solicitation NSF 15-555. The CAREER program is a National Science
Foundation-wide activity that offers the most prestigious awards in support of
junior faculty who exemplify the role of teacher-scholars through outstanding
research, excellent education and the integration of education and research.
Based on findings from research on effective science teaching supporting the
notion that meaningful learning occurs when teachers attend to students'
thinking, this project will conduct an in-depth investigation of teachers'
knowledge of noticing students' science thinking in terms of what they do and
say, to not only attend to their ideas, but also to make sense of and respond to
those ideas. The work will be grounded on the premise that there is a
relationship between teachers' practice and knowledge, and that it is possible
to observe practice in order to infer knowledge. The project will examine
teacher noticing in practice, use empirical evidence to model the specialized
teacher knowledge involved, and design teacher learning materials informed by
the model. The setting of the study will include an existing school-university
partnership serving diverse student populations in Appalachian communities,
where students significantly underperform nationally in Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Mathematics areas across grades levels. It will target fifth
grade science teachers' noticing their students' thinking as they engage in
science learning in six rural and semi-rural elementary
schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The three research questions will be: (1) What
disciplinary ideas in students' thinking do elementary teachers notice in
practice?; (2) What knowledge do elementary teachers draw on when noticing the
disciplinary ideas in students' thinking in practice?; and (3) How does a set of
web-based interactive instructional materials support teachers' knowledge
construction around noticing the disciplinary ideas in students' thinking in
science? In order to investigate teachers' noticing students' thinking, and
answer the research questions, the project will use two wearable technologies to
collect data of teachers' "in-the-moment" noticing while engaged in planning,
instructional, and assessment activities. One is a point-of-view digital video
system consisting of three parts: a small video camera, a hand-held remote, and
a separate recording module. The other is an audio-recording wristband with a
recording mode allowing the user to capture previous one-minute loops of audio
data. An audio loop is saved whenever the user taps the wristband. Data will be
analyzed for evidence of students' disciplinary knowledge and skills in order to
give insight of teachers' knowledge involved in noticing each instance using the
three interconnected dimensions featured in "A Framework for K-12 Science
Education" (National Research Council, 2012). The project will consist of four
strands of work: (1) empirically investigating teachers' noticing of students'
thinking; (2) developing an initial conceptual model of teachers' knowledge of
noticing students' thinking; (3) conducting design-based research to develop
instructional materials supporting teachers' knowledge construction around
noticing students' thinking in science; and (4) producing and disseminating
these instructional materials through an interactive web-based platform. The
main outcomes of this project will be (a) an empirically grounded model of fifth
grade teachers' knowledge of noticing Appalachian students' thinking in science;
and (b) the design of web-based interactive instructional materials supporting
fifth grade teachers' knowledge construction around noticing Appalachian
students' thinking in science. These outcomes will serve as the foundation for a
more comprehensive future research agenda testing and refining the initial model
and instructional materials in other learning environments in order to
eventually contribute to a practice-based theory of teachers' knowledge of
noticing students' thinking in science to inform and impact science teaching
practice. An advisory board will oversee the project's progress, and an external
evaluator will conduct both formative and summative evaluation.