* 1552176
* Collaborative Research: CEDAR--Life Cycle of the Quasi Two-Day Wave in the Southern Hemisphere
* GEO,AGS
* 03/15/2016,02/28/2019
* David Fritts, GLOBAL ATMOSPHERIC TECHNOLOGIES AND SCIENCES, INC.
* Continuing Grant
* Carrie E. Black
* 02/28/2019
* USD 159,907.00

The Coupling, Energetics, and Dynamics of Atmospheric Regions (CEDAR) program, a
broad-based, community-guided, upper atmospheric research program, is aimed at
understanding the behavior of atmospheric regions from the lower atmosphere
upward through the ionized upper layers of the atmosphere. One of the major
themes of this program is the measurement of the transfer of atmospheric wave
energy from the lower atmosphere into the mesosphere and lower thermosphere,
which overlaps the lower ionosphere. An important dynamical phenomenon
associated with this wave coupling is called the quasi two-day wave (QTDW),
which is a large-scale wave structure seen in the middle atmosphere winds and
temperatures that is particularly pronounced within the southern hemisphere
region with a spatial extent over many thousands of km. The lifetime of this
structure varies between one and two weeks with a rapid growth, evolution, and
decay profile that is not understood. The research of this award would utilize
simultaneous data from two NASA satellites to follow the spatial progression
with longitude of this structure with high temporal resolution. The 10 years
extent of the database will allow this phenomenon to be intercompared from year
to year and for the two periods of solar maximum and solar minimum. This
research would determine through the application of a theoretical primitive
equation model what might be the predominant excitation source generating this
wave structure. Two possible candidates would be investigated. One (baroclinic
instability) is the development of a dynamical instability mechanism energized
by the poleward edge of the stratospheric jet stream. The other (inertial
instability) is an instability process energized near the geographic equator as
a result of the very weak magnitude of the Coriolis force. The broader impact of
this award is the improvement of our overall understanding of fundamental MLT
dynamics. A graduate student would receive half-time
support.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed activity will directly address
questions regarding the coupling between atmospheric height regions, and
possible energetics feedbacks between the QTDW wave phenomenology and the zonal
mean circulation. The QTDW structure will be holistically investigated from the
generation region into the 110 km region. Momentum and energy exchange across
the stratopause and mesopause boundaries will be examined. The study will
encompass a decade of observations, 2002-present, which will allow study of
contrasting years, e.g., the possible influence of stratospheric warmings.