* 1552163
* CPS: Synergy: Sensor Network-Based Lower-Limb Prosthetic Optimization and Control
* CSE,CNS
* 05/16/2015,11/30/2020
* Ou Bai, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 11/30/2020
* USD 910,249.00

More than one million people including many wounded warfighters from recent
military missions are living with lower-limb amputation in the United States.
This project will design wearable body area sensor systems for real-time
measurement of amputee's energy expenditure and will develop computer algorithms
for automatic lower-limb prosthesis optimization. The developed technology will
offer a practical tool for the optimal prosthetic tuning that may maximally
reduce amputee's energy expenditure during walking. Further, this project will
develop user-control technology to support user's volitional control of lower-
limb prostheses. The developed volitional control technology will allow the
prosthesis to be adaptive to altered environments and situations such that
amputees can walk as using their own biological limbs. An optimized prosthesis
with user-control capability will increase equal force distribution on the
intact and prosthetic limbs and decrease the risk of damage to the intact limb
from the musculoskeletal imbalance or pathologies. Maintenance of health in
these areas is essential for the amputee's quality of life and well-being.
Student participation is supported.

This research will advance Cyber-Physical Systems (CPS) science and engineering
through the integration of sensor and computational technologies for the
optimization and control of physical systems. This project will design body area
sensor network systems which integrate spatiotemporal information from
electromyography (EMG), electroencephalography (EEG) and inertia measurement
unit (IMU) sensors, providing quantitative, real-time measurements of the user's
physical load and mental effort for personalized prosthesis optimization. This
project will design machine learning technology-based, automatic prosthesis
parameter optimization technology to support in-home prosthesis optimization by
users themselves. This project will also develop an EEG-based, embedded
computing-supported volitional control technology to support user?s volitional
control of a prosthesis in real-time by their thoughts to cope with altered
situations and environments. The technical advances from this project will
provide wearable and wireless body area sensing solutions for broader
applications in healthcare and human-CPS interaction applications. The explored
computational methods will be broadly applicable for real-time, automatic target
recognition from spatiotemporal, multivariate data in CPS-related communication
and control applications. This synergic project will be implemented under
multidisciplinary team collaboration among computer scientists and engineers,
clinicians and prosthetic industry engineers. This project will also provide
interdisciplinary, CPS relevant training for both undergraduate and graduate
students by integrating computational methods with sensor network, embedded
processors, human physical and mental activity recognition, and prosthetic
control.