* 1552996
* CAREER: Conformational Dynamics of SH3 Molecular Recognition
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2022
* Megan Thielges, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Engin Serpersu
* 06/30/2022
* USD 966,759.00

Title: CAREER: Conformational Dynamics of SH3 Molecular
Recognition&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The operation of a cell is orchestrated by
interactions among proteins. and understanding how different proteins are able
to recognize their appropriate binding partners within the complex and crowded
cellular environment is currently an important scientific question. Like
macroscopic machines, proteins have moving parts. However experimentally
studying how protein motion is involved in their recognition of other proteins
is challenging because proteins are large, complex molecules with parts that can
move on different timescales. This research takes advantage of state-of-the-art
methods in chemical biology and physical chemistry to place reporter chemical
bonds at specific locations in a protein structure to test how the motions at
different parts of the proteins change upon binding their partners. As protein
recognition underlies all of biology, knowledge about what contributes to its
fidelity has wide reaching impact to our understanding, and ultimately our
ability to manipulate, biological systems. &lt;br/&gt;In addition to her
research efforts, the PI will utilize her role as a Faculty Fellow mentor for
female undergraduates of the Indiana University Women in Science and Technology
Center in combination with her outreach activities with the local Girl Scouts to
develop peer/near-peer role models who can help develop and enhance female
scientific conception and identify obstacles in doing
so.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research is to evaluate the
mechanism(s) by which protein dynamics contribute to the affinity and
specificity of molecular recognition. Although protein dynamics are increasingly
invoked as contributors to protein function, rigorous experimental assessment of
their role has been challenged by both the spatial heterogeneity of proteins and
the rapid interconversion of potentially important conformational states. This
research combines the inherent high temporal resolution of linear FT and 2D
infrared (IR) spectroscopy with the spatial resolution afforded by site-
selective incorporation of vibrational reporter groups via protein engineering
to generate the highest resolution picture possible of the conformational
dynamics involved in the yeast Sho1 Src homology 3 domain (SH3)-mediated
recognition of its physiological target the proline-rich peptide derived from
the protein Pbs2. A number of Pbs2 peptide variants and additional SH3 domains
will be used to evaluate whether and how protein and/or ligand conformational
dynamics modulate the affinity and specificity of molecular recognition, and
specifically to test the model that poly-specificity results from increased
protein and/or ligand flexibility involving a combination of slower timescale
conformational dynamics in the unbound states via a conformational selection
mechanism and faster timescale conformational dynamics via an induced-fit
mechanism. The studies should elucidate the mechanisms governing the molecular
recognition of these critical eukaryotic protein interaction domains with
unprecedented biophysical detail.