* 1552288
* EAGER: BIGDATA: SMART Data - Academic Success Made Affordable, Rapid, and Timely through Integrated Data Analytics
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2017
* Matthew Ohland, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* John Cherniavsky
* 09/30/2017
* USD 300,000.00

Academic Success Made Affordable, Rapid, and Timely through Integrated Data
Analytics&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Data science techniques have revolutionized many
academic fields and led to terrific gains in the commercial sector. They have to
date been underutilized in solving critical problems in the US educational
system, particularly in understanding Science, Technology, Engineering and
Mathematics (STEM) learning and learning environments, broadening participation
in STEM, and increasing retention for students traditionally underserved in
STEM. The goals of the Directorate for Education and Human Resources through the
Critical Techniques and Technologies for Advancing Foundations and Applications
of Big Data Science &amp; Engineering (BIGDATA) program are to advance
fundamental research aimed at understanding and solving these critical problems,
and to catalyze the use of data science in Education Research. This Early
Concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) will seek to understand the
background and backbone of systems of data processing and analytics that can
provide insights using standard types of data that colleges and universities
already have (for example, from their Learning Management Systems,
administrative data systems, and advising systems) to provide predictions and
recommendations to students and instructors to increase the percentage of
students who succeed in college and graduate on time. This has terrific
potential to increase graduation rates at two- and four-year institutions, which
can lower college costs for families and students. In addition, it has terrific
potential to increase the attraction and retention of underrepresented
minorities in STEM fields, as it will identify barriers for all students to
graduating successfully and on time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The team vision is to
eventually build a data platform that integrates key data sources and provides
tools that leverage important insights from these sources. The types of data
sources are: 1) longitudinal data from undergraduate students on their academic
trajectories in STEM majors; 2) Learning management system (LMS) records of
student activity, and 3) text data from a variety of sources, such as advisors.
The tools will include a 1) GUI for students, teachers and administrators to see
student academic pathways and 2) a portal for communication between students,
faculty and advisors. This system will help students, teachers and admistrators
engage in Data Driven Decision Making (D3M) around academic pathways to
successful and on time graduation from college. This Early Concept Grant for
Exploratory Research (EAGER) will solve many challenges that must be undertaken
to achieve this vision and provide the solutions to those challenges to relevant
communities in a variety of ways. The team has four goals for this early concept
project. The first is to examine existing data and predictive models for
understanding student success and retention and build a catalog of applications
and data types available for decision making around pathways to these outcomes.
The second goal is to describe design specifications, including data types,
algorithms, and machine learning techniques that are needed to build the data
platform. The third is to pilot research on critical elements of a D3M training
program for undergraduate students, instructors and administrators. The final
goal is to develop a design framework that builds ethics, privacy and security
in from the ground up. All products will be made available as publications,
curricula, or software shared openly on common forums such as GitHub.