* 1552410
* CAREER:  Intra-Urban Variability in Carbon Deposition: Rates, Pathways, and Determinants
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2023
* Alexandra Ponette, University of North Texas
* Continuing Grant
* Tom Evans
* 05/31/2023
* USD 581,360.00

NATIONAL SCIENCE FOUNDATION&lt;br/&gt;GEOGRAPHY SPATIAL SCIENCES (GSS)
PROGRAM&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Faculty Early-
Career Development (CAREER) award will support research that will contribute new
knowledge about urban carbon cycle science by assessing the role of vegetation
in the capture, cycling, and fate of carbon in urban environments. As a major
source and sink for carbon, urban areas are a frontier in understanding changing
environments and the carbon cycle. The investigator will study the extent to
which city trees function as urban air filters, capturing carbon particles from
the atmosphere and then depositing them into soils for long-term storage.
Because of carbon?s powerful influence on atmospheric radiative mechanisms,
understanding its removal and input into the soil is key to developing and
implementing short-term environmental mitigation strategies. In addition,
understanding the factors that contribute to carbon removal in urban areas could
help improve air quality for urban residents. The research will be conducted at
the edge of the Dallas-Fort Worth metropolitan area and will quantify the
filtration of carbon particulates. The project will open new pathways into
science, technology engineering, and mathematics (STEM) for geography and
education majors, and it provides research experiences for undergraduate and
graduate students. Project results will have socioeconomic implications by
providing opportunities to impact urban architecture and configuration while
understanding the complex urban forms that drive biogeochemical patterns and
processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigator will quantify rates, pathways,
and determinants of carbon deposition at fine spatial scales in a rapidly
growing city that is representative of many urban areas in semi-arid regions of
the world. The investigator will explore answers to three core questions: (1)
What is the spatial variability in the deposition rates of black carbon on urban
tree canopies? (2) What is the role of throughfall and litterfall in the flux of
carbon to the soil? (3) What are the urban form components that control spatial
patterns of black carbon deposition? High-resolution light detection and ranging
(LiDAR) data, geospatial data, and field-measured vegetation characteristics
will be integrated to determine the most important factors contributing to
spatial variability in the filtering of carbon particulates. A statistical model
will be developed to provide estimates of carbon removal by trees at the city
scale. The LiDAR-based scaling approach is potentially transformative, because
it has broad applicability to a range of scientific questions across diverse
ecosystems.