* 1552232
* CAREER: Chasing icebergs: quantifying iceberg motion and melt in Greenland's glacial fjords
* GEO,OPP
* 11/01/2016,10/31/2021
* Joshua Roering, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Colene Haffke
* 10/31/2021
* USD 799,723.00

Mass is being lost from the Greenland Ice Sheet both in the form of liquid water
and solid ice. The solid ice occurs in the form of icebergs. The influence of
these icebergs on the stratification and circulation of water in fjords, as well
as on the freshwater content of the adjacent ocean, is poorly understood. This
project will improve understanding of the role of icebergs in fjords and the
coastal ocean through intensive process studies on iceberg melt and movement.
These studies will include both field observations and numerical modeling
experiments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will contribute to the
development of the nation's STEM workforce by providing support for the training
of a graduate student and a post-doctoral associate. To enhance the
communication of science to the general public, a course in Geo-communication
will be modified to include new multi-media approaches. Additionally, the
project will allow the PI to extend his prior collaborations with University of
Oregon's STEM CORE program to work with a local middle school on STEM-focused
curricula. To enhance outreach to the broader public, the principal investigator
will collaborate with a science historian to transcribe archived data into
modern format that will be freely distributed, co-deliver public talks, add
content to an existing website, and participate in an annual event on Climate
Change and Indigenous Peoples organized by his
institution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ongoing surge in ocean-glacier
interactions studies around Greenland is motivated primarily to improve our
understanding of the role ocean circulation plays in outlet glacier variability.
Two potential mechanisms that lead to glacier acceleration and dynamic thinning
are (1) increased submarine melting due to an enhanced ocean heat transport to
the glacier termini, and (2) a weakening of the ice m√©lange that buttresses the
glacier face. Fjords act as links between these two processes with the large-
scale climate forcing on one hand (both oceanic and atmospheric) and the
Greenland ice sheet variability on the other. However, one key process, iceberg
melt, has been largely neglected in most fjord circulation studies due to a
narrow focus on plume driven circulation, as well as the overall difficulty of
obtaining in situ observations. This proposal aims to gather novel observations
on iceberg melt and movement in Greenland?s fjords by tracking the horizontal
and vertical motion of large, deep-keeled icebergs at high temporal resolution.
Tracking individual icebergs, combined with ship- and drone-based surveys, will
allow quantification not only of iceberg melt rates, but also of their movement
through the fjord and eventual dispersal across the shelf and into the interior
ocean. Fieldwork will be conducted in relatively well-studied systems in
Greenland, with the potential for rapid generalization to other systems.
Complemented by numerical ocean modeling, these process studies will enable
assessment of how well current parameterizations capture the melt processes
occurring in Greenland's waters. Ultimately, these results will provide a solid
foundation for improving understanding of the spatial and temporal picture of
iceberg motion and melt and how this can be incorporated into operational
iceberg trajectory models, as well as global scale climate models.