* 1552461
* CAREER: Graphene-hexagonal Boron Nitride (hBN) Heterostructure Infrared Polaritonic Devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/01/2016,01/31/2022
* Fengnian Xia, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 01/31/2022
* USD 500,000.00

Abstract Title: Infrared Devices using Graphene-hexagonal Boron Nitride Layered
Heterostructures&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nontechnical description:Infrared devices
covering a wavelength range from 6 to 15 microns can play a critical role in
many optical technologies such as thermal imaging, night vision and free-space
optical communications. The most commonly used material for the access to this
infrared window is mercury cadmium telluride. However, the growth of mercury
cadmium telluride involves toxic elements and hence is highly challenging.
Moreover, it is soft and brittle, leading to difficulties in device fabrication
and system integration. In this program, the principle investigator and his team
will explore an alternative material system based on layered graphene-hexagonal
boron nitride heterostructures for the infrared device applications. They will
focus on the interaction of infrared light and the heterostructures and optimize
their infrared properties. Furthermore, the team will built infrared devices
which can perform infrared light detection functions in the wavelength range
from 6 to 15 microns. This program will also train students and postdocs and
hence contribute to the nation's workforce needs in optics and semiconductor
industries. The program will provide students with unique hands-on research
training in a rapidly emerging field, while exposing them to multidisciplinary
research approaches. In collaboration with Yale Pathways to Science, this
program will also educate pre-college students in New Haven area from diverse
backgrounds and ethnicities especially under-represented groups, instilling
their interests in science and engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
description: Polaritons are quasiparticles resulting from the coupling of
photons with electric dipole-carrying elementary excitations such as plasmons,
phonons, or excitons. Here the principle investigator and his team will explore
graphene based infrared polaritonic devices covering an important mid-infrared
wavelength range from 6 to 15 µm. They will investigate plasmon, phonon, and
plasmon-phonon polaritons in large area hybrid structures consisting of graphene
and hexagonal born nitride (hBN). The overall goals are to achieve unprecedented
light-matter interaction and to realize high performance polaritonic imaging
elements in the infrared. The key element of this proposal is the enhanced
light-graphene interaction using polaritonic resonances. The principle
investigator proposes two complementary thrusts: (1) Understand the plasmon,
phonon, and plasmon-phonon polaritons and their damping processes in graphene-
hBN heterostructures and build polaritonic photodetectors in mid-infrared (6 to
15 µm) based on lateral nanoribbon junctions; and (2) Understand the hot-carrier
dominated thermionic emission effect in vertical heterostructures and build
polariton enhanced photodetectors utilizing hot-carrier thermionic emission. The
proposed research will lead to new optical devices based on an alternative
material system. Systematic study on plasmon, phonon, and plasmon-phonon
polaritons including their damping pathways will lead to discoveries of new
optical physics in two-dimensional layered materials.