* 1552603
* CAREER: The Early Universe as a Window to Quantum Gravity
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2022
* Ivan Agullo, Louisiana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 08/31/2022
* USD 400,000.00

Recent observations have detected remnants of physical processes that occurred a
tiny fraction of second after the origin of the universe. However, the
theoretical tools we have at present to interpret these data are far from
complete. A key difficulty is how to make Einstein's theory of gravity
consistent with quantum mechanics. The present project seeks to contribute to
filling this gap by incorporating new ideas in quantum gravity to cosmology. The
goal of this project is twofold: to extend our understanding of the origin and
fate of the universe, and to use the last generation of cosmological
observations to test recent developments in quantum-gravity. Additionally, this
award supports several educational initiatives that enhance the teaching of
cosmology at graduate and undergraduate levels through the creation of new
courses as well as outreach projects in coordination with the LIGO Science
Education Center.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports research aimed at
developing theoretical methods to incorporate quantum gravity physics in models
of the early universe. Investigations will focus on theoretical as well as
phenomenological aspects of quantum cosmology, with special emphasis on
techniques coming from loop quantum gravity. From the theoretical point of view,
it will be explored how matter fields propagate on regimes where quantum aspects
of gravity are important, and the way in which the familiar quantum field theory
in curved space-times emerges from the more fundamental theory. From the
phenomenological viewpoint, the resulting theoretical framework will be applied
to extend cosmological models to include Planck scale physics. Investigations
will cover scalar perturbations that are responsible for the temperature
anisotropies in the cosmic microwave background and galaxy distribution, non-
Gaussianity, primordial magnetic fields, and gravitational waves generated in
the early universe. Attention will also be paid to find mechanisms to account
for some anomalies recently observed in cosmic microwave background. The results
of this project are expected to reinforce the bridge between quantum gravity and
cosmology, producing benefits for both fields.