* 1552712
* CAREER: Statistical Design of Hierarchical Metal Structures for High Performance, Flexible Solar Cells
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/01/2016,01/31/2021
* Paul Leu, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 01/31/2021
* USD 512,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical:&lt;br/&gt;This Faculty Early Career
Development (CAREER) project seeks to design new metal structures into flexible
thin crystalline silicon to achieve high efficiency, low cost solar cells. This
work will develop new statistical techniques to design metal structures across
multiple length scales into high performance transparent conductors. Subsequent
work will evaluate how these structures may be incorporated into flexible thin
film crystalline solar cells to increase efficiencies and lower cost. The
proposed work is expected to have important implications in promoting the
widespread adoption of solar, decreasing the U.S.?s dependence on fossil fuels,
and enhancing portable energy sources. This project will allow for additional
opportunities in incorporating metal structures into sensors, photodetectors,
and smart surfaces. &lt;br/&gt;The PI will build upon his long relationship with
the Pittsburgh Office of Diversity and develop new K-12 activities for the
INVESTING NOW summer program and Mobile Science Lab. New in-person and virtual
(Google Street View-like) tours will be implemented for the PI?s lab and the
Pittsburgh Nanofabrication and Characterization Facility. The PI will develop a
new ?Statistical Design of Materials? graduate course. Undergraduates (with an
emphasis on minorities) will have opportunities to pursue research through the
Mascaro Center for Sustainable Innovation.&lt;br/&gt;Technical:&lt;br/&gt;The
objective of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project is to
develop new statistical techniques that understand the structure "property"
process relationships of hierarchical metals so they may be systematically
designed into flexible thin crystalline silicon to achieve high efficiency, low
cost solar cells. This project will investigate biologically inspired
hierarchical metal structures, which require the integration of physics across
multiple length scales. These structures will be assessed over a wide range of
incident light angles corresponding to the movement of the sun through the sky
during the day. New statistical methodologies will be developed to handle
physics across multiple length scales and integrated into a simulation and
experimental framework. This paradigm will lead to novel statistical models that
enable fast throughput materials design of innovative applications such as
transparent conductors, flexible electronics, and solar cells. The PI will
explore the performance limits of hierarchical metal structures for transparent
conductors. Subsequently, hierarchical metal structures will be designed into
both the top and bottom of flexible crystalline silicon thin films for plasmonic
light trapping and carrier collection. This research will pave the way to a new
flexible lightweight, high efficiency solar cell technology that exceeds the
efficiency of conventional, rigid, bulk silicon solar cells.