* 1552828
* CAREER: Data Representation and Modeling for Unleashing the Potential of Multi-Modal Wearable Sensing Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2022
* Edgar Lobaton, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Ralph Wachter
* 03/31/2022
* USD 492,109.00

The recent increase in the variety and usage of wearable sensing systems allows
for the continuous monitoring of health and wellness of users. The output of
these systems enable individuals to make changes to their personal routines in
order to minimize exposures to pollutants and maintain healthy levels of
exercise. Furthermore, medical practitioners are using these systems to monitor
proper activity levels for rehabilitation purposes and to monitor threatening
conditions such as heart arrhythmias. However, there is substantial work to be
done to facilitate the processing and interpretation of such information in
order to maximize impact. This proposal develops a computational framework that
models the complex interactions between physiological and environmental factors
contributing to an individual's health. The contributions of this award will
facilitate the broad adoption of wearable sensing platforms and innovative
analytical tools by individuals and medical
practitioners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award develops methodology for the
estimation and prediction of physiological responses and environmental factors,
with the objective of enabling users to efficiently change their behavior. To
accomplish this objective, the framework will build on tools from statistical
analysis, topological data analysis, optimization theory and human behavior
analysis. This novel framework will not only develop new formal techniques, but
it will also serve as a bridge between these cross-disciplinary fields. In
particular, the proposed hierarchical computational framework has the potential
of providing a trade-off between accuracy and computational flexibility based on
the choice of granularity of the representation. This award will: (1) develop
methodology for the concurrent representation of physiological, kinematic and
environmental states for inference purposes; (2) develop techniques for mapping
representations between different systems to enable information sharing; and (3)
develop techniques to maximize the impact on the behavior of individuals by
building on the proposed data representation. The algorithm development will be
informed by integration of limitations on embedded platforms due to memory,
computational and power capabilities, and transmission costs when off-board
processing is required. The proposed techniques will empower users and medical
practitioners to understand, analyze, and make decisions based on patterns in
the data. The outcomes of this project will empower medical practitioners by
providing innovative and effective tools for wearable sensing systems which
enable efficient pattern identification, data representation and visualization.
Besides training students directly working on this project, the data sets and
algorithms developed will be incorporated into a new graduate course on
computational techniques for physiological and environmental sensing.
Undergraduate students will be engaged by participating in data collection
experiments, REUs, and local demonstrations. Underrepresented undergraduate
student communities will be exposed to the research at the national level by
presenting demos at well-known diversity conferences in the STEM fields.
Furthermore, K-12 local student communities will be engaged via summer workshops
that will be prepared for students and educators.