* 1552824
* CAREER: Empirical Studies of Incentive Design, Information Technology Use, and Productivity in Physician Markets
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2016,07/31/2022
* Benjamin Handel, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 07/31/2022
* USD 450,000.00

Empirical Studies of Incentive Design, Information Technology Use and
Productivity in Physician Markets&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Health care cost growth
is one of the central policy problems the U.S. currently faces: 17.4% of U.S.
GDP is devoted to health care spending while 43% of all health spending comes
from federal, state, and local governments. While high spending can be justified
given the potential value of health services, recent research indicates that
spending could be reduced without negatively affecting health. The Affordable
Care Act of 2010 greatly increased access to health care but included few
provisions to meet the cost growth challenge head on. Current policy approaches
to facilitate efficient health care spending include (i) consumer cost-sharing
(ii) health technology assessment (iii) physician payment reform and (iv)
improved use of IT. &lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to advance our understanding
of how to improve population health in a cost-effective manner. It focuses on
better understanding (i) how physicians respond to financial incentives for
providing quality health care and (ii) how physician treatments respond to the
availability of sophisticated IT tools. Despite the importance of understanding
these medical provider behaviors, there is limited research on these topics. The
project leverages unique data and employs cutting edge methods in economics to
advance our scientific understanding of physician and patient behaviors in these
domains. These research advances should have direct implications for policies
that seek to improve national health and well-being in a cost-effective manner.
&lt;br/&gt;In addition to this research dimension, the project will set up a
workshop for graduate students in health economics designed to promote a
comprehensive understanding of the scientific techniques necessary to make
advances in this field in original research. This workshop will bring together
leading health economists from across the country to train Ph.D. students in
both health economics and health policy. Both the proposed and proposed workshop
will have broader impacts beyond just the scientific advances, including policy
impacts in the space of health care and professional impacts in training a new
generation of health economists. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;On the
research side, this project investigates several new large-scale datasets that
track both physician behaviors and patient behaviors in detail. The first
environment to be studied is the Hawaii Medical Service Association (HMSA), the
largest insurer in the state of Hawaii. HMSA has implemented a range of state-
of-the-art quality incentive programs to encourage physicians to provide higher
quality medical care. In addition, in 2012 HMSA led the system-wide
implementation of a sophisticated IT tool that provides physicians with specific
real-time information on their quality performance. In the context of these
natural experiments, there are detailed administrative data on (i) patient
behaviors and characteristics for over 700,000 patients and (ii) physician
behaviors and characteristics for over 1,000 physicians. Key micro-level
information are observed on exactly how physicians respond to quality incentives
and use available IT, both before and after HMSA implemented specific key
changes. The PI will leverage these micro-level data to investigate
heterogeneous effects related to physician training, the profile of patients a
physician treats, and characteristics of physician organizations. The analysis
will be used to investigate ways to structurally improve physician quality
incentives and use of IT with the goals of higher quality and more cost-
effective health care. &lt;br/&gt;The second environment that will be
investigated is Maine Medical Center, which worked with a technology partner
AgileMD to implement mobile technology that aids its 200+ physicians in the
treatment of complex medical conditions. In this context, the PI will use a
randomized evaluation, together with detailed data on physician behaviors and
use of IT, to study the role of mobile technology on productivity.
&lt;br/&gt;This research program uses cutting edge methods in economics together
with novel datasets to investigate key intellectual questions that will enhance
our understanding of the economics of an important policy area. In addition to
this intellectual merit, the project will have broader impact through both the
policies it will impact and the workshop to train a new generation of health
economists.