* 1552344
* CAREER: Leveraging the Virtualness of Virtual Reality for More-Effective Training
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2016,04/30/2020
* Ryan McMahan, University of Texas at Dallas
* Continuing Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 04/30/2020
* USD 434,879.00

This research takes a new approach to computer-based virtual reality (VR)
training by leveraging the virtualness of VR to provide training solutions not
possible in the real world. The aim is to develop VR techniques that are more
effective and more time-efficient for training than real-world exercises and VR
systems that emulate them. To demonstrate the general effectiveness of these new
VR training techniques, the research focuses on two training domains: (1)
Robotic operating room tasks for non-surgeon team members, including
preoperative setup, intraoperative tasks, and postoperative cleanup. (2) Pre-
shift inspections of off-highway trucks, which include walk-around inspections,
mounting the vehicle, and in-cab inspections. Formative expert reviews, studies
comparing the new techniques to traditional VR training versions, and real-world
validation studies will be used to determine the effectiveness and efficiency of
the techniques. Educational activities include a graduate VR course, research
experiences for undergraduates, a summer research program for underrepresented
high school students, an annual VR summer camp for high and middle school
students, and the creation of online video tutorials for VR development to
support formal and informal learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A new framework for
designing and analyzing VR training techniques has been developed to facilitate
this research, the Framework for Altering Fidelity to Influence Memory. It
connects two concepts, system fidelity and working memory. System fidelity is
the objective degree of exactness with which real world experiences are
reproduced by a VR system. Working memory is the temporal activation of short-
term or long-term perceptual, cognitive, and motor memory networks in the mind
of the human user. The premise of the framework is to manipulate an aspect of
system fidelity to help a stage of working memory, which in turn should improve
the effectiveness of training. Six novel VR techniques, based on approaches
identified with this framework, will be developed and investigated: (1)
causation signaling, (2) sensory accents, (3) situational dramatization, (4)
error instigation, (5) object conjuration, and (6) regulated biomechanics. For
example, the causation signaling method is to purposefully alter time and
physics to convey the cause-and-effect relationship between an event and its
consequence. Time warping is a causation signaling technique in which the
training scenario can be fast-forwarded after an error to the resulting
consequence and then rewound back to the decision point just before the error.
This technique will convey to the user the cause-and-effect relationship between
the error and resulting consequence, in addition to allowing the user to correct
the mistake.