* 1552741
* EAGER: Strain Engineering the Mechanical Properties of Black Phosphorus
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2016
* Traian Dumitrica, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Tom Kuech
* 12/31/2016
* USD 120,000.00

With this EArly-concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER), the team will
investigate the feasibility of producing thin layers of phosphorus that, based
on measurements and theoretical predictions, have more attractive electronic
properties than thin layers of carbon. Ultrathin materials that consist of one
or a few atomically-thin layers are being studied as alternatives for current
silicon-based microelectronics. The electronic properties of thin layers of
phosphorous change when subjected to deformation, enabling control by the
application of external forces that would offer interesting device functionality
when placed on flexible material supports. This project will demonstrate the
effect of macro- and nano-scale bending on the electronic properties of thin
phosphorus films. Being able to produce and control the properties of
phosphorous would enable new materials and concepts for electronics. Insight
from the combined experimental-theoretical approach to investigate strain in
atomically thin layers would be applicable to other two-dimensional materials.
The research program is integrated with an outreach program involving student
recruitment in partnership with the Society of Hispanic Professional Engineers,
Inc. and public education in relation to the Solar Vehicle Project. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research is to demonstrate strain engineering in
atomically-thin membranes by combining experimental realization and
characterization with computational investigation. Two-dimensional (2D) films of
the phosphorus allotrope known as black phosphorus will be exfoliated onto
silicon carbide and flexible substrates. It is expected that the black
phosphorus will conform to patterns in the silicon carbide in a manner that
depends on the number of phosphorus layers and pattern dimensions. The black
phosphorus will be strained by application of a force to the flexible substrate.
The strain introduced in the black phosphorus will be measured by Raman
spectroscopy and scanning tunneling microscopy. The delamination from the
patterns will be measured by atomic force microscopy. The experiments will be
modeled by density functional-based theory to obtain a picture of the mechanical
and electronic properties at the nanoscale in two-dimensional films. The
understanding and control of strain will enable a new anisotropic, 2D electronic
material that has a bandgap, and will establish a robust platform for achieving
strain engineering in technologically important 2D films beyond graphene.