* 1552794
* EAGER: Corrosion Reduction in Reinforcing Steel of Concrete Structures through Grain Size Alteration
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,12/31/2018
* Amir Poursaee, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Kishor Mehta
* 12/31/2018
* USD 154,123.00

Corrosion of reinforcing steel in concrete structures is one of the critical
parameters in deterioration of concrete structures. It is hypothesized that
reduction in grain size in steel can significantly reduce corrosion in
reinforcing bars. Analytical and experimental studies will be pursued to
correlate between grain size and level of corrosion. The experiments in this
EArly-concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) project will include
putting the reinforcing steel in the simulated concrete environment. The grain
size in steel will be altered using thermal cycles to determine effects of grain
size on corrosion and mechanical properties. The reinforcing steel will be
subjected to chloride contaminated concrete pore solution and the level of
corrosion on the corroded steel bars will be assessed using different
microscopic and spectroscopic analyses. Mechanical properties of the steel with
different grain sizes will be obtained with standard tests. Cost analysis of the
alteration of grain size will be pursued in this exploratory project to
determine viability of the process.

Electron backscatter diffraction technique to obtain quantitative
microstructural map will be used for crystallographic nature of the steel
specimens. This technique reveals grain size, grain boundary character, grain
orientation, texture, and phase identity of the specimens. The microstructural
map in an analytical model will allow predicting the pitting corrosion behavior
of steel with different grain sizes. Physical and chemical composition of the
steel will be obtained using scanning electrochemical microscopy, X-ray
photoelectron spectroscopy, and optical profiler. The analytical model will
include pitting growth as a variable. Life cycle cost analysis will be pursued
as related to grain size necessary to reduce corrosion. A procedure that is in a
standard for cost analysis for measuring life cycle costs in buildings will be
used for this purpose. The final results of this exploratory project will be to
understand corrosion as related to grain size of steel exposed to environment of
concrete.