* 1552862
* CAREER: Allosteric Regulation of Transcription Factor DNA Binding Specificity, Kinetics and Cellular Activity
* BIO,MCB
* 01/15/2016,12/31/2021
* Miles Pufall, University of Iowa
* Continuing Grant
* Manju Hingorani
* 12/31/2021
* USD 1,162,416.00

Only a fraction of the over 20,000 genes present in every cell of the body are
used at a given time. The choice of which genes to use is determined by
environmental cues, such as heat, cold, food, hormones, and injury. This project
studies how proteins function to turn genes on and off in response to hormones.
Understanding this problem requires expertise from a variety of different
disciplines, including physics, chemistry, and biology, that are often separate
in the scientific culture. This research fosters cross-disciplinary training
early, at the undergraduate level, by re-engineering how organic chemistry
laboratory is taught, and connecting it to this pressing research problem. The
results of this study provide critical insight into how cells respond to their
environment while preparing the next generation of scientists to break down
interdisciplinary barriers in the workplace.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proteins
called transcription factors (TFs) have the critical task of integrating intra-
and extracellular signaling pathways to precisely regulate gene expression in
response to stimuli. TFs regulate genes by binding specific DNA sequences and
nucleating the machinery needed for transcription (RNA synthesis). Recent large-
scale efforts have defined the core DNA sequence preferences for hundreds of
TFs, but very little is known about how these crucial regulatory signals change
TF:DNA binding activity. This project may determine how external signals remodel
the intrinsic properties of TF:DNA binding to redirect genomic association and
gene regulation. Using the glucocorticoid receptor (GR, a hormone activated TF)
as a model system, the effect of ligands and phosphorylation on the specificity
and kinetics of DNA binding are measured in vitro, and compared to GR genomic
occupancy and DNA binding dynamics in live cells. DNA binding specificity are
measured in vitro using high resolution systematic evolution of ligands by
exponential enrichment (SELEX-seq) from which thermodynamic models of binding
covering all possible sequences are generated, and in cells using chromatin-
immunoprecipitation followed by deep sequencing (ChIP-seq). DNA binding kinetics
are measured in vitro using single molecule total internal reflection
fluorescence microscopy (TIRFM) and in cells using single molecule single
molecule tracking (SMT). The consequence of changing specificity and kinetics
are then tested using cell lines with engineered binding sites generated using
CRISPR/Cas9 (clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats).
Students in the undergraduate Advanced Organic Laboratory course at Butler
University synthesize some of the ligands to be used in the research, and also
participate in their testing. The results build on current static descriptions
for understanding specificity and regulation, by enabling creation of new models
that predict the effect of changing intrinsic properties on regulating cellular
function.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is co-funded by the Genetic
Mechanisms Program in the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences and the
Division of Emerging Frontiers in the Biological Sciences Directorate, and by
the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Division of Chemistry in the
Mathematical and Physical Sciences Directorate.