* 1552598
* CAREER: Natural User Interfaces for Children
* CSE,IIS
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2021
* Lisa Anthony, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 12/31/2021
* USD 501,582.00

Natural user interfaces allow users to interact with technology through
modalities like touch, gesture, and motion. They are a key element in realizing
the vision of ubiquitous computing, yet they present challenges with respect to
supporting children. The PI's research on touchscreen interaction for children
has found that existing surface gesture recognition algorithms designed,
trained, and tested on adult input, and interaction design guidelines developed
based on adult interaction patterns, do not apply equally well to children. For
example, if a typical gesture interface is expecting a gesture to be entered as
a single stroke, the system will not be able to process the multiple strokes
generated by a child, leading to an unsuccessful interaction for that child.
Recognition for whole-body interaction gestures experiences similar challenges;
a child is more likely to perform an action or gesture (e.g., "jump" or "wave")
with greater intensity or different motion paths than an adult performing the
same gesture. In this research the PI's goal is to fundamentally advance our
understanding of how to design and develop natural user interactions for
children. The research will be carried out in three phases: (1) Data Collection
and Analysis: collection of input behaviors from elementary-school aged children
in each modality, and analysis for patterns and characteristics of children's
input; (2) Recognition and Classification: development of new recognition
algorithms attuned to the expected input behavior patterns of children and use
of machine learning to evaluate their performance; and (3) Multimodal
Interaction: investigation of multimodal input patterns exhibited by children,
and validation of new approaches to multimodal synthesis that perform well on
children's natural input. A testbed application will be developed to showcase
the findings in an educational domain. Open-source natural user interaction
recognition and synthesis algorithms and clear, practicable design
recommendations will be developed and released in both peer-reviewed papers and
on the project website for use by researchers and
practitioners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will make fundamental advances
in our understanding of child-computer interaction with natural user interfaces
and develop robust new approaches for recognizing input and recovering from
errors. This work will contribute solutions to interaction design research
questions, such as how to best adapt and use these new modalities for children,
and machine learning research questions, such as how to develop intelligent
multimodal recognition algorithms tailored for children's input. The knowledge
gained and contributions delivered by this research will inform the design of
ubiquitous computing for children in learning contexts. To these ends, the PI
will create models of expected input behavior patterns for children in two
natural modalities, touchscreen interaction and whole-body interaction, and use
these models to develop and adapt intelligent recognition algorithms tailored to
process children's input. Multimodal interaction, or streamlined processing of
disparate input from multiple simultaneous and unsynchronized input streams, is
also a key component of natural user interfaces. Like unimodal recognition,
traditional approaches to multimodal fusion for adult input may also not apply
well to children. Specifically, the following research questions are targeted:
What are the ways children produce interaction behaviors in multimodal natural
user input modalities? What interaction design techniques are most effective for
children using multimodal natural user input modalities? What new multimodal
recognition and fusion algorithms for natural user interaction modalities
perform effectively on children's input? This work will be conducted in
partnership with schools and teachers, allowing the research findings to have
immediate impact on how real children are using natural user interaction
technology in educational contexts. The project will involve both undergraduate
and graduate research assistants, broadening participation in computer science
by recruiting women and underrepresented minority students. Education plans
focus on developing a new undergraduate certificate in Human-Centered Computing.