* 1552444
* CAREER: Cyberinfrastructure for Intelligent Water Supply (CIWS): Shrinking Big Data for Sustainable Urban Water
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2016,01/31/2022
* Jeffery Horsburgh, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 01/31/2022
* USD 507,082.00

1552444 (Horsburgh)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To overcome challenges in using smart
water metering as an effective tool for sustainably managing urban water
supplies, an integrated research and education plan called Cyberinfrastructure
for Intelligent Water Supply (CIWS) is being implemented. CIWS will investigate
novel cyberinfrastructure and analytics to advance smart metering technology,
enable detailed characterization of residential water use behavior, and build
the scientific data and knowledge base for sustainably managing urban water
supplies. CIWS will enable transitioning of existing conventional "dumb" water
meters (the vast majority of water meters in use today) into low-cost (~$100)
"smart" and computationally-capable devices that can collect high frequency
data, use onboard processing capability to "shrink" the collected data by
extracting the timing and volume of individual water end uses, and then transmit
actionable data products to water managers for analysis - all without replacing
or affecting the functionality of the meter. CIWS will be capable of closing
critical gaps in understanding of and ability to quantify water use behavior at
the household and water system level. It will also enable identification of
alternative water management strategies and opportunities for water conservation
and increased efficiency. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CIWS and associated residential
water use studies offer a way to characterize residential water use and generate
new knowledge about: 1) how water use behavior varies across socio-demographic
groups and neighborhood types; 2) the timing of water demand and how this
information can be used by water providers to ensure water availability and
efficiency, plan for related energy demand, and improve customer satisfaction;
and 3) how water consumers change their behavior given detailed information
about their water use. This information is critical in identifying opportunities
for conservation, forecasting demand, and determining how water use patterns may
change over time in response to population growth, demographic shifts, and
technology improvements. CIWS will advance understanding of water use behavior,
the cyberinfrastructure for smart metering, and the pool of "cyber-savvy"
professionals and students capable of implementing smart metering, all of which
are critical for realizing the promises of smart metering. Mentorship will be
provided for a new generation of engineers and scientists who will receive
training and engage in research that prepares them to leverage new
cyberinfrastructure. Water users will be directly engaged in data collection and
information transfer. Hundreds of USU students will engage in a campus "Water
Wars" competition aimed at water conservation and sustainability using
cyberinfrastructure developed by this project. Logan City and USU Facilities
will be integral partners in data collection. Finally, graduate and
undergraduate students will be engaged in a visualization challenge using
continuous flow data from residential water meters. These efforts will involve
participants from underrepresented groups in undergraduate research through
targeted recruiting using existing programs at USU.