* 1552099
* Linking Calcium Sensor Gene Duplication and Functional Divergence to Plant Salt Tolerance
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2016,12/31/2021
* Karen Schumaker, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 12/31/2021
* USD 558,184.00

Soil salinity affects over 6% of the world's land mass, and currently causes the
loss of at least three hectares of arable land worldwide each minute. It has
been estimated that, in the United States alone, soil salinity reduces irrigated
crop yields by 20-30% annually. With few exceptions, crop plants are unable to
adapt to the stresses induced by elevated levels of salt in the soil. While
genetic variation for plant growth in salinity (salt tolerance) exists, little
is known about the genes underlying this variation. Two copies of a calcium
sensor gene has been found in the plant species Eutrema salsugineum, while many
related species have only one copy. Because Eutrema is able to grow in high salt
soils that kill most, if not all crop plants, the duplication of this gene
provides a unique opportunity to link its function to plant salt tolerance. To
do this, the project will uncover how and when the functions of the original and
duplicate genes diverged and identify the physiological changes that resulted.
In addition, this project will be used to enhance the infrastructure of
research, training, and outreach through the continued education and training of
students and postdoctoral researchers at the University of Arizona, design of
simple research modules for largely minority-serving K-12 classrooms in the
Tucson area, and participation in outreach efforts to K-12 students and the
community in Southern Arizona.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Gene duplication is a major
source of genetic diversity and, consequently, adaptive evolution. Because most
duplicated genes are lost via pseudogenization, the maintenance of duplicated
gene pairs in a genome can be indicative of an adaptive benefit conferred by the
paralogous genes. The CBL10 calcium sensor is present as a single gene in the
salt-sensitive model plant Arabidopsis thaliana (Arabidopsis), but as two genes
in its salt-tolerant relative, Eutrema (both members of the Brassicaceae). This
project will use the genetic and genomic resources developed for Arabidopsis to
determine how new traits and phenotypes emerge from a gene duplication event and
contribute to plant adaptation. Specifically, characterization of Eutrema with
reduced expression of the CBL10 genes will determine their specific functions in
salt tolerance (Aim 1). Functional analysis of CBL10 homologs from closely
related species within the Brassicaceae will determine when the duplicated
Eutrema genes acquired the changes that led to their functional divergence (Aim
2). Analyses of CBL10 protein sequences and biochemical activities will identify
domains that underlie the differences in Eutrema CBL10 function and the
associated physiological mechanisms (Aim 3).