* 1552328
* EAGER:  Experimental Techniques for Discerning Female-specific Morphology in Non-avian Theropod Dinosaurs
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2020
* Mary Schweitzer, Friends of the North Carolina State Museum of Natural Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 04/30/2020
* USD 185,690.00

Birds include more species than in any other group of extant vertebrates, and
were the only lineage of dinosaurs to survive the mass extinction at the end of
the Cretaceous Period about 65 million years ago. The long-standing success of
birds may be attributable in part to their unique reproductive physiology, which
includes a specialized skeletal tissue deposited in the inner cavity of long
bones known as medullary bone (MB). MB acts as a calcium reserve for the
production of eggshells and was long thought to be a key reproductive adaptation
unique to birds. However, the tissue has recently been purported to occur in a
handful of extinct species, including both non-avian dinosaurs and dinosaurian
relatives. Given the vast evolutionary distance across the groups in which MB
has been tentatively identified (across lineages that diverged over 100 million
years prior to the origin of birds), substantiation (or refutation) of MB in
these taxa and a careful study of the chemical characteristics and
microstructure of these skeletal tissues is a critical first step to determine
the validity of these identifications and the evolutionary significance of this
tissue. The proposed project will be transformative in developing an untested,
independent proxy for chemically distinguishing MB in fossils, and a non-
destructive means for identifying the microstructure of MB in the fossil record
that can be used to explore reproductive life history and physiology of the bird
lineage in deep time. Public outreach and education associated with this
research will be conducted at the North Carolina Museum of Natural Sciences.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Medullary bone (MB) is an ephemeral, estrogen dependent,
endosteal tissue lining the marrow cavity in extant avialans (birds). This
specialized reproductive tissue is highly vascular histologically, exhibits a
woven bone matrix, and is more densely mineralized than other bone types.
Although originally considered a key avian adaptation, MB has since been
identified in non-avian theropod and ornithopod dinosaurs, far removed
phylogenetically from the direct lineage of extant avialans, and most recently
outside of Dinosauria, in one of the clade's closest extinct relatives
Pterosauria (non-dinosaurian flying reptiles). To date, identifications of MB in
fossils have relied exclusively on structural comparisons (location, texture,
distribution, and microstructure) with MB in birds by means of histological
(destructive) sampling. However, MB in living birds can also be identified by
its unique molecular signature because the tissue incorporates more non-
collagenous proteins than cortical bone, and utilizes more sulfated
glycosaminoglycans, particularly keratan sulfate, which is not present in
cortical bone. This project will provide new information on chemical and
microstructural variation in MB within extant avialans and will use these data
to generate novel ÂµCT and histochemical techniques for identifying MB in the
fossil record. This protocol will then be used to test the homology of published
accounts of MB in extinct Archosauria, ultimately providing an informed
phylogenetic context for the evolution of medullary bone and avian-specific
reproductive physiology. This research is co-funded through the NSF Office of
International Science and Engineering in support of research on fossils in China
and Mongolia in this project.