* 1552153
* CEDAR: Impacts of Lower Atmosphere Forcing on the Mesosphere-lower Thermosphere and Ionosphere During September Equinox Transition
* GEO,AGS
* 06/15/2016,12/31/2021
* Han-Li Liu, University Corporation For Atmospheric Res
* Continuing Grant
* Tai-Yin Huang
* 12/31/2021
* USD 310,395.00

This award supports the investigation based upon the analysis of satellite data
with plasma density, oxygen composition, and mesosphere lower thermosphere
temperatures being the key parameters selected. The goal of this investigation
is to understand how the short-term variability that is observed in the
ionosphere total electron content (TEC) during the September equinox may be
explained as a result of the wave coupling between the lower and upper
atmosphere regions. These TEC variations can be characterized as ionospheric
weather that occur as a result of several dissipative processes that are
supported by the coupling of large scale lower atmosphere waves to the
ionospheric plasma of the region between 100 to 350 km. The key idea that would
be studied in this award is based upon the fact that the transmission of large
scale waves upward from the lower atmosphere region maximizes during the
equinoctial period. Normally, the stratospheric winds would block these waves
from reaching such high heights. However, the September equinox is when the
direction of stratospheric winds reverses direction being eastward during winter
and westward during the summer. During the equinox, these stratospheric winds
are weak and then transmission of the large scale waves through the middle
atmosphere region becomes possible. The investigation will compare modeled
results for the oxygen composition, temperature, and plasma densities in the
region of 100 to 350 km computed for the September equinoctial study to the
satellite measurements of these quantities for this same period. An
undergraduate student will be involved in the proposed research activities
through the Significant Opportunities in Atmospheric Research and Science
(SOARS) program. The involvement of a SOARS student will serve to enhance
participation of historically under-represented groups in the atmospheric
sciences. The research will further benefit society through an improved
understanding of short-term, day-to-day, variability in the ionosphere.
Understanding this variability is critical due to the impact of the ionosphere
on communication and navigation signals. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The modeling
research would use numerical simulations of the plasma densities using a newly-
developed, state-of-the-art whole atmosphere data assimilation model (WACCMX).
Incorporation of data assimilation in WACCMX will represent the first whole
atmosphere model with a comprehensive ionosphere and thermosphere to include the
data assimilation capability, enabling new insights into lower-upper atmosphere
coupling during specific events. By employing a data assimilation whole
atmosphere model, the numerical simulations can be directly compared with the
observations. This capability will be used to diagnose the mechanisms
responsible for the observed variability. The realization of the proposal
objectives will result in an overall improved understanding of the upper
atmosphere variability that occurs using the September equinox transition as a
representative simplified case study drawn from the overall range of upper
atmosphere dynamics. This simplification is a result of the weakness of
stratospheric winds during the reversal period. The elimination of the need to
know in detail the stratospheric winds thus enhances the ability to assess and
measure the modeling capability to simulate the other physical processes ongoing
in upper atmosphere dynamics.