* 1552640
* CAREER: High-Resolution Multidimensional Nonlinear Ion Mobility Spectrometry for Analytical Separations and Structural Characterization
* MPS,CHE
* 02/01/2016,07/31/2023
* Alexandre Shvartsburg, Wichita State University
* Continuing Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 07/31/2023
* USD 688,296.00

This CAREER award from the Chemical Measurement &amp; Imaging Program (with co-
funding from the Instrument Development for Biological Research Program)
supports the efforts of Professor Alexandre Shvartsburg at Wichita State
University to develop new technologies for the characterization of biomaterials.
Mass spectrometry (MS) is a technique used to identification and
characterization biological and environmental samples. To enable application to
complex samples, MS is usually preceded by a separation step, typically
employing solution-based methods of liquid chromatography or electrophoresis.
These methods are increasingly being replaced or complemented by much faster
separations based on gas-phase ion mobility spectrometry (IMS), which can
provide additional insight into elements of ion structure. Dr. Shvartsburg and
his group are advancing the capabilities of IMS based on fundamentally new
measurement concepts. The research is integrated with an educational program
centered on an IMS exhibit in the Wichita Exploration Place and other science
museums and discovery centers nationwide, and taken to schools as part of a K-12
outreach program. The exhibit emulates IMS separations demonstrating the key
aspects of resolution and sensitivity in an interactive format. This effort is
complemented by a summer program for faculty from undergraduate institutions and
community colleges in Kansas, providing them with opportunities to learn more
about MS, IMS, and their applications. Incorporation of this knowledge into
courses taught at their home institutions may help prepare students to
contribute to a technology-based economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Initial IMS
methods were designed such that measured ion velocities are linearly
proportional to the applied electric field. The relationship between field
strength and velocity becomes more complex in strong fields, where ion mobility
varies with field strength, enabling a newer technique called field asymmetric
waveform IMS (FAIMS) that sorts ions by the difference between mobilities at
high and low fields. FAIMS is capable of providing exceptionally fine
separations, extending, in favorable cases, to separations of isotopic isomers
(isotopomers). Dr. Shvartsburg is pursuing multiple approaches to advancing the
resolving power of FAIMS by expanding the nonlinear IMS paradigm in
fundamentally novel ways. One approach is higher-order differential IMS
employing more complex asymmetric waveforms to achieve unique separations.
Another is IMS with alignment of dipole direction, where the pendular locking of
macromolecular dipoles permits capturing the directionally (rather than
orientationally) averaged cross sections for more detailed structural
characterization. Implementation of FAIMS at reduced temperatures may extend the
pendular regime to smaller ions (including essentially all peptides) and avoid
heating ions above room temperature, which can cause dissociation or structural
distortion in high-field IMS systems. Assembly of multidimensional separations
comprising linear and nonlinear IMS stages is central to this work. By devising
and sharing teaching tools related to these sophisticated concepts, Dr.
Shvartsburg is not only advancing our characterization capabilities, but also
helping prepare students with the skills and understanding needed to advance the
state of technology.