* 1552454
* EAGER: Social Networks Based Concept Learning in Images
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Bir Bhanu, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 08/31/2018
* USD 200,000.00

The need for easy, quick, and intuitive search of visual data at the conceptual
level is universal. This project will explore a novel network analysis-based
approach to searching visual data, ultimately leading to visual search engines
that would make searching images as easy as searching by keywords is today.
Accomplishing this requires new approaches to machine learning of visual
concepts. This project proposes a formal framework that unifies the ideas from
social networks and semantic concept learning so multiple semantic concepts can
be learned with high confidence. Specifically, the approach utilizes
hierarchical co-occurrence correlation among concepts as cues to help the
detection of individual visual concepts. The sources for robustness are the
learning of co-occurrence patterns, similar to community structures in a social
network, and their refinement over time. The success of concept co-occurrence
detection will simplify management of personal image data with automatic
tagging. With semantically organized personal content, the preferences of a user
can be learned to provide personalization of various contents that he/she
consumes online. This will have a broad impact for diverse applications ranging
from information technology to physical, life and social sciences to
intelligence organizations to news bureaus. Forensics analysis of digital data
would be greatly speeded up as humans do not have to sift through large amount
of data. Extension of the techniques to video, music, and multi-modal data would
also provide similar ease for content consumption. The research team provides an
environment integrating education and workforce development with research, and
with recruiting and retaining a diverse group of students. Complementing the
research activities will be new initiatives in education and public outreach.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project develops a transformative approach to explore
the acquisition and refinement of semantic visual concepts systematically.
First, it discovers the hierarchical co-occurrence patterns of concepts as
underlying community structures in the co-occurrence network. The co-occurrence
patterns play roles similar to underlying scene concepts at a higher level of
semantics. Second, it proposes an approach for selecting visually-consistent-
semantic concepts. Since concepts vary in their visual complexity, visual-
semantic relatedness of each concept is investigated by quantitatively measuring
the within-concept visual variability and the visual distances to the other
concepts such that they can be modeled more reliably and detected more easily.
Third, the project introduces a novel image content descriptor called concept
signature that can record both the semantic concept and the corresponding
confidence value inferred from low-level features. Finally, the project proposes
techniques for scalability to handle and evaluate the performance on large
databases by developing open source techniques and software tools. The results
will be broadly disseminated through the project website
(http://vislab.ucr.edu/RESEARCH/VisualSemanticConcepts/VSC.php), via regular
releases of software tools and offering tutorials/workshops at major IEEE/ACM
conferences.