* 1552114
* CAREER: Making Science Visible: Using Visualization Technology to Support Linguistically Diverse Middle School Students' Learning in Physical and Life Sciences
* EDU,DRL
* 06/01/2016,12/31/2022
* Kihyun Ryoo, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Fengfeng Ke
* 12/31/2022
* USD 683,641.00

The growing diversity in public schools requires science educators to address
the specific needs of English language learners (ELLs), students who speak a
language other than English at home. Although ELLs are the fastest-growing
demographic group in classrooms, many are historically underserved in mainstream
science classrooms, particularly those from underrepresented minority groups.
The significant increase of ELLs at public schools poses a challenge to science
teachers in linguistically diverse classrooms as they try to support and engage
all students in learning science. The proposed project will respond to this
urgent need by investigating the potential benefits of interactive, dynamic
visualization technologies, including simulations, animations, and visual
models, in supporting science learning for all middle school students, including
ELLs. This project will also identify design principles for developing such
technology, develop additional ways to support student learning, and provide new
guidelines for effective science teachers' professional development that can
assist them to better serve students from diverse language backgrounds. The
project has the potential to transform traditional science instruction for all
students, including underserved ELLs, and to broaden their participation in
science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In collaboration with eighth grade science
teachers from two low-income middle schools in North Carolina, the project will
focus on three objectives: (1) develop, test, and refine four open-source, web-
based inquiry units featuring dynamic visualizations on energy and matter
concepts in physical and life sciences, aligned with the Next Generation Science
Standards (NGSS); (2) investigate how dynamic visualizations can engage eighth-
grade ELLs and native-English-speaking students in science practices and improve
their understanding of energy and matter concepts; and (3) investigate which
scaffolding approaches can help maximize ELLs' learning with visualizations.
Research questions include: (1) Which kinds of dynamic visualizations
(simulations, animations, visual models) lead to the best learning outcomes for
all students within the four instructional science units?; (2) Do ELLs benefit
more from visualizations (or particular kinds of visualizations) than do native-
English-speaking students?; and (3) What kinds of additional scaffolding
activities (e.g., critiquing arguments vs. generating arguments) are needed by
ELLs in order to achieve the greatest benefit? The project will use design-based
research and mixed-methods approaches to accomplish its research objectives and
address these questions. Furthermore, it will help science teachers develop
effective strategies to support students' learning with visualizations. Products
from this project, including four NGSS-aligned web-based inquiry units, the
visualizations created for the project, professional development materials, and
scaffolding approaches for teachers to use with ELLs, will be freely available
through a project website and multiple professional development networks. The PI
will collaborate with an advisory board of experts to develop the four
instructional units, visualizations, and scaffolds, as well as with the
participating teachers to refine these materials in an iterative fashion.
Evaluation of the materials and workshops will be provided each year by the
advisory board members, and their feedback will be used to improve design and
implementation for the next year. The advisory board will also provide summative
evaluation of student learning outcomes and will assess the success of the
teachers' professional development workshops.