* 1552405
* Confidence Judgments and Metacognition in Comparative and Developmental Perspective
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2021
* John David Smith, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Michael Hout
* 07/31/2021
* USD 592,087.00

People regularly assess what they do and do not know. They seek information that
they lack for making good decisions, and they hesitate when they are unsure
until certainty arrives through new information, or through careful
reconsideration of a problem or question. This monitoring of one's perceptions,
memories, and knowledge states is critical to many intellectual and educational
activities - this capacity is called metacognition. The study of the precursors
to human metacognition in nonverbal animals is a strong area of focus in
comparative research, and the study of the emergence of metacognition in
children is a strong focus of developmental research. This project will answer
new questions of metacognitive competence across species and age ranges in
humans, fostering new insights into a cognitive capacity that is critical to
education, decision-making, and intellectual functioning. This type of research
draws great interest from the media and the public, and will be presented
directly to the public through various forms such as publications,
presentations, documentaries, and live demonstrations of psychological research
in progress at the Smithsonian's National Zoo. Undergraduate students, graduate
students and postdoctoral associates will develop their skills as researchers,
teachers, and future mentors through this research program, with a strong
emphasis on the participation of underrepresented groups in this research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The tasks in this project will generate comparative data
of cognitive monitoring by human adults, children, and nonhuman primates. The
tasks will assess how these groups demonstrate confidence in what they know or
do not know, adjust behavior to seek information when it is needed, and flexibly
deal with varying degrees of perceptual experience, memory, and knowledge. The
data will illustrate key aspects of the emergence of metacognitive control
across species and across development. These non-invasive, behavioral studies
will generate animal models for metacognition, expand the range of paradigms
available to researchers, illuminate the early roots of metacognition in
children, potentially support the study of metacognition in language-delayed or
autistic children, and help ground efforts to train metacognition in populations
that show impairment in this ability.