* 1552211
* In situ synchrotron X-ray diffraction of Fe oxide transformations in aqueous solutions
* GEO,EAR
* 02/15/2016,01/31/2020
* Peter Heaney, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 01/31/2020
* USD 408,616.00

The mineral hematite (Fe2O3) is of critical economic importance, as it serves as
the primary mineral reserve for the extraction of iron, which accounts for 90%
of worldwide metal consumption. In addition, hematite formation in soils is of
the highest environmental significance, because hematite nanoparticles can
attach to the surfaces of soil particles and modify their ability to sequester
harmful metals. Hematite also is used technologically in applications ranging
from magnetic data storage to pigmentation, and it is being tested as an agent
for water-splitting in solar cells. However, despite the ubiquity of hematite at
Earth's surface, the chemical reactions by which hematite crystallizes are still
poorly understood. This study will explore a novel hypothesis that the first
crystals of hematite to nucleate from aqueous solutions are chemically and
physically distinct from ideal hematite, not only because of their nanometer-
scale particle size but because up to one-third of the iron atoms are missing
from the crystal structure. Previous studies have shown that these iron defects
can dramatically alter the magnetic properties, color saturation, and chemical
reactivity of hematite. In this study, the investigators will explore the
relation between iron defects and the physical properties of hematite, and they
will determine the connection between the abundance of defects and the
temperature, pH, and oxygen content of the groundwaters from which natural
hematite crystallizes.

The investigators hypothesize that when hematite (Fe2O3) forms from ferrihydrite
and goethite in aqueous solutions, the hematite first nucleates as highly iron-
deficient, hydrous nanocrystals. These defective precursor phases are metastable
and may anneal to endmember hematite with time. The investigators base these
inferences on their recent observations of crystallization sequences in ferric
chloride solutions. That work revealed incipient phases of "hydrohematite" with
a chemical formula close to FeOOH forming from precursor akagan√©ite. The
investigators will determine whether the more common crystallization pathways
for natural hematite - from antecedent ferrihydrite and goethite - experience an
analogous multi-step reaction route. In contrast to approaches based on dry
heating of powders or on "before-and-after" characterization of batch-reacted
mixtures, the investigators will exploit novel synchrotron-based techniques that
allow them to capture X-ray diffraction patterns of mineral-fluid mixtures from
25 to 200 degree C with very high time resolution. The diffraction data are
amenable to Rietveld analysis and will yield high-quality cell parameters, atom
positions, and occupancies. In addition to pinpointing the evolution of hematite
growth at the atomic scale, the experiments will yield kinetic models from which
they can extract robust activation energies for the nucleation and growth of
iron (hydr)oxides as a function of pH. The investigators will couple these
experiments with detailed microscopic and spectroscopic examinations of natural
and historic specimens of "hydrohematite", and they will perform density
functional calculations to gauge the relative stabilities of hydrous hematite
phases and to relate chemical properties to particle size.