* 1552954
* Extending the Reach of Mathematics Teacher Leaders
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2020
* Jodie Novak, University of Northern Colorado
* Standard Grant
* Sandra Richardson
* 09/30/2020
* USD 300,000.00

This project will explore the development of mathematics teacher leaders'
capacity to engage in systemic leadership activities. The model for developing
this capacity will be based on the concept that teacher leadership work can be
conceived of as having levels, similar to the idea of management levels. In this
model, Tier I teacher leadership activities are those that leverage teachers'
knowledge, experience, and motivation to support effective instruction in
classrooms outside their own. Tier I teacher leadership activities have a close
proximity to and thus directly influence teachers' instruction. Tier II teacher
leadership activities are those that leverage teacher leaders' knowledge,
experience, and motivation to improve systems that support effective
instruction. This model is predicated on two positions: (1) Tier II leadership
activities necessitate the employment of knowledge and skills different from
those required for Tier I leadership activities; and (2) Productive systemic
change can occur by supporting teacher leaders to expand their work into Tier II
leadership activities. This project will develop teacher leaders' knowledge and
skills to engage in Tier II activities and to further theorize and evaluate the
conceptualization and operationalization of Tier I and Tier II leadership
activities in teacher leadership development. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will implement and evaluate a teacher leader development model that will build
the capacity of Tier I and Tier II teacher leaders in their respective
leadership capacity. In the teacher leader development model, Tier II teacher
leaders will receive training and mentoring to 1) train Tier I teacher leaders
to implement the professional development with classroom teachers and 2) oversee
broader implementation issues, such as developing district support for the
professional development and supporting the creation and implementation of an
evaluation plan for the professional development. The professional development
will consist of a sequence of nine, 90-minute sessions that will support
elementary teachers in developing a rich conceptualization of multiplication of
whole numbers. Through this vehicle of implementing a mathematics professional
development program, both sets of teacher leaders will receive training and
mentoring to develop their knowledge, skills, and dispositions to engage in
their tier of teacher leadership activities. Teachers will then be positioned to
leverage their increased leadership capacity to engage in other Tier I and II
teacher leadership activities that support the improvement of STEM education.
The evaluation of the implementation of the leadership development model will
help the field understand the key characteristics that support the effectiveness
of the training. Additionally, in their roles as ambassadors for K-12
mathematics education, Tier II teacher leaders will work at the nexus of policy,
practice, and STEM education research through Tier II policy activities.
Teachers will then be positioned to leverage their increased leadership capacity
to engage in other Tier I and II teacher leadership activities that support the
improvement of STEM education. The design of the teacher leader development
model can be scaled through any STEM professional development, when it is paired
with the teacher leader training of Tier I teacher leaders. Although the project
involves mathematics teachers and teacher leaders, it has the potential to
inform teacher leadership development and effectiveness across the STEM fields.