* 1552101
* CAREER: Hybrid Incompatibility Genes in Caenorhabditis Species
* BIO,MCB
* 12/01/2015,11/30/2023
* Michael Ailion, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Manju Hingorani
* 11/30/2023
* USD 926,357.00

This research project investigates how new biological species form. Laboratory-
based efforts to identify genetic and molecular mechanisms of speciation in
nematode worms will be aided by the isolation of new worm strains and species by
members of the general public. High school students will participate directly in
scientific research by collecting nematodes from rotting fruits and flowers.
They will learn how research is performed and will also gain a basic
understanding of genes, DNA, and evolution that is becoming increasingly more
important and societally relevant. By engaging students in the practice of
science, this project fulfills one of the three central dimensions in the Next
Generation Science Standards recently adopted by many states across the nation
and will improve scientific literacy in the general population by helping to
build an informed public that understands the scientific enterprise and can
better contribute to future national policy decisions that require the
interpretation and evaluation of scientific data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
process of speciation involves the evolution of reproductive barriers between
populations within a species so that a single species can split. Though multiple
reproductive barriers typically isolate existing species, less is known about
which barriers drove the speciation process originally. The goal of the project
is to identify genes that cause reproductive isolation and determine their
molecular mechanisms of action. The project is focused on identifying genes that
mediate incompatibility within species and will operate at three levels to: 1)
determine the detailed molecular and cellular mechanism of action of a
previously identified intraspecific incompatibility in the nematode C. elegans
mediated by a selfish toxin/antidote gene pair, 2) identify the genes involved
in a newly discovered nuclear-cytoplasmic intraspecific incompatibility in the
related nematode species C. nouraguensis, and 3) systematically search for more
intraspecific genetic incompatibilities within the Caenorhabditis genus in a
large-scale project to isolate new strains of Caenorhabditis species using a
crowdsourcing approach implemented in high school classrooms, and by systematic
crosses of strains performed by undergraduate researchers to test for hybrid
breakdown.