* 1552397
* CAREER: Nucleophilic, Radical, and Electrophilic Palladium Carbene Complexes: New Types of Reactivity For Palladium
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2022
* Vlad Iluc, University of Notre Dame
* Continuing Grant
* Laura Anderson
* 04/30/2022
* USD 603,320.00

In this CAREER project funded by the Chemical Catalysis Program of the Chemistry
Division, Professor Vlad M. Iluc of the Department of Chemistry at the
University of Notre Dame is developing new tools for the selective reaction of
hydrogen atoms bonded to common elements such as carbon, oxygen, boron, nitrogen
and silicon. In this project, new approaches that involve metal-ligand
cooperation are being developed to facilitate chemical transformations under
mild conditions. This work is expected to have environmental and societal impact
by providing basic knowledge that allows the development of catalytic processes
involving water, alcohol, and amines, which are readily available chemical
feedstocks. As the educational component of his project, Professor Iluc is
developing an outreach program that focuses on mentoring of students from socio-
economic groups that are underrepresented in science. The educational program
provides educational opportunities for youth at the Bashor Children's Home and
promotes their recruitment into science, technology, engineering and
mathematics-based careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project targets (1) hydrogen
transfer from the ligand to the metal and vice versa, which involves a
nucleophilic carbene as part of a diphosphine pincer ligand; (2) hemilabile
ligands, which incorporate olefins in a pincer architecture, in order to
synthesize new untethered carbene nickel and palladium complexes; and (3)
transfer of radical character from the supporting ligand to a coordinated
substrate. The first class of complexes features nucleophilic carbene palladium
complexes that are applied to the hydration, hydroalkoxylation, and
hydroamination of olefins and other unsaturated substrates. The second class
focuses on nickel and palladium and is applied to carbon (C)- silicon (Si) and
C- boron (B) bond forming reactions. Finally, the third class features radical
carbene palladium complexes that are applied to C-hydrogen (H) amination
reactions with azides and olefin copolymerization reactions. Molecular models
based on density functional theory guide these experiments. The educational
project includes collaboration with the Bashor Children's Home, in Goshen,
Indiana, a non-profit agency that provides help for at-risk children. In
addition, the CAREER Award supports summer research activities at the University
of Notre Dame. Visiting high school students work closely with graduate and
undergraduate chemistry students in science activities related to research in
the Iluc group.