* 1552183
* Expanding Curricular Pathways into Engineering at Liberal Arts Colleges to Broaden Diversity Within the Profession
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2020
* Diane Michelfelder, Macalester College
* Standard Grant
* Alexandra Medina-Borja
* 09/30/2020
* USD 29,423.00

This Improving Undergraduate STEM Education (IUSE) project will help to increase
the number and diversity of engineering graduates in the United States by
examining the role that liberal arts colleges might serve in helping students to
consider engineering as a career option. This project will support a workshop to
re-envision the format of established dual degree programs that combine three
years of study at a liberal arts college and two years in an engineering
program. This approach, frequently referred to as a 3-2 program, has seen
diminished student interest in recent years. This workshop entitled:
"Engineering Connections in the Liberal Arts College Environment" will bring
faculty together to re-envision the 3-2 dual degree option and develop creative
approaches expanding pathways into engineering for students of liberal arts
colleges. Liberal arts colleges have long supplied a disproportionate number of
graduates, including women and underrepresented minorities, into the professions
and the workshop will help to extend this success to engineering. Successful
engineering innovation is increasingly seen as demanding critical thinking,
communication skills, and an understanding of context, all hallmarks of liberal
education. Participants, including 3-2 program advisers, will come from physics,
engineering, mathematics, philosophy, and other disciplines, drawn from the
institutions of the liberal arts colleges across the country.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop will focus on three main topics. Given the
diversity in student populations at many liberal arts colleges, how might more
attention to engineering in a liberal arts college inspire more women and
members of other underrepresented groups to become involved with engineering?
What alternatives to the traditional 3-2 pathway into engineering might take
better advantage of the liberal arts college environment and serve a wider array
of student interests? What kinds of curricular and co-curricular programs can
liberal arts colleges develop to build smoother transitions into engineering and
better community among students interested in pursuing careers in engineering
and/or design? The workshop will lead to a transformation of the way faculty
think about engineering education through rethinking what it is to engineer.
This will result in better knowledge of how to integrate the liberal arts
culture into the education of an engineer and how to better inform liberal arts
college students about their potential as future engineers. The project includes
efforts to communicate the results of this work to the broader higher education
community.