* 1552625
* RAPID - Comparative Assessment of Environmental  Stress Factors Associated with Aerosol Exposure to Oil Spill  Impacted California Shoreline
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2017
* Bernard Singleton, Dillard University
* Standard Grant
* Claudia Rankins
* 08/31/2017
* USD 152,196.00

The National Science Foundation uses the Grants for Rapid Response Research
(RAPID) funding mechanism to support quick-response research on natural or
anthropogenic disasters and similar unanticipated events. The project at Dillard
University is in response to the event on May 19, 2015, when a severely corroded
section of an oil pipeline ruptured along the Gaviota coast in Santa Barbara
County, California. It has been reported that approximately 105,000 gallons of
crude oil spilled; 21,000 gallons of which spilled into the Pacific Ocean. A
nine- mile long oil slick was created in the Pacific Ocean and nearby beaches
were contaminated. This project will characterize a cohort of microbiological
markers and toxic components associated with the oil spilled on the California
impacted shorelines and will make comparisons with the effects of the
dispersants used in the Deepwater Horizon oil releases into the Gulf of Mexico
in 2010.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific goals are to: identify and quantify
airborne microorganisms using traditional and culture independent technology; to
assess microbial loads concurrently by direct microscopy, viable plate counts,
and broad-range polymerase chain reaction analysis; to make recommendations
relevant to best practices for remediation; and to involve undergraduate
students in all aspects of the research project. The study of the impacts on
ecosystems at the lowest trophic levels should reveal indicators to guide
remedial actions. This project will help lay the groundwork for the ecological
and epidemiological survey of oil spill impacted regions, thus advancing
information for the public.