* 1552586
* CAREER: HP1 protein functions in gene regulation and chromatin structure
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/2016,01/31/2024
* Nicole Riddle, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Continuing Grant
* Stephen DiFazio
* 01/31/2024
* USD 1,245,800.00

The goal of this project is to understand the molecular mechanisms that
determine if the genetic information contained within DNA is accessible to the
cellular machinery. DNA in a cell's nucleus is packaged into a complex structure
called chromatin, which contains a variety of proteins. These chromatin proteins
determine if the information stored in a particular portion of the DNA is
accessible (genes are "turned on") or inaccessible (genes are "turned off") as
part of a process called gene regulation. The members of the Heterochromatin
Protein 1 (HP1) protein family function in chromatin structure in organisms as
diverse as yeast and humans. Specifically, this project will examine the role of
HP1 proteins in gene regulation and the molecular mechanisms mediating this
role. It is essential for an organism's survival and health to "turn on" the
correct genes at the correct time and place. The results from this study will
improve scientific understanding of why this process sometimes goes wrong and
how it might be corrected. In addition to furthering knowledge about chromatin,
this study will serve to train minority students in chromatin biology through a
summer internship program and support the development of a classroom
undergraduate research experience (CURE) specifically targeted to minorities and
non-traditional students transferring from community colleges to four-year
institutions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will use transcriptome analysis
of Drosophila lines lacking HP1 proteins and chromatin state information from
chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) experiments to evaluate the impact of HP1
proteins on gene expression. This analysis will reveal the contexts in which HP1
proteins function as transcriptional activators or repressors, and how
cooperative effects differ from individual effect. Analysis of the impact of HP1
recruitment on nucleosome positioning, chromatin composition, and RNA polymerase
dynamics will determine how HP1 proteins impact gene regulation. These
experiments will identify the molecular mechanism(s) mediating the effects of
HP1 proteins on gene expression. Finally, biochemical analysis of the
transcription-start-site-(TSS)-associated HP1 complexes will determine why
single HP1 complexes are formed at some TSSs, while others recruit multi-HP1
complexes. The findings will provide the foundation for understanding how this
important class of proteins is recruited to their target sites and carries out
diverse functions in chromatin structure and gene regulation. By utilizing a
multi-faceted approach, this study will link the well-established role of HP1
proteins in heterochromatin formation with their role in gene
regulation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is co-funded by the Genetic
Mechanisms Program in the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences in the
Biological Sciences Directorate and by the NSF EPSCoR Program.