* 1552879
* The Effects of Emotion Regulation Strategies when Contending with Discrimination
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2020
* Jennifer Richeson, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 07/31/2020
* USD 325,690.00

Discrimination is unfair negative treatment due to societal group membership,
such as race, class, sexual orientation, and gender. Discrimination is a
stressor that can harm mental and physical health, and opportunities for work
and promotions. Previous research has found that discrimination can impair
performance on cognitive tasks, which can lead to negative emotions, such as
anxiety, despair, and anger. The present research examines novel approaches to
regulate emotional reactions to discrimination. These approaches stem from
research suggesting that reflecting on negative life events from a third-person,
distanced point of view rather than from a personal, immersed point of view
leads to better emotional outcomes. This complements findings with well-known
models of emotion regulation, which suggest that distanced processing of
emotional content lead to more positive outcomes than immersed processing. Dr.
Jennifer Richeson at Yale University, examines multiple consequences of
contending with experiences of group-based discrimination from a distanced
versus immersed perspective. The project also tests a novel strategy to create
positive emotional responses by having participants reflect on past
discrimination that reveals the ways they or their group may have become
stronger or benefitted from having had discrimination experiences in the past.
Creating such redemption narratives about stressful events has been found to
enhance well-being and may hold promise to promote well-being in the face of
discrimination.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work integrates research from
affective, emotion regulation science, and social psychology to consider
processes that give rise to the ill effects of discrimination. The research
proposes that compared to holding an immersed perspective, holding a more
distanced perspective enhances emotion regulation and emotional outcomes.
Experiments examine the influence of different emotion-regulation strategies on
emotional reactions, physiological arousal, and cognitive functioning, as well
as the motivation to act on behalf of the group that has faced discrimination.
The proposed seven experiments examine these dynamics among different societal
groups that often face discrimination (e.g., racial/ethnic minorities, women),
and an experiment examines the role of creating a redemption narrative on
reducing some of the negative mental and physical outcomes of discrimination.
Consequently, the results of this project are poised to unearth novel insights
to inform current understanding of the effects of discrimination on individual
well-being and societal social cohesion.