* 1552197
* CAREER: Resolving drivers of variation in grassland community assembly and restoration
* BIO,DEB
* 05/15/2016,04/30/2024
* Lars Brudvig, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Kari Segraves
* 04/30/2024
* USD 853,161.00

The destruction and modification of natural ecosystems for human land uses, like
agriculture, together pose the greatest threat to the world's biodiversity. In
turn, ecological restoration has been hailed as a critical conservation tool for
its ability to promote biodiversity through the repair of damaged ecosystems and
creation of new habitats. Yet, restoration outcomes are notoriously
unpredictable and this hinders land managers' abilities to reliably repair
damaged ecosystems. This project will evaluate the causes of variation in
restoration outcomes by investigating the process of community assembly - how
assemblages of species develop over time - during restoration. In doing so, it
will guide restoration practice, advance the field of restoration ecology
through the coupling of basic ecological theory and ecosystem management, and
test long-standing, fundamental questions about why the diversity and
composition of ecological communities vary among locations. Furthermore, this
project will train new restoration scientists and strengthen linkages between
restoration research and practice through classroom instruction, student and
postdoc training, and partnerships with land management agencies conducting
restoration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will take place within a system
of prairie grasslands restored through the sowing of native prairie seeds onto
former agricultural lands. A goal of this work will be to understand how
community assembly and restoration outcomes are influenced by environmental
conditions that vary in space and time (soil fertility and rainfall), and as a
function of two factors describing ecological communities - the number of
species and number of individuals for each species, within communities. Focal
questions will be evaluated experimentally and across a network of large-scale
grasslands undergoing restoration, forging a link between mechanism-oriented
experiments and real-world assembled ecosystems.