* 1552130
* CEDAR: Solar Extreme Ultraviolet Irradiance Effects on the Coupled Ionosphere-Thermosphere System
* GEO,AGS
* 03/01/2016,02/28/2021
* Phillip Anderson, University of Texas at Dallas
* Continuing Grant
* John Meriwether
* 02/28/2021
* USD 201,919.00

The Coupling, Energetics, and Dynamics of Atmospheric Regions (CEDAR) program is
a broad-based, community-guided, upper atmospheric research program. It is aimed
at understanding the behavior of atmospheric regions from the middle atmosphere
upward through the ionized upper layers of the atmosphere and into outer space
in terms of coupling, energetics, chemistry, and dynamics on regional and global
scales. The processes of interest are related to perturbations that propagate
upward from the lower atmosphere as well as to solar radiation and particle
inputs from above. This project will contribute fundamental results towards
CEDAR goals in the area of understanding the variability in the upper atmosphere
caused by the changing input of solar irradiance in the extreme ultra-violet
part of the spectrum. A specific goal is to determine directly, for the first
time, the relationship between measured irradiance levels and observed
conditions in the upper atmosphere. The results of this study will provide a
unique observational benchmark for validating and constraining physics-based
models of the upper atmosphere. Such models are essential for understanding and
predicting critical processes in the near-Earth space environment that can
severely impact technological systems such as satellite navigation, radio wave
communication, and electric power grids. The project will support the education
of a graduate student at University of Texas at Dallas.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main goal of this project is to quantify the response
of the ionosphere relative to direct, spectrally separated measurements of solar
extreme ultraviolet (EUV) radiation from the TIMED and SDO spacecraft. This
approach constitutes an immense improvement over previous studies based on
proxies. The C/NOFS and DMSP spacecraft will provide corresponding measurements
of ionospheric parameters at a range of altitudes. This dataset, spanning more
than a solar cycle, allows for the use of advanced statistical analysis
techniques and will be used together with the SAMI-2 model to address
outstanding science questions related to understanding the ionospheric response
to solar EUV variability. Interesting questions to be investigated include the
relative importance of and interaction between the responses in the neutral and
ionized components of the upper atmosphere.