* 1552559
* CAREER: Advancing Multi-Hazard Assessment and Risk-Based Design for Offshore Wind Energy Technology
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/01/2016,01/31/2022
* Andrew Myers, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 01/31/2022
* USD 508,000.00

Offshore wind energy is a resource of renewable energy that is conveniently
accessible to many major population centers, but harvesting offshore wind energy
currently costs more than traditional sources. The research goal of this Faculty
Early Career Development (CAREER) Program grant is to advance knowledge that can
lead to reduction in the cost of offshore wind energy through (1) a much sharper
understanding and modeling of the spatio-temporal interaction of multiple
offshore hazards that impact the system-level performance of offshore wind
energy farms to reduce insurance and financing costs, (2) the calculation of
novel system-level performance metrics, and (3) the advancement of shallow water
wave modeling to mitigate the current reliance on overly conservative design
methods. The educational goals of this project are to leverage field experiences
at state-of-the-art offshore wind-themed sites in New England to inspire high
school students to pursue science, engineering, mathematics, and technology
careers and to transfer knowledge of multi-hazard assessment and design to the
public, other researchers, and the practicing engineering
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will achieve the research goal
through fundamental advancements to metamodels (surrogate models) to overcome
restrictions that have previously limited the impact of such models in the
context of multi-hazard assessment of spatially-distributed infrastructure.
Specifically, novel metamodels will be developed to include several important
features, such as spatio-temporally varying hazards, high-dimensionality of the
input and output vectors, explicit accounting of model adequacy by quantifying
inter- and intra-event uncertainty in the model predictions compared to
measurements, and a coupling of multi-hazard and system/structural metamodels.
The research will also explore innovative models that overcome important
deficiencies in the modeling of nonlinear, highly skewed shallow water waves and
their associated hydrodynamic loads, including breaking waves. The research will
synthesize these advances and generate system-level performance metrics that
will provide a fundamentally different paradigm for designing offshore wind
farms. The project will leverage partnerships with state, city, academic, and
industry organizations. The research outcomes are expected to have broad impact
beyond the offshore wind industry, given the national needs in multi-hazard
analysis and infrastructure system resilience, and the potential of metamodeling
applications in civil engineering and other fields.