* 1552427
* CAREER: End-User Programming of General-Purpose Robots
* CSE,IIS
* 05/15/2016,04/30/2021
* Maya Cakmak, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 04/30/2021
* USD 503,983.00

Robots that can assist humans in everyday tasks have the potential to improve
people's quality of life and bring independence to persons with disabilities. A
key challenge in realizing such robots is programming them to meet the unique
and changing needs of users and to robustly function in their unique
environments. Most research in robotics targets this challenge by attempting to
develop universal or adaptive robotic capabilities. This approach has had
limited success because it is extremely difficult to anticipate all possible
scenarios and use-cases for general-purpose robots. Instead, this research aims
to develop robots that can be programmed in-context and by end-users after they
are deployed. The PI's approach is to apply and extend methods from the broad
research area of end-user programming, which has previously been limited to
personal computers, smart phones, and Web applications, to programming robots.
Project outcomes will have long-term societal and economic impacts, particularly
on individuals with varying levels of motor impairments. To further broaden the
impacts of this research, the project will involve several outreach and
educational activities focused on broadening participation of women and
individuals with disabilities in computer science education, research, and
careers. These activities will directly integrate tools developed in the
project, within three educational outreach modules for K-12 students and one
undergraduate course. Outreach modules will target three venues with different
time scales; a week-long summer camp for students with disabilities organized by
the UW DO-IT center, a three-hour exercise for a "Girls who Code" field trip,
and one-hour exercise for an "Hour of Code" event. The Robotics Capstone course
developed by the PI will be updated to integrate tools developed in this project
and to focus on projects within assistive robotics with the involvement of an
actual customer. All tools will be implemented on a state-of-the-art mobile
manipulator robot, PR2, and will be released as open-source projects. A truly
unique aspect of this research is that developed tools will be deployed on two
privately-owned in-home PR2 robots, leading to first insights from real-world
evaluations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To achieve her goal the PI will address
challenges related to distinct characteristics of robots including situatedness,
ability to influence the environment, mobility, distributed concurrent
processing, and overall complexity. This research will produce a suite of new
methods and tools within three programming paradigms: (i) "situated programming"
which involves programming through direct interactions with the robot and its
environment, (ii) "simplified programming" which involves actual programming but
with highly simplified languages, and (iii) "abstracted programming" which
involves manipulating abstractions of program entities for which programs are
synthesized automatically. All methods will be instantiated as tools for
programming robots at multiple levels, including programming of new knowledge,
skills, tasks, and rules. The main objectives of the projects are to make these
tools (i) expressive enough to capture useful real-world tasks, (ii) usable by
people with no technical background, and (iii) accessible to people with diverse
abilities. The first objective will be evaluated through systematic experiments
with a comprehensive user-centered benchmark for domestic assistive robots,
including programming of tasks such as fetching, organizing, or preparing, and
skills such as opening or closing cabinets, drawers, appliances, and faucets in
different homes. The second and third objectives will be evaluated through user
studies with both able-bodied and motor-impaired individuals.