* 1552416
* CAREER:  Interactions between Stress and Attention Circuits: Investigating Corticotropin Releasing Factor Modulation of the Basal Forebrain
* BIO,IOS
* 03/15/2016,02/28/2022
* Debra Bangasser, Temple University
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen Lynch
* 02/28/2022
* USD 907,211.00

It is easy to think of examples of how stressful life events can impair
cognition. Of interest to the principal investigator of this project is the
ability of stress to impair sustained attention, the process of monitoring
situations for rare and unpredictably occurring events. Adequately sustaining
attention is critical for accurately performing more complex cognitive tasks.
Therefore, disruptions in sustained attention as a result of stress can lead to
widespread cognitive impairments. Surprisingly, the neurobiological mechanisms
that underlie the effect of stress on this type of attention are unknown. This
project addresses this gap in knowledge by using behavioral, neuroanatomical,
and molecular approaches to test how a specific stress-related chemical signal,
corticotropin releasing factor, regulates the brain circuitry required for
sustained attention in male and female rats. The results from this research will
greatly advance our understanding of the interactions between the brain systems
involved in stress and attention. These findings thereby may lay the groundwork
for the development of strategies aimed at improving cognition during stressful
events. In addition to the scientific work, this project includes an education
plan designed to improve student learning outcomes for Temple University's
diverse undergraduate population and create public resources for improving the
teaching of college courses in the "flipped-classroom" format, in which students
first learn new material outside of class and then use class time to work on
exercises with classmates and the instructor.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Studies have
examined how stress modulates learning, the neurobiological mechanisms by which
stress modulates attention remain underexplored. Recently, the principal
investigator of this project demonstrated that sustained attention is disrupted
by central infusions of the stress-related neuropeptide, corticotropin releasing
factor (CRF) in male and female rats. Sustained attention is known to be
mediated by the basal forebrain. Therefore, this project examines how CRF
regulates the basal forebrain from the systems to the molecular levels. Aim 1 is
to test the hypothesis that CRF directly modulates the basal forebrain to
disrupt sustained attention by combining pharmacological manipulations and a
well-validated attention task. Aim 2 is to uncover the circuitry by which CRF
can impact basal forebrain neurons by using retrograde tracing, cell-type
specific markers, and measures of neuronal activation. Aim 3 is to identify
molecular changes induced by CRF in cholinergic basal forebrain neurons by using
Fluorescent Activated Cell Sorting in combination with next generation
sequencing. The findings will improve our fundamental understanding of how
stress affects cognition. The rich sequencing data resulting from this work is
an important resource for researchers studying attention circuits, and is to be
made publicly available for use by other investigators. The project's education
plan is designed to improve the flipped-classroom format by developing special
assignments that emphasize cognitive and metacognitive techniques to promote
active engagement with the out-of-class material. These assignments are made
available through public media and their efficacy is examined experimentally.
The insights gained from the educational plan are to be published in education
journals.