* 1552855
* EAGER: Uncertainty Quantification of Structural Systems: Generalized Information Theory
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Ross Corotis, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Yick Hsuan
* 08/31/2018
* USD 155,192.00

Uncertainty is inherent in the assessment and prediction of the performance of
structures and community infrastructure when evaluating risk, hazard mitigation
and vulnerability/resiliency. Structural engineering needs to reflect multi-
disciplinary societal issues, including social, political and economic, which
introduce partial knowledge and disparate characteristics of uncertainty. While
traditional probabilistic methods to treat the uncertainty can address partial
and dissimilar information, they are not the most appropriate for comprehensive
incorporation of broader contexts reflecting sources such as expert judgement
and imprecision. This EArly-concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER)
project undertakes exploratory research on the broader aspects of uncertainty
approaches to structural engineering safety, incorporating multi-attribute
aspects of judgement and unpredictability in human decision-making. The research
introduces varied sources of uncertainty into structural design, melding this
with community issues that assess the value of the structure to economic,
environmental and social/political sustainability. Quantitative and linguistic
uncertainties are incorporated under a comprehensive design philosophy capable
of handling vagueness, and ambiguity. These broadened approaches to structural
engineering and community performance will lead to great benefits to society
through enhancements of the built environment.

The primary objective of this project is the development of methods under the
umbrella of Generalized Information Theory that expand traditional probabilistic
approaches to structural and community safety, enhancing the treatment of
uncertainty by incorporating notions of ignorance, interactivity, and linguistic
information. The scope of the project includes generalization of probability
theory with uncertainty measures based on monotone theory and incorporating
linguistic vagueness, ambiguity, evidence concepts (belief and plausibility),
conflicting expert judgement, imprecision, partial knowledge, confidence, and
subjective possibility. An initial application in this exploratory project will
be for earthquake damage estimation and vulnerability assessment. With actual
community data, fuzzy pattern recognition will be used to investigate the
existence of building damage patterns and potential seismic vulnerability
prediction.