* 1552218
* CAREER: Causation in Dynamical Systems: Bridging the Gap Between Data Analytics and System Identification
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/01/2016,02/28/2022
* Jonathan Rogers, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Eva Kanso
* 02/28/2022
* USD 500,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project explores an innovative
approach to system identification. System identification is the process of
building a model for a physical system from observed experimental data. System
ID processes are used in a wide variety of scientific and engineering
applications from weather prediction to aircraft design. While numerous system
ID algorithms have been developed to date, many current methods yield poorly
performing models when applied to complicated physical systems involving
numerous interacting components. However, recent advancements in data analytics
have yielded new algorithms that can identify patterns, and specifically causal
relationships, in data. This award supports fundamental research exploring how
these new data analysis tools can inform the system ID process and enable a new
class of system ID algorithms specifically applicable to large-scale, complex
systems. The resulting algorithms may be useful in difficult modeling and
prediction problems including atmospheric/climate prediction, modeling of
biological systems, or financial market analysis. The approaches developed here
may lead to better predictive models for many of these complex systems. The
program has strong ties to engineering education since undergraduates will have
the opportunity to participate in specific experimental aspects of the
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite extensive research in system
identification over the past several decades, system ID tools for nonlinear or
high-order systems are rather underdeveloped and oftentimes suffer from
convergence or computational issues. The research to be performed here leverages
very recent advances in the mathematics and data analytics communities to derive
a fundamentally novel approach to system identification based on information
theory. At the core of this research is the concept of causation entropy, an
entropic measure of information transfer within a dynamical system that can be
computed directly from measured output data. The project seeks to derive
rigorous, causation entropy-based approaches for nonlinear parameter estimation
and model order reduction, as well as establish a fundamental realization theory
for linear Gaussian systems using causation entropy. Furthermore, the problem of
identifying input-output dynamics will be addressed from an information theory
perspective. A series of case studies will be generated which highlight
performance and utility of the system identification methods in a wide range of
real-world examples.