* 1552182
* CAREER: Multiphase magnetohydrodynamic mixing models for liquid metal battery applications
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2016,01/31/2022
* Douglas Kelley, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 01/31/2022
* USD 592,368.00

PI: Kelley, Douglas &lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1552182&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
goal of this CAREER proposal is to explore the fluid dynamics effects that are
important in the performance of batteries that utilize liquid metals as
electrodes. Such batteries hold a strong promise for energy storage applications
on an electrical grid with intermittent energy sources, such as one based on
renewable energy sources. The PI proposes to use alloys that are liquid at lower
temperatures (at about 160C) instead of currently applied options, where
operations at temperatures in the range of 550C are used.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The battery behavior is viewed from the transport
phenomena point of view, where fluid flow, mass and heat transfer are limiting
the battery performance. Prior work has focused on materials and chemistry. In a
liquid metal battery, fluid flow brings reactants about 10 mm to the interface
where primary reactions charge and discharge the battery, removes reacted
material, and prevents the formation of undesirable solids. The questions to be
addressed in this work include: Which boundary layer - viscous, thermal, or
electromagnetic - mediates mass transport? How does flow affect growth and
erosion of solid phases? How do solid phases affect flow? How do size and aspect
ratio affect the relationship between inputs and outputs? How does the mass
transfer rate depend on temperature difference and current density?