* 1552264
* CEDAR: Secondary Gravity Wave Coupling Dynamics Between the Mid-Latitude Mesosphere and Thermosphere
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2018
* Steven Smith, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Irfan S. Azeem
* 07/31/2018
* USD 98,329.00

This project addresses the dynamic coupling processes between the Earth's
mesosphere and thermosphere. It will yield estimates of the momentum and energy
contribution by gravity wave breaking processes occurring in the mesopause
region to the thermosphere. Specifically, the mesospheric secondary gravity wave
momentum/energy transport and coupling processes in the Southern hemisphere's
upper atmosphere will be studied. This project continues an international
collaboration involving scientists from the United States and New Zealand. An
undergraduate student will be involved and mentored during the project. Results
will be made widely available to the scientific community and general insights
communicated to the public. This work will utilize existing ground-based optical
imaging, spectrometer and radar measurements combined with space-based
measurements in order to investigate the occurrence and characteristics of
secondary gravity wave coupling between the mesosphere and thermosphere. The
project will build upon recent observations at Mt. John Observatory, New Zealand
of secondary gravity waves generated by gravity waves breaking at a lower
altitude region in the mesosphere near 100 km altitude. The New Zealand region
is a known "hotspot" of gravity wave activity in the southern hemisphere, a
region of the globe under-represented in terms of upper atmospheric
observations.