* 1552503
* CAREER: Protecting the Future of Children's Online Identities
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2023
* Sarita Schoenebeck, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 07/31/2023
* USD 581,821.00

This research will investigate how children's online identities are established
and managed as they grow up, especially in the context of technologies that
facilitate indexing and resurfacing of personal data. Parents share extensive
personal information about their children on social media sites, often starting
before their children are even born. As a result, children are now growing up
with their online identities formed and shaped from birth through adulthood.
However, upon becoming adults, they have little ability to revise or remove what
has already been posted about them online. Furthermore, computational
advancements like tagging, facial recognition, and voice recognition enable
searching and indexing of personal data, yet provide little support for families
to make decisions about how that data should be preserved, accessed, or
controlled. This work casts a lens on children's online identities as part of a
complex sociotechnical system that is formed and shaped by parents, extended
familial and social networks, technology companies, policy makers, and children
themselves. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will first investigate 1) what
information families share about children online; 2) how families think about
past identities and future identities being available online; and 3) technology
companies' data management and archival practices around children. It will then
4) design and develop prototypes that support families making preservation,
access, and control decisions about children's online identities. This research
program bridges advances in computation, human-computer interaction, and social
computing. It addresses numerous conceptual and technical challenges, including
how to support preservation and access decisions about children's identities
online, and how to support children's ownership of their own online identities
as they grow up. This project includes partnerships with nonprofit agencies to
educate families about social media use and sharing personal information online.