* 1552822
* CAREER: Mechanisms of Specificity and Homeostasis in an Obligate Symbiosis: Discovery-based Research at a Regional University
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2024
* Jon Seal, University of Texas at Tyler
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna Shisler
* 05/31/2024
* USD 722,399.00

This project will examine the roles that bacteria play in stabilizing the
interactions among the so-called fungus-gardening ants and their farmed fungi.
These ants are ecologically important members of desert and forest ecosystems
throughout the southern US and tropical regions of North and South America.
Understanding these organisms informs us how they influence and interact with
their environment. Detailed studies and experiments in this project have
important societal and scientific benefits. For example, some ant-fungal
symbioses are important agricultural pests. Others are sources of antibiotics
and antimicrobial compounds, while others serve as models for biofuel
production. This research will train undergraduate and graduate students in
experimental biology, microbiology and the analysis of large molecular datasets
as well as increase the national and international exposure of students at a
regional university in east Texas. Outreach activities include but are not
limited to (a) construction of a living leaf-cutter ant exhibit at a local
museum, (b) construction of interpretative exhibits in the UT Tyler Nature
Preserve (c) the development of new courses at UT Tyler that emphasize
connections between the environment, biomedicine and human health (d)
participating and co-organizing the annual UT Tyler Darwin Day.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Symbioses (ecological associations of unrelated organisms
living in close proximity) were and are crucial to the evolution and ecological
success of all life on earth. One of the central issues facing the study of
symbiosis is elucidating how symbioses are organized and function in a dynamic
world. Fungus-gardening (attine) ants form an obligate macrosymbiosis with
specific fungi that the ants grow for food, but also interact with a number of
other bacteria and microfungal species. The attine symbiosis is an excellent
model to address functional relationships because the ants and fungi can be
experimentally disassembled and reassembled into novel combinations, thus making
it possible to demonstrate links among colony and fungal performance and
microbial community composition. Of particular interest in this project is the
roles that the microbial communities (microbiomes) associated with attine ants
and the fungi play in the maintenance of the ant-fungus community. The proposed
experiments will examine how interactions with the microbiomes promote
specificity and homeostasis with the various partners in this symbiosis. This
discovery-based research will combine intensive field surveys, next generation
sequencing, bioinformatics and experimental biology to examine the role of the
bacterial communities in conferring stability between host ants and symbiotic
fungi. As a result, this research has broad implications for understanding the
evolution and maintenance of obligate symbioses.