* 1552195
* Improved Understanding of the Response of Mean and Extreme Precipitation to Climate Change
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Paul O'Gorman, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 06/30/2020
* USD 420,185.00

The goal of this work is to understand the basic mechanisms which determine how
increases in global temperature affect precipitation, including both changes in
the spatial distribution of precipitation and changes in the intensity of the
most extreme precipitation events. Model simulations of the response of the
climate system to greenhouse gas increases show substantial changes in
precipitation as a consequence of global warming, but models disagree on the
details of these changes and the mechanisms for them are not well understood.
One mechanism commonly invoked to explain the changes is predicated on the fact
that the moisture content of air typically increases with warming, so moisture
convergence and subsequent precipitation increase in regions where moisture is
already converging and causing precipitation in the present-day climate (drying
is likewise expected in regions which are already dry). But previous work by the
PI shows that this "wet get wetter" argument does not adequately account for
precipitation changes over land, where they have the greatest societal impacts.
Work pursued here seeks to better understand the precipitation response over
land by considering the roles played by spatial differences in land surface
warming and relative humidity change, through experiments with a simplified
atmospheric general circulation model and analysis of simulations from the
Climate Model Intercomparison Project version 5 (CMIP5) . Another argument holds
that precipitation will increase over the tropical oceans where local sea
surface temperature (SST) exceeds the overall warming of tropical SSTs, as the
warmer SSTs cause the overlying atmosphere to be less stable than in neighboring
regions. But this "warmer gets wetter" argument neglects potential contributions
from near-surface wind convergence, the radiative effects of water vapor and
clouds, and changes in dry static stability. These effects will be examined
together using a diagnostic model in which precipitation is related to a shallow
vertical mode which responds to low-level convergence, and a second mode which
captures the dependence of deep convection on relative SST change.

Research on changes in the intensity of extreme precipitation events uses a
cloud-system resolving model (CRM, specifically the System for Atmospheric
Modeling) in idealized configurations to make up for the limitations of climate
models in representing extreme precipitation. Some simulations are performed
using hypohydrostatic scaling, in which the vertical momentum equation is
artificially modified to reduce the scale gap between the small scales on which
convective precipitation occurs and the much larger scales of typical of the
weather systems and high and low pressure centers found on weather maps. This
approach enables experiments incorporating both scales which would otherwise be
too computationally expensive. A further topic to be addressed is the effect of
warming on extreme snowfall events. The PI's previous work posits an optimal
temperature for snowfall extremes which occurs because precipitation extremes
increase with temperature whereas the fraction of precipitation that falls as
snow decreases sharply in a range near the freezing point. Work conducted here
uses observed snowfall data and model outputs to test this theory and explore
its implications for a warming climate.

The work has broader impacts due to the potential impacts of changes in mean
precipitation and the severity of extreme precipitation events. Mean
precipitation is important for agriculture and for water resources and their
management, while extreme precipitation is often disruptive to society, and
extreme snowfall events are associated with a number of costs in urban
environments. The project also supports and train a graduate student, thus
contributing to workforce development in this research area. The project also
provides summer support for an undergraduate student.