* 1552716
* CAREER:  A Systematic Data-Analytics Approach to the Design of Interface-Rich Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2022
* Jennifer Carter, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 08/31/2022
* USD 649,006.00

Interface-rich materials are pervasive in all engineered systems, including
turbine discs for energy harvesting, and bonded layered composites in medical
imaging equipment. The mechanisms that control performance of interface-rich
materials manifest at the mesoscale, a length scale between the nanometer and
macroscopic system (millimeter to meters) scales. Therefore, efficient design of
these materials to achieve the performance metrics necessary for an engineered
system (i.e., thermal resistance for x-ray generation) requires a quantitative
understanding of the manufacturing processes and their relationship to the
mechanisms at this "in-between" length scale. This Faculty Early Career
Development (CAREER) award supports fundamental research needed integrate the
theory of mesostructure performance, and statistical-based analysis of "big
data." The design paradigm will be applied specifically to a forged nickel-based
superalloy, and has the potential for broad impact on the rapid insertion of new
materials and manufacturing processes to reduce cost and time-to-market for
engineered systems which interface-rich materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research goal is to test the hypothesis that statistical data analytics can lead
to a versatile design paradigm for the manufacturing of interface-rich materials
for particular performance requirements. The predictive capabilities of these
data-derived models will be assessed for Inconel-706 a forged Ni-based
superalloy, with the performance metrics of high temperature strength and low
cycle fatigue life. This alloy is significant for the manufacturing of efficient
energy harvesting applications. The data for this research includes
manufacturing, mesostructure and performance measures from legacy data obtained
over the past 10 years by Alcoa Forging Research Group. The research team will
test this hypothesis by cultivating an open, robust, data infrastructure that
goes beyond a simple electronic "filing cabinet" and allows for seamless access
to the data by analysis tools and allows for the analysis results to also be
stored with all the associated metadata. Exploratory data analysis will guide
the team in determining what additional datasets are needed to increase the
statistical validity of the data-derived models. This research program supports
broader efforts of the Material Science community through both the Materials
Genome Initiative and Integrated Computational Materials Engineering by
producing a robust, open-source data framework, which is generalizable to
manufacturing routes of other interface-rich materials.