* 1552497
* CAREER: Inference-Driven Data Processing and Acquisition: Scalability, Robustness and Control
* CSE,CCF
* 02/15/2016,09/30/2023
* George Atia, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 09/30/2023
* USD 573,321.00

Ubiquitous sensing has enabled new services and applications that
mark&lt;br/&gt;every aspect of our lives. However, the ensuing data deluge is a
brick&lt;br/&gt;wall in face of our abilities to interpret, process and store
data. Also, not&lt;br/&gt;all the data collected is informative, nor well-
attuned to the tasks we&lt;br/&gt;care to accomplish. This project introduces
new approaches for data&lt;br/&gt;processing that hold promise to bring about
stunning speedups in the&lt;br/&gt;processing of massive data, and explores
principled controlled data&lt;br/&gt;acquisition paradigms for numerous
inference problems. The research&lt;br/&gt;activities are expected to advance
the theory and practice of data&lt;br/&gt;processing and acquisition in emerging
cyber-physical systems for civil&lt;br/&gt;infrastructure, healthcare, energy,
and transportation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research involves 1) developing,
and analyzing the fundamental&lt;br/&gt;limits of, transformative subspace-based
approaches to data processing&lt;br/&gt;that are simultaneously scalable and
robust to outliers using subspace&lt;br/&gt;pursuit in structure-preserving data
sketches, and data-subspace&lt;br/&gt;formulations which are invariant to
transformations that preserve the&lt;br/&gt;underlying low-dimensional data
structures, 2) exploring controlled data&lt;br/&gt;acquisition in asymptotic
regimes of large number of observations with&lt;br/&gt;relaxed notions of
optimality to unravel the complete structure of&lt;br/&gt;optimal design and
recognize unifying principles for the design of&lt;br/&gt;efficient control
policies for a host of controlled inference problems. The&lt;br/&gt;practical
implications of the fundamental results are studied in the&lt;br/&gt;context of
structural health monitoring for damage detection and&lt;br/&gt;characterization
of engineering structures. The educational activities&lt;br/&gt;include
establishing a new miniature sensing lab, developing an&lt;br/&gt;introductory
course on learning from big data and sequential analysis,&lt;br/&gt;compiling a
corpus of intuitive tutorials laying out the core concepts of&lt;br/&gt;research
results, and mentoring of senior design projects.