* 1552519
* CAREER:   The Size of the Global Dust Cycle and its Radiative Impact on Climate
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Jasper Kok, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Varavut Limpasuvan
* 08/31/2021
* USD 601,670.00

At any given time, the Earth's atmosphere contains tens of millions of metric
tons of desert dust. Surprisingly, many basic questions regarding the effects of
these vast quantities of dust on climate remain poorly known. How much dust is
actually in the atmosphere? Does desert dust warm or cool our planet? Will
future climate-induced changes in dust storms oppose or enhance man-made climate
changes? This project will address these fundamental questions by leveraging
satellite observations, experimental measurements of atmospheric dust and its
properties, and climate model simulations of desert dust climate impacts. In
addition, this project will integrate educational and research activities at
UCLA's department of Atmospheric and Oceanic Sciences through the establishment
of a Research-Enhanced Learning Assistant program.

The research will lead to improved understanding of desert dust's prevalence and
its climate impacts as well as enhance forecasts of regional and global climate
changes, thereby helping to inform policies to adapt to or mitigate future
climate changes. Furthermore, the project results will facilitate improved
understanding of dust impacts on weather, the biosphere, air quality, and human
health. Finally, the Research-Enhanced Learning Assistant program will improve
learning, recruitment, and retention of geosciences students, and especially of
under-represented minorities.