* 1552429
* CAREER:  Situated Resilience and the New Geographies of Wildlife-Livestock Interactions
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2024
* Bilal Butt, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Tom Evans
* 03/31/2024
* USD 649,999.00

This Faculty Early-Career Development (CAREER) award will support a project that
focuses on understanding the resilience and sustainability of rangelands in an
era of changing ecological conditions and land management policies. The
investigator whose work will be supported will investigate the drivers and
consequences of these ecological and political changes for the conservation of
biodiversity and sustainability of socioeconomic livelihoods. The project will
provide valuable new kinds of basic knowledge. By structuring the research to
account for the different ways in rangelands are managed, the investigator will
be able to assess degree to which as well as how wildlife and livestock share
the same spaces. The project will embrace both human and animal individual and
group behaviors to clarify the nature of wildlife-livestock relationships,
because existing understandings underestimate the role of grazing actions among
both wild and domestic grazers. The results of this research will have a direct
bearing on conservation and development policies around the world. New knowledge
will be generated to aid in decision making regarding where, when, and under
which contexts resource managers might encourage mixed use strategies with
respect to livestock and wildlife grazing. These practices have the potential to
increase the overall resilience and sustainability of drylands around the Earth.
The project will provide education and training opportunities for students to
enhance critical thinking and problem solving skills through experiential
learning. The project will enable tourists visiting rangeland protected areas to
obtain more accurate and relevant information regarding people and natural
systems in and around parks. The project also is expected to provide new
information and insights regarding ways to avoid entrenched pro-livestock or
pro-biodiversity positions, thereby reducing the large economic and ecological
costs of these positions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Rangelands are home to millions
of livestock keeping pastoralists and sustaining large densities and
distributions of wildlife. More recently, the resilience of rangeland protected
areas is being threatened because of changes in where both wildlife and domestic
livestock can graze, and the physical effects of grazing. Changes in seasonality
have further constrained the resiliency of drylands. Current understandings
about how people, wildlife, and livestock interact in rangelands have been
devoid of appropriate social, political, and ecological contexts. As a result,
there is limited knowledge about the interactions between wildlife and
pastoralists' livestock inside rangeland protected areas. In order to better
understand these dynamics, the investigator will evaluate how different
management regimes influences patterns of wildlife and livestock resource use.
He will determine the magnitude and extent to which resource patterns are
influenced by both human and animal behaviors, and he will assess how wildlife
and livestock resource-utilization patterns influence the ecology of rangelands.
To achieve these objectives, the investigator will employ mixed methods
approaches that combine ecological, social, and spatial field methods from a
long-term study site within the Mara ecosystem in southern Kenya. Although
conducted in this locale, the insights developed through this project will
enhance basic understanding in a much broader range of locations, including many
in the United States, where individuals and groups managing domesticated grazing
animals share the same habitats with wild animals.