* 1552860
* EAGER: Collaborative Research: CRUFS: A Unified Framework for Social Media Analysis of Adverse Drug Events
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2018
* Donald Adjeroh, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 07/31/2018
* USD 140,000.00

An adverse drug reaction (ADR) is any undesired response to a medication. ADRs
have been linked with significant morbidity and mortality, accounting for as
much as 5% of hospital admissions. The problem stems from the fact that the ADR
profile of a given drug is rarely complete at the time of official approval. The
typically limited pre-approval evaluation often results in the possibility that
when the drug is finally approved for use in the general population (with
significant diversity in race, gender, age, lifestyle), some previously
unidentified ADRs are often observed. For psychotropic medications, the problem
becomes compounded by the fact that most people with psychiatric diseases tend
to have other health issues, with the individual taking multiple medications
(both psychotropic and non-psychotropic) at the same time, with often unknown
interactions between them. Given the huge quantities of data on drugs, drug
interactions, and diseases, and the possibility offered by social media sources
in obtaining more information about particular drugs and their side effects, the
problem of post-marketing drug surveillance could be turned into a computational
problem. This work will have relevance to government agencies charged with drug
approval and disease monitoring (e.g., the Food and Drug Administration (FDA),
Centers for Disease Control (CDC), public health agencies), pharmaceutical
companies, and the general public. The proposed work will have impact beyond
drug surveillance as the methods can be applied to other scenarios such as
financial markets, national security, or other healthcare problems. Graduate and
undergraduates students will be involved in the project, thereby gaining
experience in doing research. Journal papers and conference presentations will
be used to disseminate research results. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project takes
a new approach to the problem of adverse drug event surveillance by relying
heavily on the collective intelligence of the web community, with significant
emphasis on social media and online sources. This calls for more serious
attention to the ubiquity, veracity and diversity of data from these sources.
Thus the general goal is to develop the CRUFS (credibility, recency, uniqueness,
frequency and salience) framework as a uniform and innovative foundation for
assessing different data channels in social media analysis of adverse drug
events. The project will study methods to extract reliable signals from
unreliable, noisy, redundant, and potentially deceptive online data, a core
challenge in social media analytics. The project also proposes novel methods for
ADR signal detection and signal fusion based on causality networks. The results
will change the current passive surveillance that relies on voluntary reports,
by making the public an integral part of a proactive drug surveillance system.