* 1552439
* CAREER: Biological tuning of plasma membrane mixing
* BIO,MCB
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2022
* Sarah Veatch, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Charles Cunningham
* 12/31/2022
* USD 1,004,186.00

All animal cells are surrounded by a plasma membrane that defines the outer
surface of the cell. Cells control the protein and lipid composition of their
plasma membrane to support a broad range of functions, including acting as a
sensor of the local cellular environment. For example, the plasma membrane
senses and communicates to the cell interior when it is appropriate to grow and
divide, if and where the cell should crawl, or when certain compounds or classes
of compounds are present in the vicinity. This project will investigate how and
why cells adapt their plasma membrane composition in response to several changes
in their growth conditions. Many of these sensing functions are thought to
depend on how proteins and lipids are organized within the plasma membrane, and
the researchers will investigate how both membrane heterogeneity and sensing
functions are impacted as cells adjust membrane composition. The long term goals
of the project are to discover how cells maintain a heterogeneous membrane, and
how this membrane structure contributes to the efficient functioning of the
cell. The researchers will communicate their findings through publications,
conference presentations, public lectures, development of undergraduate
curricula, and outreach to high school students from backgrounds that are under-
represented in the physical sciences. The principle investigator will train
undergraduate and graduate students for careers in STEM
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Plasma membranes isolated from intact cells
separate into two liquid phases when cooled below room temperature, similar to
oil and water in three dimensions. The presence of this phase transition at low
temperature predicts the existence of smaller membrane domains at the higher
temperatures where cells live in culture. The objective of the research is to
directly observe domains in intact cells at growth temperature, and to determine
if cells tune their membrane composition to control the physical properties of
these domains in order to optimize cellular functions. The research will use
conventional cell biological, biochemical, and biophysical techniques as well as
cutting edge experimental methods, including super-resolution fluorescence
localization microscopy to image the nano-scale organization of membrane
components and quantitative lipidomics to detail plasma membrane lipid
composition.