* 1552109
* CAREER: Leveraging Wireless Virtualization for Enhancing Network Capacity, Coverage, Energy Efficiency and Security
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2016,09/30/2016
* Danda Rawat, Georgia Southern University Research and Service Foundation, Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Wenjing Lou
* 09/30/2016
* USD 76,542.00

Over the last several decades, we have experienced tremendous growth in the use
of cellular telephones and Wi-Fi networks for home and office, as well as
emerging wireless technologies geared toward different applications. The massive
growth of lightweight hand-held devices used to access wireless networks has
resulted in an exponential increase in demand for wireless services and severe
wireless spectrum shortage. To overcome these problems, beyond spectrum sharing
with licensed users, a new wireless architecture is needed to enhance network
coverage, capacity and security. The research objective of this CAREER project
is to significantly advance the field of wireless communications, with an
expectation of opening transformative research directions, by a) devising a
novel generalized wireless virtualization architecture, or Wi-Vi, to provide
wireless services to users using Radio-as-a-Service where Wi-Vi architecture
will enhance network capacity, coverage, seamless mobility and energy
efficiency, and thus be able to support trillions of devices in next generation
wireless systems; and b) by extending the scope of the proposed Wi-Vi framework
for performance isolation, security and privacy while providing quality-of-
service/experience to users in a diverse wireless environment. Moreover, this
work will help researchers across many fields understand how wireless
communications influences the emerging fields such as smart grid, eHealth,
vehicular networks, next generation cellular networks, Internet-of-things,
cyber-physical systems and secure cyberspace. The PI will train the next
generation of scientists and engineers in the area of next generation wireless
networks, and mentor researchers (including minorities and female) at
undergraduate and graduate level, as well as inspire K-12 students in science
and engineering fields at the early stage of their learning career through
hands-on demonstrations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER project focuses on
the design, analysis and evaluation of a Wireless Virtualization (Wi-Vi)
framework by combining different wireless resources and infrastructures, beyond
spectrum sharing with licensed users, to be used as on-demand service over the
network, with the goal of enhancing network capacity, coverage, energy
efficiency and security. The PI will develop Wi-Vi architecture using systematic
approaches to improve overall network performance. Specifically, the
significance of the proposed research includes: 1) development of a generalized
wireless virtualization framework that will help meet dynamic demands of
wireless users by expanding or shrinking wireless resources of the virtual
wireless operators; 2) study and implementation of optimal wireless resource
sharing among coverage- and capacity-driven Mobile Virtual Network Operators
(MVNOs); 3) development of systematic approaches for base station-level, MVNO-
level and user level optimizations and Quality-of-Service (QoS) provisioning; 4)
application of wireless virtualization in network security through dynamic
network segmentation; and 5) validation and evaluation of the proposed novel
techniques through extensive simulations and experiments in NSF-funded cloud
testbeds such as ROAR, Chameleon, etc. The CAREER award will have a broad
societal impact as wireless networks touch every aspect of our society, and will
support enhancement of our national wireless capacity and cybersecurity. This
project will impact many emerging areas in which wireless communication has
applications - such as smart grid, eHealth, vehicular networks, next generation
cellular networks, Internet-of-things, cyber-physical systems and secure
cyberspace. The PI will train undergraduate and graduate students by
disseminating knowledge to students through new courses and modules on wireless
virtualization and next generation wireless networks. Focused efforts will be
undertaken to interest underrepresented students (including females) in
conducting the proposed research. Overall, the PI will establish an integrated
research and educational program to train future scientists and engineers in the
area of next generation wireless networks and to inspire young people's interest
(including K-12 students) in science and engineering fields at the early stage
of their learning career.