* 1552240
* CAREER: Improved Mass Spectrometry Identification and Quantification Through Probabilistic Data Segmentation
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2021
* Rob Smith, University of Montana
* Continuing Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 05/31/2021
* USD 808,251.00

Mass spectrometry is a chemistry technique that has a broad range of
applications of societal interest, including in medicine, forensics, and basic
biological sciences. This research develops new analysis techniques that allow
mass spectrometry data to be used in ways that are not currently possible, that
may lead to advances in fields like medical diagnostics, drug development, and
better understanding of poorly understood ailments involving proteins, such as
Alzheimer's disease. A significant part of the research plan involves outreach
to Seeley Swan High School in Montana, where researchers and teachers will team
up to teach students problem-solving skills using computers, in subjects such as
chemistry, math, and biology. Students who have strong computational problem-
solving abilities are more likely to attend college and more likely to apply
for, and succeed in, professions requiring those skills, including scientific
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mass spectrometry (MS) plays a role in many
investigations because it can quantify and identify the major components
(proteins, lipids, metabolites) of almost any cellular system. MS data
processing identifies the molecular composition of an MS sample by analyzing
digital MS output signals. This research develops a fundamentally different
approach to MS output signal analysis by: 1) Creating a fundamentally different
paradigm for MS signal processing that probabilistically segments the entire MS
output file instead of extracting subregions of interest, 2) Showing that
current methods are insufficient through a quantitative evaluation, 3) Enabling
future research by capturing currently excluded low abundance molecules, and 4)
Demonstrating how this new paradigm broadens downstream experimental
possibilities with a novel correspondence approach built on the additional
information provided by the proposed segmentation techniques. Diversity will be
fostered through continuing and expanding currently successful recruitment
practices for lab participation. This research brings real research experience
into collegiate and rural high school classrooms by 1) Stimulating discovery
(particularly among underrepresented groups) through integrating computational
mass spectrometry into the undergraduate and graduate computer science
curriculum at the University of Montana. 2) Fostering problem-based STEM
experience in rural high school students through integrating computational
problem solving research into high school course materials. Results from this
research will be posted to http://ms.cs.umt.edu.