* 1552619
* Power Sharing, Political Goods Provision &amp; Post-Conflict Stability
* SBE,SES
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2020
* Matthew Hoddie, Gettysburg College
* Continuing Grant
* Brian Humes
* 05/31/2020
* USD 447,802.00

General Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study seeks to better understand how
power-sharing arrangements foster peace in the aftermath of civil war. Power-
sharing institutions, rules to apportion political, military, economic, and
territorial power among former belligerents, are an increasingly prevalent
feature of civil war settlements. Academics have posited that power-sharing
institutions secure the commitment of elites and the masses to stability by
providing key political goods: security for both elites and masses, inclusion
for elites, and basic services for the masses. In the absence of data
appropriate for testing those hypotheses, however, previous research has been
unable to identify the exact causal mechanisms through which power sharing
fosters stability after civil war. This study addresses this gap in our
understanding of power sharing by collecting micro-level data on elites' and
masses' knowledge about and perceptions of the effects that these institutions
have on the delivery of political goods. Data collection in the form of
interviews and surveys will be conducted in the Mindanao region of the
Philippines, where efforts at civil war resolution have at times featured the
use of power-sharing mechanisms. The principal investigators will use these data
to conduct statistical analyses of the effects that power sharing has on
different groups' commitment to the peace. The information obtained from this
study will serve to inform policymakers about the best practices for the design
and implementation of power-sharing arrangements in the aftermath of civil
war.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study
seeks to better understand how power-sharing arrangements may foster peace in
the aftermath of civil war. Powers sharing institutions, rules to apportion
political, military, economic, and territorial power among former belligerents,
are an increasingly prevalent feature of civil war settlements. This research
will critically examine the hypothesis that power-sharing arrangements promote
peace by providing citizens with important political goods such as security and
access to basic services. This will be accomplished by focusing on the Mindanao
region of the Philippines, where efforts at civil war resolution have at times
featured the use of power-sharing mechanisms. Conducting open-ended interviews
with key informants, semi-structured interviews with focus groups, surveys of
the population in conflict-affected areas, and survey experiments, the principal
investigators will gather micro-level data that make it possible to answer two
key questions. First, do individuals residing in regions included in a post-
civil war power-sharing arrangement have greater access to political goods
relative to comparable populations excluded from power sharing? Second, is there
a correlation between access to political goods and an individual's support for
the post-conflict peace process?