* 1552998
* Student Participation Support at ACM Multimedia 2015
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2016
* Qi Tian, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 08/31/2016
* USD 30,000.00

The provided support enables about 15 graduate/undergraduate students enrolled
in the U.S. institutions to participate in the premiere conference in the
multimedia area, ACM Multimedia 2015, to be held 26 - 30 October 2015, Brisbane,
Australia (http://www.acmmm.org/2015/). It is very valuable for students to
engage in the unique research and education programs provided by this
conference. This is the worldwide premier conference and a key world event to
display scientific achievements and innovative industrial products in the
multimedia field, covering latest technical papers, technical demos, grand
challenge competition, open source software competition, doctoral symposium, and
an interactive art program stimulating artists and computer scientists to meet
and discover together the frontiers of artistic communication. Participation in
such event allows students to learn/experience innovative research, develop
professional networks, and interact with industry and academia leaders involved
in practical applications and technology transfer. The availability of support
will be announced to the broad community and students, and underrepresented
groups will be particularly encouraged to apply. ACM Multimedia 2015 calls for
full papers presenting novel theoretical and algorithmic solutions addressing
problems across the domain of multimedia and related applications. The
conference also calls for short papers presenting novel, thought-provoking ideas
and promising (preliminary) results in realizing these ideas. The active
participation in ACM Multimedia 2015 will be valuable for students to understand
the state-of-the-art techniques in multimedia area. The Doctoral Symposium will
provide a forum to present Ph.D. students' ongoing work and receive feedback
from established researchers. This will foster establishment of a supportive
worldwide community, and build professional networks for PhD students. In
addition, the Brave New Idea (BNI) Program focuses on highly innovative ideas
and/or paradigm shifts in conventional theory and practice of multimedia
computing, communications and applications, and may involve cross-disciplinary
efforts. This session is especially useful for students or junior researchers
who are exploring new research direction. Multimedia Grand Challenges presents a
set of problems and issues from industry leaders, geared to engage the
Multimedia research community in solving relevant, interesting and challenging
questions about the industry's 3-5 year vision for multimedia. The ACM
Multimedia Open-Source Software Competition is designed to promote the
contribution of freely available resources, which advance the field by providing
a common set of tools for building and improving multimedia research prototypes.
Finally, the large Technical Demonstration session is intended as real,
practical, and interactive proof of the presenters' research ideas and
scientific or engineering contributions. This session allows students to
demonstrate their own novel research prototypes, and also to view and interact
first hand with live evidence of innovative solutions and ideas in the field of
multimedia.