* 1552837
* CAREER: Collaborative Image Manipulation and Annotation in Surgical Telemedicine
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2022
* Helena Mentis, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 05/31/2022
* USD 548,351.00

The objective of this project is to investigate the benefit of collaborative
image interaction in conveying expert knowledge during distributed work.
Although there have been great advances in the compression and transfer of audio
and video signals for telecommunication, there is still a significant challenge
in providing the appropriate tools for conveying expert knowledge in distributed
work settings. Surgical telemedicine is one domain where collaborative
interaction with highly specialized images is vital for the efficient and
effective conveyance of expert information, and the collaborating individuals
may not have the same level of expertise. In this research the PI will
systematically ascertain the challenges of expert distributed communication of
technical images and the benefits that collaborative image interaction has in
conveying expert knowledge in distributed work. Because the findings from this
research will be translatable to other expert distributed environments that
utilize imagery in order to have a positive effect on distributed collaborative
work practices, project outcomes will have broad implications aside from the
immediate benefit of providing manipulation and annotation ability on images for
distributed collaborative work to support healthcare. The project will provide
educational experiences at multiple levels by including high school,
undergraduate, and graduate students in this interdisciplinary research. Because
the PI will actively engage and mentor under-represented groups throughout the
project, the work may also increase the number of underrepresented minorities
and women in science and technology. Finally, the PI will disseminate results
broadly in both the medical and HCI literature, and coordinate workshops at the
respective yearly conferences, in order to engage a wider audience of
researchers and system designers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work is part of a
long term effort by the PI in investigating how images play a part in scientific
and medical collaborative practices, particularly with regards to how both
professionals and lay people perceive the information through images and, in
turn, the effects of new mechanisms for sensing, presenting, and interacting
with those images. The research aims are: to determine the verbal and non-verbal
mechanisms for conveying expert knowledge in co-located and distributed
collaboration with images; to develop a prototype for distributed collaborative
image interaction; to determine the effects of collaborative image interaction
on expert communication processes and performance outcomes; and to determine the
effects of and the reactions to collaborative image interaction on distributed
work practices. The educational objective is to produce scholars with a deep
understanding of collaborative technology design and social science evaluation
on health information system success. This is part of a long-term effort by the
PI to engage under-represented groups in computer and information science by
exposing them to the process of developing technology solutions to real world
problems. Specific educational activities will include development of an
internship program for high school students to participate in research and
systems design on the real-world problems of the operating room, and development
of a cross-listed graduate course on telemedicine that utilizes a project-based
curriculum to bring together the expertise of graduate students from three
different UMBC graduate programs: Information Systems, Human Centered Computing,
and Health IT.