* 1552077
* Collaborative Research: Formation of Organic Nitrogen and Secondary Organic Aerosol Related to Nitrate Radical Oxidation of Volatile Organic Compounds
* GEO,AGS
* 02/15/2016,01/31/2018
* James Flynn, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 01/31/2018
* USD 248,314.00

This project focuses on increasing the understanding of how human-produced
emissions combine with biogenic emissions from forests to influence the
formation of small particles in the atmosphere. A mobile laboratory will be
deployed to two different types of forests (urban and remote) in order to
compare and contrast the impact of long-range and short-range transport of
nitrogen species to forests. The results will lead to improved control
strategies that minimize the health, visibility and climate effects of
anthropogenic emissions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary objectives of the
science campaign are to: (1) Characterize the ambient aerosol, radiation, and
trace gases at two forest sites, both above and below the canopy, and along a
north-south transect in the central United States; (2) Quantify the level of
oxidation found in SOA using atomic ratios (such as the oxygen to carbon ratio,
O:C) and determine the impact the presence of particulate organic nitrate (PON)
has on the observed oxidation state of the submicron particulate matter (PM);
(3) Investigate how in-canopy gradients and through-canopy transport impact
submicron PM, PON, and oxidants; (4) Determine the impact nitrogen oxides (NOx)
have on volatile organic carbon (VOC) oxidation and SOA formation in all
locations; (5) Compare and contrast the chemistry of remote, on-road, and urban
forested areas; (6) Identify the factors contributing to SOA using positive
matrix factorization (PMF) to identify important components of SOA under
different levels of anthropogenic influence both above and below canopy; and (7)
Investigate the fate of NOx in all locations.