* 1553708
* CAREER: Designing Learning Environments to Foster Productive and Powerful Discussions among Linguistically Diverse Students in Secondary Mathematics
* EDU,DRL
* 02/01/2016,01/31/2023
* William Zahner, San Diego State University Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Eric Knuth
* 01/31/2023
* USD 922,263.00

The project will design and investigate learning environments in secondary
mathematics classrooms focused on meeting the needs of English language
learners. An ongoing challenge for mathematics teachers is promoting deep
mathematics learning among linguistically diverse groups of students while
taking into consideration how students' language background influences their
classroom experiences and the mathematical understandings they develop. In
response to this challenge, this project will design and develop specialized
instructional materials and guidelines for teaching fundamental topics in
secondary algebra in linguistically diverse classrooms. The materials will
incorporate insights from current research on student learning in mathematics as
well as insights from research on the role of language in students' mathematical
thinking and learning. A significant contribution of the work will be connecting
research on mathematics learning generally with research on the mathematics
learning of English language learners. In addition to advancing theoretical
understandings, the research will also contribute practical resources and
guidance for mathematics teachers who teach English language learners. The
Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) program is a National Science
Foundation (NSF)-wide activity that offers awards in support of junior faculty
who exemplify the role of teacher-scholars through outstanding research,
excellent education, and the integration of education and research within the
context of the mission of their organizations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
is focused on the design of specialized hypothetical learning trajectories that
incorporate considerations for linguistically diverse students. One goal for the
specialized trajectories is to foster productive and powerful mathematics
discussions about linear and exponential rates in linguistically diverse
classrooms. The specialized learning trajectories will include both mathematical
and language development learning goals. While this project focuses on concepts
related to reasoning with linear and exponential functions, the resulting
framework should inform the design of specialized hypothetical learning
trajectories in other topic areas. Additionally, the project will add to the
field?s understanding of how linguistically diverse students develop
mathematical understandings of a key conceptual domain. The project uses a
design-based research framework gathering classroom-based data, assessment data,
and interviews with teachers and students to design and refine the learning
trajectories. Consistent with a design-based approach, the project results will
include development of theory about linguistically diverse students' mathematics
learning and development of guidance and resources for secondary mathematics
teachers. This research involves sustained collaboration with secondary
mathematics teachers and the impacts will include developing capacity of
teachers locally, and propagating the results of this work in professional
development activities.