* 1553696
* CAREER: Group-Centric Secure Information Sharing - Models, Properties, and Implementation
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2023
* RAM KRISHNAN, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Continuing Grant
* Jeremy Epstein
* 06/30/2023
* USD 544,376.00

One of the oldest and most challenging problems in cyber security is to enable
secure information sharing (SIS) (i.e., maintaining some control over
information even after it has been shared.) For example, a product manufacturer
may need to share customer account information with a company that ships the
products and bills the customers. The manufacturer cannot allow its partner to
then misuse those customer records by direct marketing or selling customer
records. This project focuses on the policy challenge of specifying, analyzing
and enforcing SIS policies. The project is developing intuitive, usable, and
mathematically sound models that can be used by organizations to specify and
enforce SIS policies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on specifying,
analyzing and enforcing group-centric secure information sharing (g-SIS)
policies. The researchers are developing a theory of multiple, connected groups
based on relationships such as subordination, conditional membership and mutual
exclusion, with broad, real-world application. The approach separates policy
layer specifications from enforcement layer specifications, and develops varying
levels of formal consistency metrics between the two with respect to
authorization decisions. The research team is working with organizations to
prototype and use the information sharing platform in ongoing community cyber
incident information sharing efforts.