* 1553756
* CAREER: Beyond Condensation Reactions and Polymer Casting: New Water Treatment Membrane Materials Through Electropolymerization
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2016,06/30/2018
* David Jassby, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 06/30/2018
* USD 512,613.00

1553756&lt;br/&gt;Jassby&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although the water treatment
community developed methods to control biofilms, organic fouling, and mineral
scaling on membranes, these methods are often cost-prohibitive. By leveraging
the principal investigator's (PI's) expertise in electrochemistry, membrane
separations, and colloidal science, this project will advance the science and
engineering of water treatment processes with a clear improvement over existing
best practices. This project embodies the PI's goal of ensuring safe and
plentiful water resources in a rapidly changing global environment by applying
innovative technological solution. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Electrochemical
reactions have the potential to solve many of the most persistent challenges
facing membrane-based water treatment processes. These challenges can be
summarized as: 1) the sensitivity of reverse osmosis and nanofiltration
membranes to oxidizing chemicals, such as chlorine, which significantly
complicates biofilm management and membrane cleaning operations, and, 2)
membrane fouling in in ultrafiltration and membrane distillation processes. This
project will address both of these problems by applying electrochemical methods.
The PI will use electropolymerization to fabricate a new generation of chlorine-
resistant, smooth nanofiltration and reverse osmosis membranes, and electro-
polymerize conducting polymers onto porous carbon nanotubes to form
electroactive ultrafiltration and membrane distillation membrane materials that
are resistant to electrocorrosion. The project is based on the central
hypotheses that that electropolymerized polymeric films can maintain the
chemical structures and transport properties critical to membrane separation
processes while providing improved functionalities. The first major objective of
the project is to fabricate, characterize, and test an electropolymerized
material that combines the transport properties critical to nanofiltration and
reverse osmosis processes with chlorine-resistance and a smooth surface. This
objective will be pursued by developing appropriate electrically conducting
substrates, identifying potential monomers, testing/characterizing the
electropolymerized materials, and modeling the resulting polymeric material. The
second major objective is to form electrically conducting ultrafiltration and
membrane distillation membrane materials that can be used as anodes at high
electrical potentials without suffering from electro-corrosion, and that can
participate in electrooxidation reactions. This objective will be pursued by
electropolymerizing conducting polymers onto carbon nanotubes substrates,
characterizing the electrochemical, chemical and physical properties of the
composite material, and describing the transport properties of the membrane
materials. Finally, all the membranes will be tested for their anti-fouling
properties using model organic and inorganic foulants. Electropolymerized
chlorine-resistant nanofiltration and reverse osmosis materials and electro-
corrosion resistant conducting membranes represent an advancement in membrane-
based water treatment processes. They have potential applications in wastewater
reuse, seawater desalination, and groundwater treatment. The project will
develop fundamental understanding of the electrochemical reactions taking place
during the fabrication of the new reverse osmosis material and during the
electrochemical reduction of nitrate. The research plan directly addresses the
NSF Environmental Engineering Program's emphasis on enhancing the availability
of high quality water supplies. The focus of the education plan is to provide
disabled military veterans with internships in order to attract/maintain them in
STEM fields Additionally, the PI works at a Hispanic-serving institution and
collaborates with a community college that serves Hispanics.