* 1553379
* CAREER: Broadening Participation in STEM: A Qualitative Analysis of African American Male STEM Majors' Mathematics Experiences and Career Decisions
* EDU,EES
* 03/15/2016,02/28/2022
* Christopher Jett, University of West Georgia
* Continuing Grant
* Tori Rhoulac Smith
* 02/28/2022
* USD 405,063.00

African American male students' stories of mathematics success are critically
needed in the research literature, and it is important to gain insights from
African American male science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM)
majors to improve efforts to recruit, retain, and graduate these students.
Furthermore, African American male students' STEM career decisions can provide
insights concerning persistence and career trajectories in STEM fields. This
project awarded to a CAREER scholar has the goal to understand, synthesize,
document, and highlight the mathematics experiences and career decisions of
forty African American male STEM majors. Additionally, an African American Male
Mathematics Network (AAMMN) will be established to influence and capitalize on
students' mathematical strengths, and this network will serve as a national
model for other stakeholders with similar research and education goals. The
Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) program is a National Science
Foundation-wide activity that offers awards in support of junior faculty who
exemplify the role of teacher-scholars through outstanding research, excellent
education, and the integration of education and research within the context of
the mission of their organizations. This award is supported by the EHR Core
Research (ECR) program. ECR emphasizes fundamental STEM education research that
generates foundational knowledge in the field. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work
is guided by three goals: 1) to identify and examine the experiences, barriers
and successes of African American male STEM majors; 2) to broaden the
participation of African American male students in mathematics; and 3) to
disseminate the results broadly. Critical Race Theory and the Socio-Ecological
Outcome Model are used as the theoretical framework to conduct this research.
The study employs qualitative methods such as a pre-survey, an interview, and
artifacts to examine the nuances of African American men's mathematics
experiences and career decisions. The intellectual distinction of this work lies
in its anti-deficit perspective and thus will add to the body of research
highlighting the strengths of this population. The forty students who will be
selected for the study will come from Clark Atlanta University, Georgia State
University, Georgia Tech, and Morehouse College. This work is exemplary in
integrating research and education. A graduate capstone course will be
developed, students are involved in the research, and an African American Male
Mathematics Network will be created. The findings from this project will make a
significant contribution to the field by providing a nuanced understanding,
interpretation, and analysis of African American male STEM majors' mathematics
experiences and career decisions to inform national strategies, policies,
interventions, and initiatives for African American male students.