* 1553100
* CAREER: Fighting Behavior, Performance, and the Evolution of Shape
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/2016,01/31/2022
* Christine Miller, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Jodie Jawor
* 01/31/2022
* USD 843,925.00

The completion of this project will boost human knowledge of biological
evolution through the study of animal weapons. Understanding evolution is
essential for figuring out solutions to modern problems such as antibiotic
resistance, a major problem in medicine, and for understanding how life on our
planet became so diverse and how it will change next. Animal weapons including
such intriguing structures as horns on bighorn sheep, antlers on deer, and tusks
on elephants, have fascinated people for centuries. The earliest-known human
paintings show wild animals fighting with weapons. In spite of the interest
these structures have attracted, understanding of weapon diversity is in its
infancy. This project will increase understanding of why even closely-related
species can have profoundly different weapons. Simultaneously, it will provide
important insights into why other shapes and forms in nature can be so variable.
Data and specimens collected as part of this project will be stored in
scientific archives and museums, where they will be shared freely with other
researchers for use in future projects. This project will also contribute
directly to the science education of more than two hundred college students.
These students will learn how to do science and to recognize that science is a
process, not just a collection of facts. The researchers will also interact and
share their results with the general public through blogs, presentations, and
student-made videos about experiences doing science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
diverse traits resulting from sexual selection offer outstanding opportunities
for understanding the evolutionary interactions between behavior and morphology.
It is now well established that mate choice and male-male competition can select
for differences in the sizes of ornaments and weapons. However the evolution of
the shape of these traits is more puzzling. Why has such shape diversity
evolved? In the case of animal weapons, habitat-driven changes in male-male
competitive behavior are hypothesized to be a central factor. However, explicit
tests of this hypothesis are virtually nonexistent. This project will examine
the roles of fighting behavior, ecology, and function in the evolution of weapon
shape, capitalizing on the extreme weapon shape diversity and myriad of fighting
styles in leaf-footed bugs (Hemiptera: Coreidae) to address the long-standing
puzzle of weapon shape diversity. Methods include experimental selection
analyses, finite element analysis, phylogenetics, and ancestral state
reconstructions. The successful completion of this project will offer an
unprecedented analysis of the evolutionary interplay between behavior and
morphology, using the medium of weaponry. Data and specimens will be stored and
shared with other scientists through international archives, including NCBI,
DRYAD, and the Florida Museum of Natural History. Over 200 undergraduates will
contribute to the completion of this project through Course-based Undergraduate
Research Experiences (CURE), and curricular materials developed for this purpose
will be shared with other educators through workshops and publications. Training
in the integration of research and education will also be provided to a
postdoctoral researcher, graduate students, and undergraduates. Substantial
outreach will be accomplished through the production of short videos by
students, blogs, research spotlights, social media, and public presentations.