* 1553610
* CAREER: Scaling Forensic Algorithms for Big Data and Adversarial Environments
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2022
* Matthew Stamm, Drexel University
* Continuing Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 04/30/2022
* USD 583,578.00

Forged digital images or video can threaten reputations or impede criminal
justice, due to falsified evidence. Over the past decade, researchers have
developed a new class of security techniques known as 'multimedia forensics' to
determine the origin and authenticity of multimedia information, such as
potentially falsified images or videos. However, the proliferation of
smartphones and the rise of social media have led to an overwhelming increase in
the volume of multimedia information that must be forensically authenticated.
Forger's capabilities have also grown dramatically, as sophisticated editing
software allows forgers to perform complex manipulations of digital images and
videos. Researchers have recently demonstrated that an adversarial forger can
design anti-forensic attacks capable of fooling forensic algorithms. By
contrast, little multimedia forensics research has focused on improving the
speed at which multimedia forensics techniques operate, particularly on large
data sets. This research project is focused on scaling multimedia forensic
algorithms to address these new challenges that have arisen due to the evolving
technical and social landscape. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research project is
focusing on three main aims: (1) Scaling forensic algorithms to meet big data
challenges, (2) Scaling forensic algorithms to handle complex forgeries, and (3)
Scaling forensics to meet increased adversarial capabilities. To accomplish
these aims, the research is drawing from a wide variety of fields such as signal
processing, estimation theory, statistical hypothesis testing, machine learning,
optimization theory, and game theory.