* 1553791
* Moving Toward Stronger Communities of Inclusion: Identifying Challenges and Approaches Associated with Introductory Engineering Offerings
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2017
* Leigh Abts, Morgan State University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Poats
* 08/31/2017
* USD 50,000.00

This project supports a workshop that explores issues related to developing an
introductory engineering course sequence that ensures that the requisite skills
in science and mathematics are met while developing relevancy, expertise, and
ownership of the student. The workshop convenes approximately 40 participants
from groups who have different roles in the support in the successful entry of
underrepresented students into higher education and the engineering workforce.
The workshop facilitates discussion, community building, and sharing of best
practices among experts from across the social, education (middle and high
schools and higher education), engineering, business/government, and policy
making communities. The broader impact of this project is the focus on
broadening the participation in engineering by supporting pathways to success
for underrepresented groups in urban areas, including African American students.

The goals of the workshop are to: 1) identify the challenges and the potential
ways to identify the critical aptitude and efficacy performance indicators for
recruitment and monitoring of students to enter into a pre-engineering course
sequence, 2) identify the challenges and the potential ways to identify the
outcomes, performance indicators, modalities and the timeline associated with a
pre-engineering course sequence, and 3) develop recommendations for pathways and
models for the sustainability of such efforts. Workshop participants are engaged
through pre-workshop readings and materials, interactive sessions during the
workshop, and follow up interactions after the workshop. Issues related to
models for transferable credit to engineering programs for academic work in
secondary and post-secondary settings also are considered. A focused evaluation
plan that includes interviews and surveys to document the impacts of the
project.