* 1553607
* CAREER: SusChEM: Controlling Carbonation Degradation in Sustainable Cements by Stabilizing Amorphous Calcium Carbonate
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2016,12/31/2022
* Claire White, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Nazanin Bassiri-Gharb
* 12/31/2022
* USD 609,872.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: Portland cement manufacturing accounts for 5-8% of
global anthropogenic carbon dioxide emissions, and with concrete utilization set
to double over the next few decades there is a pressing need for sustainable
concrete alternatives. One such alternative is alkali-activated materials
(AAMs), a class of cement whose manufacture emits less carbon dioxide than
Portland cement. However, the long term durability of new cementitious materials
must be understood and optimized prior to employment in the construction
industry. This project investigates the chemical reactions that occur during
degradation of AAMs due to exposure to atmospheric carbon dioxide, a form of
degradation that plagues both Portland cement and new cementitious materials.
The ability to arrest the degradation reaction(s) is being explored by
exploiting the stabilizing effect of magnesium on the carbonate-based reaction
products (amorphous calcium carbonate). The development of durable and
sustainable cementitious materials will lead to the implementation of
sustainable products in residential and commercial construction industry, which
will significantly reduce the associated carbon dioxide emissions. The project
promotes and encourages underrepresented minorities and women in science,
technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) through outreach components
centered on the new applied science/engineering curriculum that is being
instituted in high schools in New Jersey.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
DETAILS: This project will provide a deep understanding of the complex phase
formation processes that occur during carbonation-induced degradation of slag-
based AAM pastes. Key objectives include (i) obtaining a fundamental
understanding of the role of magnesium in stabilizing the precipitated amorphous
carbonate phase and (ii) determining the short and long-term stability of the
disordered phases, including calcium-(sodium)-alumino-silicate-hydrate gel and
amorphous carbonates. Highly carbonation-resistant slag-based AAMs are being
developed through this research, which have the potential to supplant existing
cement technologies. To obtain this understanding a suite of state-of-the-art
experimental techniques are being used, including training the next generation
of scientists (undergraduate and graduate students) in cutting-edge research.
Techniques include: micron-resolved atomic structural information obtained using
X-ray pair distribution function analysis combined with micro-tomography,
nanoscale elemental mapping using nano-fluorescence, X-ray diffraction, infrared
spectroscopy, thermal analysis and synchrotron X-ray absorption fine structure.