* 1553430
* CAREER: Restoring Function in Chronic Venous Insufficiency: Unraveling the Structural-Mechanics of Venous Valve Tissues
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2016,08/31/2022
* Shadow Huang, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Grace Hwang
* 08/31/2022
* USD 616,000.00

1553430&lt;br/&gt;Huang&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Chronic venous insufficiency (CVI)
is a debilitating vascular disease with a prevalence estimated to be twice as
high in women; risk increases with pregnancy, age, and occupations involving
standing. CVI is considered a disabling condition by the US Social Security
Administration; however, increasing prevalence has not been met with
commensurate increases in rehabilitation research. For the first time, this
CAREER project will provide a detailed compositional, structural and biaxial
mechanical characterization of venous valve leaflet, sinus and associated vein
tissues. Thus, this research will fill a critical gap in the basic science of
venous valves, as well as serve as a springboard for innovation, informing
approaches to the treatment of CVI. This CAREER project will engage a diverse
range of groups: high school, undergraduate, and graduate students, postdocs,
underrepresented groups, visually impaired persons, and the local community.
Seminars and workshops for the local community will raise awareness of CVI,
venous hypertension, and venous valve incompetence. The barrier-free Virtual
Atlas of the Valves (VALV) web tool will provide a global repository for
knowledge sharing, including tactile graphics of valvular tissue macro- and
micro-anatomy for the visually impaired. The embossed tactile graphics from VALV
will aid in providing additional accessible educational materials, enabling
active learning by the visually impaired through their senses of touch.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER project focuses on the structural-mechanical
aspects of the venous valve tissues. The PI aims to determine, for the first
time, the biaxial, nonlinear, and viscoelastic mechanical properties of venous
valve leaflet, sinus and adjacent vein tissues, as well as biochemical
quantification of venous valve extracellular matrix (ECM) constituents, collagen
fiber orientation, and ECM morphology. Experimental structural-mechanical
results will be incorporated into viscoelastic and structural-based constitutive
models. Collectively, results will provide a much-needed comprehensive basis for
understanding venous valve physiology, pathology, and for the advancement of
both palliative and restorative therapies, including pharmacological, surgical,
and rehabilitation interventions to combat CVI.