* 1553863
* CAREER: Integrated Research and Education in Nonlinear Modal Decoupling and Control for Resilient Interconnected Power Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/01/2016,02/28/2022
* Kai Sun, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 02/28/2022
* USD 500,000.00

The conventional classification of power system stability has worked for decades
in practice but will no longer be adequate on interconnected power systems with
high penetration of intermittent renewable resources because some predefined
stability categories such as small-signal stability and transient stability are
no longer separate in real-life power system instabilities. In fact, stability
assessment for a power system is a single nonlinear dynamic problem from the
system point of view. However, a major technical gap lies in the current lack of
fast, accurate stability analysis tools for complex, interconnected, nonlinear
systems like power systems. This project aims at reducing that gap by
establishing a new methodology for power system stability analysis and control
based on understanding, decoupling and control of nonlinear modal dynamics. The
outcomes of the project are expected to create broad impacts on both the power
industry and research community. Fundamental theories established with the
proposed new methodology can be generalized for other large-scale dynamic
systems. The project will educate students at various levels in comprehending
modal dynamics and nonlinearities inherent in interconnected power systems and
train next-generation scientists and engineers to bring more nonlinear thinking
to researching, designing and operating the future smart grid accommodating more
renewable energy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research goals of the project
include: (1) acquiring an in-depth understanding in nonlinear modal dynamics of
an interconnected power system that are associated with invariant manifolds of
the system state, (2) establishing a new approach for improving power system
stability by nonlinear modal decoupling and control, and (3) boiling the new
approach down to simple recipes such as practical tools for nonlinear modal
analysis and stability monitoring of power systems. More specifically, the
project will extend the concept of linear normal modes in small-signal stability
analysis to nonlinear normal modes of power systems for global stability
analysis, establish a theoretical foundation for natural decoupling and
controlled decoupling of nonlinear normal modes based on the normal form method
to structurally decompose the mathematical model of a power system, and propose
innovative online stability assessment and control algorithms based on tracking
and control of modal energy with nonlinear normal modes. This new methodology
could be transformative to power system stability areas since the idea of
understanding the nonlinear modes with power systems has not received enough
attention in those areas and there is significant simplicity with stability
analysis focusing on one or few modes compared to the original high-dimensional
system model. Thus, the research of this project may point to a new avenue for
faster-than-real-time stability assessment and control complementing the
traditional computer simulation based approach.