* 1553274
* CAREER: The Effects of Centralized and Decentralized Sequential Decisions on System Performance
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2021
* Alessandro Arlotto, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 04/30/2021
* USD 500,000.00

The goal of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) grant is to develop a
comprehensive understanding of the immediate and long-term effects of
centralized and decentralized sequential decisions. Individuals, organizations
and firms make decisions under uncertainty on a regular basis. Such decisions
are often complex and difficult to make, and their implications are difficult to
measure. This research will develop approaches that quantify the uncertainty
arising during the decision-making process. In addition, this research will also
address decisions that involve sequential routing and scheduling and require the
completion of multiple tasks in an interrelated network. The findings will
highlight the effects of multiple sequential decisions that go beyond (nearly-)
optimizing different complex systems. Such sequential decision models provide a
natural framework for the analysis of inventory control, queueing, revenue
management, routing, and many other problems frequently arising in practice.
Therefore, this research will provide new fundamental theoretical results for
academics as well as key insights for practitioners. Furthermore, this award
will foster the education and the development of undergraduate and graduate
students who will take an active part in several research projects. This award
will also help expanding the graduate curriculum through the development of new
Ph.D. courses that integrate the results of this research. In all the
activities, the principal investigator seeks to promote the participation of
underrepresented groups in the sciences and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award will support two complementary lines
of work. The first considers centralized decisions. It is motivated by the a
priori possibility that the realized rewards may often be far away from their
optimal expected value, and it provides a detailed probabilistic analysis of
dynamic programming policies. Specific topics include limit theorems for
controlled transient systems (including knapsack problems), distributional
equivalences across formulations with different horizon lengths, and the
identification of policies that lead to the same limiting distribution as the
one obtained by implementing the optimal policy. The second line of work studies
decentralized decisions. It tackles the complexity that comes from combining a
network structure with the routing of self-interested parties who require
multiple different services. As a result, this research will characterize
equilibrium routing behaviors in queuing networks, compare the performance of a
system with self-interested agents with the performance of the same system when
managed by a central planner, and design mechanisms that aim to align the
centralized and the decentralized solutions.