* 1553437
* CAREER: Trustworthy Social Systems Using Network Science
* CSE,CNS
* 02/01/2016,01/31/2022
* Prateek Mittal, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 01/31/2022
* USD 520,957.00

Social media systems have transformed our societal communications, including
news discovery, recommendations, societal interactions, E-commerce, as well as
political and governance activities. However, the rising popularity of social
media systems has brought concerns about security and privacy to the forefront.
This project aims to design trustworthy social systems by building on the
discipline of network science. First, the project is developing techniques for
analysis of social media data that protect against risks to individual privacy;
new research is needed since existing approaches are unable to provide rigorous
privacy guarantees. Second, the project is developing new approaches to mitigate
the threat of "fake accounts" in social systems, in spite of attempts by the
creators of those accounts to elude detection. Both deployed and academic
approaches remain vulnerable to strategic adversaries, motivating the
development of novel defense mechanisms based on network science. The findings
and new designs from this research will directly impact the security and privacy
of a broad class of social network users.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The private
network analytics thrust builds on the ideas of differential privacy, ensuring
sufficient uncertainty in results to hide individual relationships. The project
introduces dependent differential privacy, which protects against disclosure of
information associated with an individual, as well as mutual information
privacy, an entropy-based measure. The Sybil mitigation thrust is based on the
idea of adversarial machine learning: the creators of fake accounts are presumed
to adapt their mechanisms to changing detection approaches. This work exploits
new features, such as temporal dynamics of the network, to address this problem.
Finally, the project aims to integrate the research with an educational
initiative for developing pedagogical approaches and content for trustworthy
social systems.