* 1553634
* CAREER: Well-Defined Hybrid Materials as a Versatile Tool to Study Energy Transfer Processes
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/2016,02/28/2022
* Natalia Shustova, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 02/28/2022
* USD 625,000.00

Non-Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;One of the main challenges facing humanity in
the 21st century is the supply of secure and sustainable energy, of which
consumption will only continue to grow as the human population increases. This
project tackles the engineering and design of well-defined hybrid materials,
which could be applied towards effective solar energy utilization. Metal-organic
crystalline materials produced by self-assembly could enable us to reach these
goals and, thereby, affect the state of future energy generation and storage.
This project also integrates the development of the Carolinian Women in Science
(Wi-Sci) Supportive Network, which addresses the workforce demand in science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM). The proposed Wi-Sci initiative
integrates educational and research opportunities for female students in STEM
disciplines by establishing intercollegiate scientific exchanges and
collaborations, providing and promoting multidisciplinary research opportunities
for female scientists in different research groups, and organizing educational
workshops focused on attraction and retention of women in the STEM disciplines.
The major goal of the Wi-Sci initiative is to create and grow a network of
support at more than 60 Carolinian institutions of higher education, including
20 historically black colleges and universities, and, therefore, increase
opportunities for women to occupy at least 50% of the new positions projected
for STEM disciplines in the Carolinas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Energy transfer in a predesigned pathway is an emerging field
of interest for a broad scientific community and required for the development of
the next generation of solar cells, photocatalysts, sensors, light-emitting
diodes, and switches. With support from the Solid State and Materials Chemistry
program in the Division of Materials Research and the Chemical Structure,
Dynamics and Mechanisms B program in the Division of Chemistry, the major goal
of this project is the preparation of crystalline hybrid materials with a
predesigned pathway for energy transfer that significantly enhance energy
utilization efficiency and, thereby, drastically modify the existing energy and
material landscape. The advantages of utilizing the proposed materials for
energy transfer studies are as follows: (i) scaffold modularity, which allows
tuning of photophysical properties of the material; (ii) crystallinity, which
provides a platform for systematic studies of energy transfer mechanisms
compared to amorphous polymers; and (iii) porosity, in combination with
structural modularity, which allows studying of different energy transfer
pathways involving organic linkers, metal nodes, and guest molecules. Moreover,
the self-assembly approach proposed for material synthesis allows replication of
the hierarchical organization of hundreds of chromophores observed in the
natural photosystem. Integration of educational and research opportunities for
high-school, undergraduate, and graduate students, with a special emphasis on
women in STEM disciplines, is also a top priority of this project.