* 1553589
* CAREER: The Impact of Language Experience on the Development of Number Representations in Deaf, Hard of Hearing, and Hearing Children
* EDU,EES
* 02/01/2016,01/31/2023
* Marie Coppola, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Ochsendorf
* 01/31/2023
* USD 1,269,634.00

There are approximately 80,000 school-age children who are deaf or hard of
hearing in our nation's schools and these students typically lag behind their
hearing classmates in mathematics achievement. There is a pressing need to
ensure that these students learn mathematics and are able to advance
academically with equal access to science and mathematics education. Recent
research suggests that early language development affects young children's
cognitive representations of numbers and their number vocabulary. A delay in
language exposure, which occurs for more than 90% of children who are deaf or
hard of hearing, may negatively impact number development. It is also unknown
whether children who acquire sign language early in life demonstrate delayed
mathematical development. This CAREER scholar will investigate how deaf or hard
of hearing children, compared to hearing children, learn numbers. The research
will examine how language experiences affect the development of number
representations, symbols and words. Project activities will also include studies
about how parents and children can be trained to impact number learning. Results
of this work are expected to provide information to parents, educators and
researchers about how to help deaf or hard of hearing children learn numbers for
mathematical development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Faculty Early Career
Development (CAREER) program is a National Science Foundation (NSF)-wide
activity that offers awards in support of junior faculty who exemplify the role
of teacher-scholars through outstanding research, excellent education, and the
integration of education and research within the context of the mission of their
organizations. This award is supported by the EHR Core Research (ECR) and
Linguistics programs. ECR emphasizes fundamental STEM education research that
generates foundational knowledge in the field. Linguistics supports basic
science in the domain of human language.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this
CAREER project is to develop a model of the formation and quality of number
systems as related to the timing of language acquisition and language modality,
with an emphasis on advancing knowledge about how deaf and hard-of-hearing
children learn number representations. The basic premise is that language is
needed before number concepts can be learned. Research questions include: (1) Do
deaf and hard-of-hearing children who acquire American Sign Language (ASL) from
birth follow the same trajectory in acquiring number knowledge as do their
hearing peers? (2)Do deaf and hard-of-hearing children who are exposed to
language later in life follow the same trajectory in acquiring number knowledge
as do deaf and hard-of-hearing children who acquire ASL from birth? (3) Do
delays in exposure to sign or spoken language affect children's ability to
fluidly and automatically manipulate number representations? (4) Can explicit
training with labelling and counting sets increase the number knowledge of young
signing deaf and hard-of-hearing children relative to non-number training? (5)
Can structured parental interactions with deaf and hard-of-hearing children, in
which parents label and count sets increase the number knowledge of deaf and
hard-of-hearing children relative to interactions that are not about numbers? A
series of studies will be conducted to address these questions and results will
be published, disseminated at professional conferences and shared with teachers
via training workshops.