* 1553252
* CAREER: NEURAL MECHANISMS OF SKILL LEARNING
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2022
* Steven Chase, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Quentin Gaudry
* 08/31/2022
* USD 800,000.00

Practice makes perfect. While most people can swing a hammer, it takes thousands
of hours of practice to become a master carpenter who can swing a hammer with
fluid speed and precision. This process of long-term improvement in movement
accuracy is known as skill acquisition, and is presumably driven by coordinated
changes in our brain's neural representation of the movement. Yet despite the
bedrock importance of skill learning in our daily lives, the link between neural
reorganization and skill acquisition is still largely unknown. This CAREER
proposal lays the foundation for a long-term integrated research and educational
program that will discover the links between cortical reorganization and skill
acquisition and determine the behavioral factors that drive skill learning. An
improved understanding of the science behind skill learning will have long-term
impact on our clinical understanding of the progression of various motor control
disorders, such as Parkinson's disease and stroke, and may inform the design of
targeted rehabilitation paradigms and brain-computer interface systems for those
patient groups. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Learning is a fundamental principle of
brain operation that impacts every aspect of neural function. Long-term practice
has been accompanied by a reorganization of cortical activity in a number of
brain areas, but it is typically only imaged at the level of millions of
neurons. The research proposed here will explicitly probe how changes in the
properties of individual neurons are linked to skill acquisition. To accomplish
this goal, this proposal leverages a brain-computer interface (BCI) skill
learning task that enables precise investigation into the links between neural
activity and behavioral improvement. With a BCI, it is possible to create a
mapping between the activity of neurons and the movement of a computer cursor.
To achieve dexterous control of the cursor, BCI subjects must practice with a
particular neuron-to-cursor mapping to learn how to structure their neural
activity to achieve desired movements. We will train Rhesus macaques to operate
BCIs and give them new skills to master by presenting them with new BCI
mappings. We will then track the reorganization in neural activity that occurs
over days and weeks as they gain skilled control of the device. Critically,
these mappings will be tailored to test various hypotheses about the behavioral
drivers (i.e., visuomotor error, visuomotor bias, and movement efficiency) of
cortical reorganization. The results of this study will thus provide an
unparalleled view into the neural instantiation of skill development over its
entire time course.