* 1553192
* EAGER: Language and Architecture Design for Approximation at Different Granularities
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2017
* Hadi Esmaeilzadeh, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* tao li
* 08/31/2017
* USD 160,000.00

The IT industry's economic ecosystem mostly relies on continuously delivering
new services and devices by exploiting continuous performance and efficiency
improvements in general-purpose processing. However, as we enter the dark
silicon era, the benefits from transistor scaling are diminishing and the
current paradigm of processor design significantly falls short of the
traditional cadence of performance improvements. These shortcomings can
drastically curtail the industry's ability to continuously deliver new
capabilities, breaking the backbone of its economic ecosystem. Radical
departures from conventional approaches are necessary to provide large
efficiency and performance gains for a wide range of applications. One such
departure is general-purpose approximate computing that accepts error in
computation and relaxes the traditional abstraction of "near-perfect" accuracy.
Approximate computing leverages the inherent error tolerance of a large body of
emerging applications. These applications span a wide range of domains including
vision, big data analytics, machine learning, sensor processing, cyber-physical
systems, multimedia, and web search. For these diverse domains of applications,
it is timely and crucial to provide architectural mechanisms and programming
abstractions that enable trading quality of results for gains in both
performance and efficiency. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to provide
both architectural mechanisms and programming language constructs that make
approximate computing effectively applicable to a wide range of domains of
applications. Energy efficiency is the IT industry's biggest challenge. To
maintain the nation's economic leadership in the IT industry, it is vital to
develop solutions such as ours that provide significant gains in efficiency and
performance. Many of these techniques allow approximation to permeate across the
boundaries of hardware and software. Thus, it is essential to educate a
workforce that not only deeply understands hardware and software but also can
innovate across the boundaries of the two. This project provides a foundation
for such research and education by producing benchmarks, tools, and general
infrastructure for approximate computing. These artifacts will be made publicly
available and will be integrated into the curriculum.