* 1553518
* Seed size variation and coexistence: testing a novel hypothesis
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2021
* John Maron, University of Montana
* Standard Grant
* Betsy Von Holle
* 05/31/2021
* USD 539,726.00

Plant species compete for nutrients, water and light, yet differ in competitive
ability. Ecological theory predicts that the superior competitor should drive
inferior competitors to local extinction (i.e. the best fighter wins!) Yet,
plant communities contain many species with varying competitive abilities, so a
central question in ecology is: How do competing species coexist in nature? For
example, co-occurring plant species differ dramatically in seed size, and larger
seeded species are often better competitors and also sometimes better at
tolerating stressful conditions than smaller seeded species. Given these
inequalities, how is seed size variation maintained? A leading theory is that
small-seeded species have better dispersal abilities than large-seeded species,
enabling them to reach local sites where large-seeded species are absent. This
theory, however, ignores the fact that large-seeded species often have
substantially more of their seeds eaten by rodents than do small-seeded species.
Thus, this research will experimentally test the novel idea that large and
small-seeded species coexist because rodent seed predators preferentially feed
on large seeded species, thereby countering the imbalance in competitive ability
among these species based on their seed size. This research will generate a
deeper understanding of the mechanisms that promote coexistence and a fuller
appreciation for the ecological forces that determine the relative abundance and
diversity of species in communities. This work will also be used to increase
public understanding of grassland ecology and enhance knowledge of how plant
communities are organized, which is essential for effectively managing these
habitats. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Seed size and number have long been considered
central to coexistence strategies, yet empirical evidence showing how these
traits are shaped by specific coexistence mechanisms remains scarce. Within
sites, seeds of 18 co-occurring forb species (9 small-seeded, 9 large-seeded)
will be added to plots with and without resident bunchgrass competitors to test
how species vary in competitive tolerance. Across 12 sites that vary in
productivity and other abiotic factors, seeds of the same focal species will be
added to plots at different densities where competition from resident dominant
bunchgrasses and rodent seed predation are manipulated. This will allow an
evaluation of how competition, seed predation, and ability to handle stressful
abiotic conditions influences recruitment functions of species with different
seed sizes. It will also enable an exploration of whether seed size is part of a
suite of correlated traits that form "syndromes" that predict demographic
performance under distinct biotic and/or abiotic conditions.