* 1553264
* CAREER: Energy-Efficient Datacenters with Wireless Interconnection Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 02/01/2016,01/31/2024
* Amlan Ganguly, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Continuing Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 01/31/2024
* USD 612,504.00

The principal aim of this CAREER: Energy-Efficient Datacenters with Wireless
Interconnection Networks project is to establish design principals of a wireless
datacenter by integrating intra- and inter-chip wireless networks. Computing
machinery around the world consumes staggering amounts of energy. According to
the NY Times in September 2012, digital warehouses like datacenters use thirty
billion watts of electricity, which is equivalent to the output of thirty
nuclear power plants. Networked computing elements are omnipresent in all
computing machinery like datacenters, servers and High Performance Computing
(HPC). Tens to thousands of multicore chips are interconnected to form an entire
datacenter making the role of the network paramount in the performance and
energy efficiency of the entire system.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Data transfer
between cores or memory components in different chips in large computing
machinery need to traverse various interconnection technologies at the different
levels of the network, often requiring change of switching protocols thus
resulting in overheads. More importantly, according to the International
Technology Roadmap for Semiconductors (ITRS), the pitch of the interchip
interconnects is not scaling as fast as the pitch of on-chip interconnects,
resulting in a performance gap in the future. Additionally, the wiring
complexity of both on-chip and off-chip interconnects exacerbates the problem by
posing design challenges, crosstalk and signal integrity issues. Recent research
envisions on-chip wireless interconnects using millimeter-wave (mm-wave)
technologies for designing Network-on-Chips, which are significantly more
energy-efficient compared to traditional architectures. On the other hand in
recent years considerable research has been done to develop wireless datacenters
using the same 60GHz unlicensed wireless spectrum. The integrated architecture
proposed in this work will be capable of establishing wireless routes between
communicating processing cores in a datacenter.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This
highly interdisciplinary project will engage experts from the disciplines of
computer engineering, computer science and electrical engineering from both
academia and industry. Using concepts and technologies from various domains like
computer architecture, communication, integrated circuit packaging and
datacenters, the project will establish methodologies for wireless
interconnections in large-scale computing warehouses to decrease their energy
consumption and carbon footprint, ultimately resulting in a green and
sustainable computing paradigm.