* 1553471
* CAREER: Generative Programming and DSLs for Safe Performance Critical Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 04/15/2016,03/31/2022
* Tiark Rompf, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 03/31/2022
* USD 517,193.00

Most performance critical software is developed using very low-level techniques,
close to the underlying hardware. But low-level code in unsafe languages
attracts security vulnerabilities, developer productivity suffers without the
software engineering benefits of higher-level languages, and in the age of
heterogeneous hardware and big data workloads, a single hand-optimized codebase
may no longer provide good performance across different target platforms.
Generative programming is a radical rethinking of the role of high-level
languages and low-level languages. Instead of running whole systems in a high-
level managed language runtime, the idea is to focus the abstraction power of
high-level languages on composing pieces of low-level code, making runtime code
generation and domain-specific optimization a fundamental part of the program
logic. This project will conduct a fundamental study of generative design
patterns, which will be extracted from existing and emerging program generators
and domain-specific languages. The intellectual merits are a deeper
understanding of how to develop software in a generative style. The project's
broader significance and importance are to establish generative programming as a
part of every performance-minded programmer?s toolbox, enabling the use of high-
level programming in more situations than currently
possible.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Generative programming, and the shift in
perspective that goes along with it, has been shown to be extremely effective in
areas like databases (query compilation), protocol and data format parsers,
hardware circuit generation, signal processing kernels, machine learning, and
big data processing on heterogeneous computing devices?traditional strongholds
of low-level languages. But while the general idea of program generation is well
understood, the technique has remained esoteric?a black art, accessible only to
the most skilled and daring of programmers. What is missing is a discipline of
practical generative programming, including design patterns, best practices and
so on. To achieve these broader goals, the project includes an education
program, which, driven by the project?s research, will teach generative
programming to a wide audience of students and developers in industry. This
education effort will also serve as a large-scale usability study, closing the
feedback loop into the research on generative programming techniques.