* 1553746
* EAGER: The Identification of Social Systems Trust: Theory and Experimental Validation
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2017
* Anna Scaglione, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* John Cozzens
* 08/31/2017
* USD 199,846.00

The effect of social network contacts is generally believed to be much stronger
than either advertising or online reputation/rating systems. There are many
theoretical models that try to predict how opinions spread among individuals
that trust each other, but the experimental evidence to back them quantitatively
in a real setting is still elusive. This project aims to close the gap between
the theory of opinion diffusion and the several empirical studies that have been
made recently on social media data. The novel idea is to exploit the presence of
influential nodes that are ?stubborn?, i.e. agents who trust only themselves, to
determine how opinions fluctuate in the network as a result of their activities
and the relative trust among all agents in the social network. The mathematical
insights from the theoretical models of opinion diffusion indicate that stubborn
agents excite the social system in such a way that reverberations of their
opinions in comments from others can allow one to fit appropriate system
equations to this phenomenon. Another key insight is that using steady state
models is a more robust method to match real data, since the fluctuations of
opinions are not directly observable, only the individual actions and comments
are.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This effort, if successful, would be akin to
realizing a ?social network Radar,? capturing a tomographic image of the hidden
medium of a social group mutual trust. Preliminary results in the case of the
celebrated linear De Groot's opinion diffusion model applied to Facebook data
show remarkably good agreement between the graph one can extract from our method
and first-hand knowledge of the group analyzed. This is a high risk high payoff
project as several questions still need to be answered and tested to verify the
results.