* 1553970
* CAREER: Flow Physics of Aerodynamic Forcing in Unsteady Environments
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2021
* Anya Jones, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 05/31/2021
* USD 504,335.00

PI: Jones, Anya&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1553970&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed research is focused on the experimental investigation of the
fundamental fluid dynamics phenomena that occur when a wing is subject to gusty
flows. In unsteady flow, the gusts result in an additional buoyancy force (i.e.,
the added mass effect), as well as an unknown change in the flow structure and
aerodynamic forcing due to the interactional aerodynamics. The PI has
established experimental capabilities that allow her to explore these issues in
detail. The results of this research could have an impact on the design of air
vehicle wings and wind energy turbines. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Previous work on
transient flows has focused on a wing driven in unsteady motion rather than the
more realistic problem of a steady wing encountering sudden disturbances. The
proposal is about identifying known and unknown mechanisms and phenomena, and
about designing and conducting careful experiments to elucidate the unknown. For
the flow regimes with large disturbances, a framework for a low-order model of
separated flow will also be constructed, completing the approach to
investigating these phenomena. There are also plans to reach out to K-12
students by demonstrating that science is exciting, fun, and to leverage
outreach efforts with organizations like Women in Engineering.