* 1553788
* CAREER: Quantum Photonics with Quantum Dots in van der Waals Heterostructures
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2022
* Anthony Vamivakas, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Lane
* 05/31/2022
* USD 411,738.00

This CAREER award is jointly funded by the Electronic and Photonic Materials
Program (EPM) in the Division of Materials Research (DMR), and by the
Electronics, Photonics, and Magnetic Devices Program (EPMD) in the Division of
Electrical, Communications and Cyber Systems (ECCS).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nontechnical description: New ideas continuously emerge to
address fundamental and technological challenges at the intersection of
materials science, nano-optics, condensed matter physics, and nanotechnology.
Particularly exciting is to uncover new material systems, as well as controlled
defects in solid materials, that support robust electronic resonances and can
serve as the optically active medium for next-generation nano-optoelectronic
devices. A transformative approach to controllable realization of defect-based
quantum dots in atomically thin semiconductors is pursued in this project. The
unique electronic properties of two-dimensional semiconductors enable a novel
source of quantum light. The research activities present opportunity to
introduce and engage high school, undergraduate and graduate students to
research at the forefront of materials science and nano-optoelectronic device
technology. The PI works closely with the University of Rochester Kearns Center
- a center focused on increasing the number of low-income and historically
underrepresented individuals pursuing undergraduate, graduate and professional
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical description: The research component of
this CAREER award explores a novel platform to realize semiconductor quantum
dots, which are hosted in van der Waals heterostructures based on stacked two-
dimensional atomically thin materials. Recent research shows that, in addition
to supporting extended two-dimensional excitons, atomically thin semiconductors
also exhibit quantum dot like defects that support localized, zero-dimensional
excitons. The research objectives of this project are two-fold: (i) elucidation
of the detailed electronic and fine structure of the two-dimensional-material
quantum-dot excitons using state-of-the-art magneto-optical spectroscopy as well
as time-resolved measurements of voltage controlled van der Waals
heterostructures and (ii) incorporation of these defect-based quantum dots into
photonic nanostructures to create a substrate for chip-based quantum information
science and quantum metrology applications. The quantum dots in van der Waals
heterostructures are expected to provide a novel platform for integrated solid-
state quantum photonics, quantum information processing and quantum metrology as
well as a rich condensed matter physics playground to explore the coupling of
quantum dots and atomically thin semiconductors.