* 1553605
* CAREER: The power and limitations of randomness
* CSE,CCF
* 02/01/2016,01/31/2022
* Raghu Meka, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 01/31/2022
* USD 500,000.00

This project addresses three foundational questions in computer science: 1)
Pseudo- randomness: When is randomness necessary for efficient computing? 2)
Hardness of approximation: Which optimization problems are computationally hard?
3) Communication complexity: Which problems can be solved with little
communication?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At first glance, these questions appear
quite disparate. However, there is a strong and deep connection between them
through a hidden, more basic, theme: identifying structure in randomness. The
central motif is that understanding what role randomness and pseudorandomness
have in computation can be a guiding approach to questions in complexity theory,
communication complexity, algorithm design, and more. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed research has potential for impacting several areas such as complexity
theory, optimization, streaming algorithms, cryptography, and communication
complexity; these areas in turn touch several core fields of computer science
that impact all of science and even our daily lives. For example, pseudorandom
generators are useful for saving space in streaming algorithms which in turn are
important for processing massive amounts of data as is done in many modern
applications. An integral part of the proposed research plan is to educate both
undergraduate and graduate students. The PI intends to involve students at all
levels in performing the research outlined in the proposal by actively advising
PhD students as well as guiding undergraduate students on research
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In more detail, this project aims to address the
following three questions:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1) Pseudorandomness: Can
randomness in algorithms be removed at the expense of a constant-factor increase
in space? Recent work has led to the resolution of several longstanding
challenges in this context and the new techniques can potentially lead to
further progress.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2) Optimization hierarchies and hardness
of approximation: Semi-definite programming (SDP) hierarchies are some of the
most powerful techniques in algorithm design. Can a comprehensive theory to
understand the power and limitations of the semi-definite hierarchies be
developed for problems in approximation algorithms? This is a particularly
pressing issue for problems where we do not have NP-hardness results as is the
case for uniform sparsest cut, the unique games problem, or average-case
problems like the planted clique problem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3) Communication
complexity: Can we characterize precisely the communication complexity of
?lifted problems??one of the most studied classes of functions in this context?
Such a characterization will likely simplify the task of analyzing communication
costs significantly. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is a rich history of
interaction between the above pivotal areas and these connections should be
investigated anew in light of the recent progress in the respective fields over
the last few years.