* 1553694
* Student Support: 2016 Manufacturing Science and Engineering Conference and 44th North American Manufacturing Research Conference; Blacksburg, Virginia; June 27-July 01, 2016
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2017
* Johnson Samuel, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Steve Schmid
* 09/30/2017
* USD 49,600.00

This award supports 80 graduate and undergraduate students studying at US
institutions to participate in the co-located conference event consisting of the
2016 International Manufacturing Science and Engineering Conference sponsored by
the American Society of Mechanical Engineers and the 44th Annual North American
Manufacturing Research Conference sponsored by the North American Manufacturing
Research Institution of the Society of Manufacturing Engineers. These two
leading conferences in the Manufacturing Engineering field act as global bridges
between industries, government laboratories, and academic institutions. The
award provides student participants with opportunities to exchange ideas with
leading researchers and engineers from worldwide industrial and governmental
facilities, as well as with students and faculty from both domestic and
international schools. In addition to nurturing a global manufacturing vision,
participants will learn the latest research areas and results in manufacturing
fields.

The support will cover (1) the registration fees at $350 per student, and (2)
the accommodation cost at $270 per student in a shared room for the entire
duration of the conference. The call for student support applications is
disseminated through posting on main conference websites, promulgation through
conference organizers, track chairs, and symposium organizers, and direct
communication with students involved in poster session, student design
competition and student author research presentation competition. The submitted
applications go through a selection process by the conference committee. The
eligibility criteria to receive the funding include (1) students must be from US
institutions and (2) students must be actively participating in the conference
through presenting a paper or poster, or participating in a competition. The two
highest selection ranks are given to students who have multiple technical papers
accepted and students who present NSF-sponsored technical papers. After the
conference, the list of student awardees will be announced on the main
conference website, in the Manufacturing Science and Engineering 2016 post-
conference report in the Manufacturing Engineering Division's Newsletter, and in
the Award and Recognition section on the North American Manufacturing Research
Institution's website.