* 1553823
* CAREER: Control of Advanced Fuel-Flexible Multi-Cylinder Engines
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/01/2016,02/28/2022
* Carrie Hall, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Eva Kanso
* 02/28/2022
* USD 578,370.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project will investigate the
dynamics and control of advanced combustion strategies that have the potential
to increase the efficiency of fuel-flexible diesel engines by up to 20 percent.
The use of alternative fuels in modern vehicles typically results in higher
production of some pollutants, as well as a drop in efficiency. However, the
combination of alternative fuels along with more advanced combustion techniques
has the potential to solve this problem, and provide efficient, clean power for
transportation. While the benefits of this strategy have been demonstrated in
highly monitored laboratory environments, significant improvements in the
control of multi-cylinder engines are needed before these benefits can be
realized in production vehicles. This project will create estimation and control
methods for complex engine systems. The project will also provide opportunities
for underrepresented students to work in this critical area of transportation
energy research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The control of advanced combustion engines
is particularly challenging due to the low availability of sensor measurements
in the harsh engine environment, the highly nonlinear and internally coupled
behavior of the system, and significant cycle-to-cycle and cylinder-to-cylinder
variations. To meet these challenges, this research will study and model the
dynamics of a multi-cylinder advanced engine system. With an improved
understanding of the dynamics, the research team will then create nonlinear
estimation techniques that capture key variables for which measurements are not
available and which are primary drivers in combustion variations. This project
will culminate in the investigation of nonlinear model predictive control
techniques that can provide optimal performance to this complex system with its
constrained and coupled inputs. While reliable linear control techniques have
existed for decades, control strategies for highly nonlinear applications such
as advanced engines are not well established. Expansion of the current nonlinear
control strategies to such systems will provide valuable insight not only for
internal combustion engine applications but other complex system structures in
areas such as robotics and hybrid vehicles.