* 1553511
* CAREER: Coupling Spin, Light, and Charge for Quantum Information Processing and Storage in Diamond
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/01/2016,02/28/2021
* LEE BASSETT, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 02/28/2021
* USD 500,000.00

Nontechnical description:&lt;br/&gt;Atom-scale defects in semiconductors -long
the bane of conventional integrated electronic devices - could actually form the
basis for new generations of devices that harness quantum mechanical effects to
achieve transformational new functionalities. Select types of impurities, known
as defect spins, exhibit desirable quantum features in room-temperature devices
amenable to integration and miniaturization. These defects respond to electric,
magnetic, and optical fields, and they can be embedded in biocompatible
nanoparticles to serve as quantum probes with nanometer precision. The purpose
of this CAREER project is to explore new ways to control defect spins in
diamond, in order to realize practical technologies for quantum information
processing and quantum sensing. Specifically, this project aims to (i)
demonstrate a new approach to probing diamond spins with light that dramatically
boosts their functionality as quantum bits and quantum probes and (ii) isolate
and manipulate coupled impurity spins that could serve as quantum memory bits
with lifetimes measured in days at room temperature, improving over the state of
the art by many orders of magnitude. These elements will form critical
components for quantum computers, secure quantum communication links, and other
chip-scale quantum technologies. The project further incorporates broad
educational goals to promote the emerging domain of quantum engineering, which
breaks traditional boundaries between disciplines such as atomic and solid-state
physics, electrical engineering, materials science, chemistry, and biology. It
will support the construction and deployment of hands-on demonstrations of
quantum coherence, in which K-12 students and the general public can actually
see quantum physics with their naked eyes in room-temperature
devices.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Technical description:&lt;br/&gt;Defect spins
such as the nitrogen-vacancy (NV) in diamond have clear potential as building
blocks for future quantum technologies, but several key challenges impede the
development of practical devices. Existing approaches to couple diamond NV spins
with single photons require liquid helium temperatures (&lt;10 K), and they are
so far incompatible with integrated photonics. Furthermore, nanoscale sensing
capabilities are limited by the standard optical readout mechanism for NV spins
that requires averaging repeated measurements, which is woefully inefficient.
This project will address these challenges by leveraging the complex interplay
of charge, orbital, optical, and spin dynamics in diamond impurities. A new
technique to achieve all-optical, single-shot NV spin readout at room
temperature will facilitate applications including quantum-limited sensing of
local fields, probing quantum correlations between multiple spins, and sensing
stochastic signals (e.g., neuron activity) that cannot be repetitively acquired.
In parallel, investigations of spin and charge dynamics in coupled defect-donor
spin systems aim to establish an optically-addressable quantum memory with room-
temperature coherence times measured in days, which will enable secure
communication technologies including quantum money and quantum repeaters.