* 1553565
* CAREER: Quantifying the Adaptability of Building Structures, Envelopes, and Foundations
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2022
* Brandon Ross, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Gianluca Cusatis
* 08/31/2022
* USD 516,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Program grant supports
fundamental research on the design of urban buildings that can be readily
remodeled, upgraded, expanded or otherwise adapted. Buildings that cannot adapt
are at risk of becoming obsolete, and recent surveys of building demolitions in
select metropolitan areas have revealed that obsolescence, not structural
failure, is the leading reason for demolition. In response, this research will
study domestic and international building projects to identify the physical
aspects of buildings that make them likely to be demolished or adapted. Findings
from the research will be used to create tools that architects and engineers can
apply to design adaptable urban buildings. Such buildings will promote economic,
social, and environmental sustainability of cities as they address unprecedented
and accelerating trends in urbanization, climate change, and technological
advancement. University students and industry practitioners will participate in
all phases of the research and will be instructed on the theory and practice of
adaptable building design. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is need to transform
current prediction-based design practices, which are incomplete with regard to
changing demands and obsolescence. To that end a Learning Buildings Framework
(LBF) will be created by integrating graph theory, risk analysis concepts, the
Delphi Method, and adaptability theories from manufacturing engineering. The LBF
will be the first quantitative and rigorously tested method for evaluating
design-based building adaptability. Data for validation will be compiled through
partnerships with domestic and international engineering, architecture, and
construction companies, and will provide an orders-of-magnitude increase in the
quality and quantity of empirical data on building demolition and adaptation. By
providing a means of quantifying adaptability, the research will give traction
to the "design for adaptability" philosophy that has been widely discussed yet
narrowly implemented. Relationships established in the course of this research
will support development of an international research and education program on
adaptable urban infrastructure.