* 1553266
* CAREER: Modeling and Analyzing High-Dimensional Molecular Assembly: Quantifying the Impact of Allergen Structure
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2023
* Lydia Tapia, University of New Mexico
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 06/30/2023
* USD 551,499.00

This CAREER award will integrate research and education dedicated to
computational simulation and analysis of molecular interactions. Molecular
interactions and binding are critical to the construction of functional
superstructures. One such process, molecular assembly of antibodies and
allergens is a precursor to signaling allergic response. This project will study
how to efficiently capture and analyze the complex conformational space of
multi-molecular binding, with the goal to provide detailed information about the
structure and assembly of aggregates. The method, inspired by high-dimensional
robotic motion search, will incorporate and integrate hybrid and multi-
resolution models of molecular structures, motion planning simulation for
assembly pathways and kinetics, and understanding of the impact of allergen
structure and antigen assembly. This work will develop tools that are applicable
to a range of molecular assembly problems. Geometric insights provided by
modeling will enable the rapid testing of disruptions to assembly-induced
allergenic signaling, i.e., allergy treatments. Experimental collaborations will
allow direct utilization and verification of models and tools, and rapid
simulation may point the way to new experiments. The educational plan includes
development of a molecular assembly haptic interaction for demonstrating
molecular interaction and the design of cross-disciplinary educational
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER will integrate research and
education dedicated to the computational simulation and analysis of assembly
processes. This will be achieved through four research thrusts that lead to a
tunable-resolution, computationally-efficient, generic framework for the
structural modeling and analysis of molecular assembly based on techniques in
biophysics, planning, and stochastic processes. The focus of this award will be
simulation and analysis of antibody-allergen interaction. A tunable resolution
model is required that will enable low computational cost simulations achieved
through limited, yet realistic, molecular flexibility and hybrid-resolution
structures. The proposed research focuses on adaptations of polygon-based models
used in preliminary work, and autonomous targeted placements of kinematic
linkages to enable flexibility. To enable simulation and kinetics analysis of
assembly processes, new heuristics will be designed and integrated into data
structure shown capable of simulating motions in high-dimensional conformational
spaces. Geometric insights provided by modeling will enable the rapid testing of
disruptions to the allergenic cascade, thus leading to allergy treatments.
Experimental collaborations will allow direct utilization and verification of
the proposed work and may lead to the development of new experiments. In
addition, an educational haptic m0olecular assembly module will permit students
to perceive physically the atomic forces between two interacting molecules. This
is coupled with interdisciplinary research and new courses, with an emphasis on
the integration of underrepresented minorities in the research.