* 1553146
* CAREER: Adaptable, Intelligible, and Actionable Models: Increasing the Utility of Machine Learning in Clinical Care
* CSE,IIS
* 02/01/2016,01/31/2023
* Jenna Wiens, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 01/31/2023
* USD 502,839.00

In recent years, the availability of clinically relevant datasets has grown
enormously. A good understanding of how to organize, process, and transform
these data into actionable knowledge is crucial. This research aims to unlock
the potential of these data through the exploration of new fundamental research
directions and approaches in machine learning. Targeting patients identified as
high-risk by through computational data-driven models could reduce the burden of
disease in a cost-effective manner. While machine learning opportunities in
medicine continue to grow, there have been relatively few successes regarding
translation to practice. Clinicians still base the bulk of their daily decisions
on relatively small amounts of patient-specific data. The technical
contributions made here will enable the meaningful use of complex medical data.
Beyond the long-term societal impact, this work will provide valuable student
training through research projects related to the proposed objectives. Targeted
outreach activities that focus on the societal impacts of computational research
will attract a diverse set of graduate students to the field. In addition, this
work will help lay the foundation for a new project-based course focusing on
applications of machine learning in clinical care. As the field continues to
grow, such courses will become critical for equipping the next generation of
students with the required tools and insights. Finally, critical inter-
departmental collaborations between computer science and engineering and
medicine will grow as a result of this work, leading to the enrichment of both
fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary research objective of this proposal is
to increase the utility of machine learning in clinical care, through the
exploration of new fundamental research directions and approaches in ML. For
data-driven predictive models to become widely and safely adopted in clinical
care, there remain several key research challenges that the ML community must
address: poor adaptability to complex unexpected changes in patient populations
and clinical protocols, insufficient intelligibility of accurate but
uninterpretable models, and absence of actionability, with accuracy overcoming
actionability. The PI proposes the development of new transfer learning
techniques for learning robust and adaptable models in a wide range of
scenarios. Experiments and evaluations with large-scale clinical datasets will
offer insight into how these data change over time, and a better understanding
of when and how models should adapt. Clinical decision models and software are
seldom incorporated into practice because they are either black-box or the
output (while accurate) does not offer any insight into how to act. One way to
increase the intelligibility of models is to focus on building clinically
meaningful features. Another way to increase intelligibility is through
sparsity. The PI will investigate feature engineering/selection methods for
learning useful abstractions that automatically leverage expert knowledge and
for learning models based on actionable features. The PI will explore structured
regularization techniques to select modifiable features. To gain a better
understanding of how different actions affect patient risk, the PI will address
the limitations of causal inference in the context of high-dimensional
observational datasets. This research will yield methods for producing
clinically meaningful inputs, and methods for jointly optimizing sparsity and
actionability. The proposed work will yield novel techniques for extracting and
building adaptable, intelligible, and actionable models from patient data. An
emphasis on adaptable solutions will ensure that such techniques can be safely
adopted long-term. The study of techniques for dealing with the inherent
heterogeneity of the data (e.g., different patient populations from across
multiple sites) will not only increase the utility of the data but will lead to
more general advances in the field of transfer learning. A focus on
intelligibility - a quality that is often overlooked by the machine learning
community - promises to increase the utility of such models, since clinicians
are more likely to adopt a model they can check and understand. Prioritizing
actionable models will yield new strategies for causal analysis in high-
dimensional observational settings. This, in turn, will enable the generation of
new hypotheses regarding causal relationships in clinical medicine.