* 1553419
* CAREER: Re-thinking Electronic Design Automation Algorithms for Secure Outsourced Integrated Circuit Fabrication
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2023
* Siddharth Garg, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Jeremy Epstein
* 05/31/2023
* USD 497,384.00

Semiconductor chip fabrication is being increasingly outsourced to off-shore
foundries. Outsourced fabrication reduces cost by leveraging economies-of-scale
and ensures access to the most advanced manufacturing technology, but comes at
the expense of trust. How can the chip designer trust that the off-shore
(untrusted) foundry does not pirate its intellectual property (IP), or
maliciously modify the integrated circuit (IC) by inserting a hardware Trojan in
the chip? This project develops transformative new solutions for trustworthy
chip fabrication at off-shore foundries. Traditionally, chips have been designed
with metrics like performance and power consumption in mind; this project aims
to introduce and account for security as a new and equally important metric in
each step of the chip design flow. The outcome of the proposed research is a new
set of algorithms for designing chips that are not only high performance and low
power, but also secure against IP theft or hardware Trojan insertion by an
untrusted, off-shore foundry. The project ensures that defense agencies and
commercial chip design companies in the United States are able to access top-end
foundries anywhere in the world without having to compromise trust, thus
contributing to the US economy and enhancing national security. Furthermore, the
project trains a new generation of security professionals by introducing
students to fundamental security concepts at an early stage, and encourages
greater participation of under-represented minorities in this critical
area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research builds upon two promising (and related)
techniques that have been proposed in literature to enable secure outsourced IC
fabrication, logic encryption and split fabrication. Both approaches are
premised on the same basic idea, i.e., to provide the untrusted foundry (the
attacker) with only partial knowledge of the design so as to limit the
attacker?s ability to pirate or modify the design. However, existing approaches
for logic encryption and split fabrication largely retrofit these techniques as
extra steps into the conventional chip design flow; that is, they treat security
as an afterthought. This project aims to fundamentally re-think automated chip
design algorithms (referred to as EDA algorithms) so as to provide formal
security guarantees and to provide maximum security while optimizing for chip
performance and power. Specifically, the research develops new security-aware
algorithms for three critical steps in chip design: logic synthesis (the chip
'compiler'); (ii) logic partitioning (breaking up a circuit into smaller
components) and (iii) placement (determining the physical location of each
component on the chip surface). These are integrated into a new end-to-end
secure EDA flow for trustworthy off-shore chip fabrication.