* 1553408
* CAREER: Evolutionary Consequences of Climate Change: Testing key hypotheses in a montane mustard
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2023
* Jill Anderson, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 03/31/2023
* USD 1,112,474.00

This research tests whether plants will be able to survive on a warming planet
using a mustard plant species as a model. Climate change threatens the
persistence of many organisms worldwide. Vulnerable species must adapt or
migrate to avoid extinction. Species such as plants that are unable to move will
face particular challenges when coping with rapid changes in climate. In the
meadows of the wildflower capital of Colorado, natural communities of plants are
confronting hotter and drier conditions. Drummond's rockcress (Boechera stricta)
is native to the Rocky Mountains and can grow at elevations as low as 5,000 feet
and higher than 12,000 feet in sites as far north as Alaska and as far south as
Arizona. The climate varies dramatically across this broad range, and rockcress
plants have developed adaptations that enable them to perform best in their home
sites. But can they adapt to the current pace of climate change quickly enough
to survive? This research combines large-scale field studies with laboratory
experiments to ask whether natural populations have enough genetic diversity to
adapt in the short-term to rapidly changing conditions. Populations or species
with limited adaptive potential may have to be relocated to more hospitable
areas to conserve biodiversity. This project engages high school students,
future high school teachers, and undergraduate researchers in the scientific
method, increasing scientific literacy, and career
opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Field and laboratory studies use the
ecological model species B. stricta to examine: (1) how short-term fitness
consequences of climate change influence the migratory and adaptive potential of
populations; and (2) how plasticity, adaptation, and gene flow contribute to
longer-term population persistence. To achieve these aims, researchers will
evaluate how snow pack dynamics and temperatures interact to shape adaptation in
nature, analyze the direct and indirect effects of climate on fitness and
optimal phenotypes, assess clinal variation in local adaptation, and investigate
the stability of the genetic covariance matrix in multiple environments.