* 1553482
* CAREER: Stimulation on Demand: Responsive Deep Brain Stimulation for the Treatment of Tourette Syndrome
* ENG,CBET
* 03/15/2016,09/30/2022
* Aysegul Gunduz, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Grace Hwang
* 09/30/2022
* USD 508,863.00

The human brain consists of numerous networks distributed over space and
connected over time to orchestrate meaningful interaction with the external
world. Neurological disorders disrupt this interaction, as well as our control
over our bodies. Deep brain stimulation (DBS) has emerged in the nineties as a
neurosurgical intervention for the treatment of movement disorders. The
principle behind DBS is to implant electrodes into deep brain structures and to
inject electrical pulses to suppress pathological brain activity. The clinical
personnel that perform programming of stimulation settings however, base their
decisions on the observable patient responses rather than a scientific
understanding of the underlying pathology, or the physiological response to
stimulation. The PI's proposed effort includes studying the neural signatures of
movement disorders, and the aftereffects of stimulation to provide insight into
treatment options that can be tailored to the current clinical condition of the
patient. Responsive DBS is expected to provide improved symptom suppression,
reduce adverse effects of continuous stimulation, and prolong battery life of
DBS implants. This project will also provide students in the PI's lab with an
environment that promotes learning in the design of neural engineering systems,
data collection in clinical settings, and analysis of large-scale datasets. All
of these skills are prolific to the development of translational medicine
applications for those suffering from disabilities, and to the education of the
next generation of biomedical engineers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall
research goal of this project is to study the electrophysiological underpinnings
of neurological disorders using next generation DBS devices capable of recording
brain signals in humans, in order to responsively deliver stimulation to the
current pathological state of the brain. To this end, the PI is investigating
the neurophysiology of Tourette syndrome, which affects an estimated 3 to 9
school-age children in 1000, and to develop responsive DBS systems for its
improved and targeted treatment in humans. Online classifieres will be built to
detect involuntary tics that characterize Tourette syndrome from neural activity
in the centromedian nucleus of the thalamus and the motor cortex. The input-
output relationship between DBS parameters and neural activity will be studied
to build inverse adaptive controllers that will yield optimal stimulation
parameters. The knowledge gained from this project and the established platform
can be extended to other movement disorders. The overall objective of the
educational plan is to increase interest and engagement in STEM fields and to
proliferate the study of engineering through a series of focused educational
activities at the K-12, undergraduate, and graduate education
levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will be co-funded by the Activation and
Modulation Programs in the Neural Systems cluster of MCB and, therefore, is
eligible for BioMaps co-funding.