* 1553993
* CAREER: CDS&amp;E: Nonlocal and Periodic Density Embedding
* MPS,CHE
* 12/01/2016,11/30/2022
* Michele Pavanello, Rutgers University Newark
* Continuing Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 11/30/2022
* USD 648,875.00

Michele Pavanello of Rutgers University, Newark is supported by an award from
the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program to develop a novel
computational chemistry methods and software. The goal of modern theoretical
chemistry is to be able to predict properties of materials and molecular
reactivity ahead of costly experiments. This has led to a reformulation of
quantum mechanics called Density Functional Theory or DFT. Although current
implementations of DFT find much broader applicability than any other quantum
chemistry method, their application to realistically sized model systems is
still problematic. This project tackles these problems head-on and explores an
alternative to DFT called subsystem DFT. Subsystem DFT is a reformulation of DFT
potentially capable of approaching much larger system sizes with no appreciable
loss of accuracy of the simulations. There are three main goals of this project:
1) develop new subsystem DFT computer software, 2) apply the software to
fundamental systems such as water, photovoltaic cells, and catalysis systems, 3)
train students from underrepresented backgrounds in the fields of theoretical
chemistry and computer coding. The impacts are to advance the accuracy and
efficiency of theoretical chemistry methods and to use the new methods to better
understand fundamental real-world systems while training the future workforce.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project centers on partitioning the electron density
into subsystem contributions leading to a subsystem formulation of DFT. This
results in a new computational framework based on a plane waves basis set
capable of modeling semiconductors, conductors and bulk systems. Additional
project activities include developing functionals of the kinetic energy and the
exchange-correlation energy aimed at making subsystem DFT predictive and
quantitative beyond semilocal and hybrid Kohn-Sham DFT. Specifically, the
scientific impacts are computational / algorithmic advances with the goal of
outputting a massively parallel code capable of exploiting the locality of
electronic structures with an unprecedented efficiency and for a wide class of
model systems.