* 1553649
* CAREER: Spatiotemporal Organization of Competing Bacterial Communities
* BIO,MCB
* 01/15/2016,12/31/2022
* Ting Lu, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Anthony Garza
* 12/31/2022
* USD 713,120.00

Bacteria can form diverse community structures, called biofilms that include
special characteristics such as spiral swirls on the surface of laboratory agar
as well as in natural environments. Understanding how these microbial structures
form is of fundamental importance, as bacteria predominantly function in the
form of communities to impact the environment, agriculture, and human health.
Understanding the design principles underlying the multi-scale organization of
communities due to competition between members of the community is important,
especially as competition is one of the major driving forces that influence how
microbial communities organize themselves within a biofilm. An integrated
understanding of bacterial competition and its roles in controlling spatial
community structure will advance our basic knowledge about microbial ecology and
facilitate new developments in the area of synthetic microbial biology. The
research will also provide educational and training opportunities for girls in
regional high schools and undergraduate institutions, particularly those
underrepresented; simultaneously, it will engage larger research communities and
the general public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Bacterial competition is a
major driving force that directs the emergence of diverse spatial community
structures. Despite significant advances over decades of research, our
understanding and predictive capability for the organization of competing
communities remains limited, largely due to the multiscale coupling of the
underlying molecular, cellular and ecological events. It is important to
determine how the key molecular traits of competition, including its scale,
variability and cost, determine the spatiotemporal structures of communities. To
achieve this goal, synthetic E. coli consortia will be used as model systems for
quantitative exploration; in parallel, a biophysical modeling platform for
systematic survey and analysis will be developed. This project will yield a
systems-level understanding of bacterial competition and community organization,
thus providing critical implications for understanding microbial ecology and
engineering artificial communities. More broadly, because of the rich nonlinear
dynamics and emergent properties associated with bacterial communities, the
planned work will further advance the fundamental knowledge of complex systems
in general.