* 1553334
* CAREER: Leveraging a fast-evolving kinase family to gain fundamental understanding of kinase evolution
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/2016,02/28/2023
* Michael Reese, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Cyr
* 02/28/2023
* USD 1,198,933.00

Kinases are critical components of cells that work by modifying proteins. This
process is finely tuned and regulated, as changes in kinase activity can be
lethal or lead to a variety of diseases. This means that signaling molecules
like them tend to evolve very slowly, because they must maintain both the
ability to perform the chemistry as well as identify the right target. For this
reason, it has been difficult to study kinases and their signaling networks. The
research goals of this project are based on developing a large family of fast-
evolving kinases from a parasite as an experimental system that can be compared
to more typical animal model systems. This will allow us to better define the
biochemical rules that govern the functional elements of kinases. This project's
educational goals will (1) develop a new course to use bioinformatics and
evolutionary concepts to teach undergraduates scientific critical thinking
skills and (2) adapt these course materials to train high school teachers from
local schools that enroll students who traditionally are underrepresented in
science in engineering. The goal of introducing high school students to inquiry-
based science The educational goals will empower students, both undergraduate
and high school, to use bioinformatic tools to ask and quickly answer questions
of their own devising. This will train them in the critical thinking that is the
foundation of scientific inquiry. Such critical thinking skills are a
fundamental part of modern education, and will further empower the students as
they grow as citizens&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As opposed to normal intracellular
signaling kinases, effector kinases of the coccidian parasites such Toxoplasma
gondii evolve at rates that dwarf normal enzymes. These coccidian kinases evolve
quickly, but act on well-studied vertebrate signaling networks. We will harness
this system to discover new biochemistry and the forces that govern its
evolution. This research will (1) determine the biochemical and structural
mechanism by which a family of coccidian kinases is able to retain its catalytic
activity in spite of missing a Gly-loop, which is a motif that has been presumed
to be absolutely required for kinase activity, (2) use the reconstruction of
ancestral gene sequences to define the residues that enable active kinases that
require ATP for stability to evolve into catalytically inactive pseudokinases
that are stable without nucleotide, and (3) determine how sets of orthologous
coccidian kinases have changed their specificity to target completely different
vertebrate pathways.