* 1553548
* CAREER: Automated Analysis of Security Hyperproperties
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2023
* Rohit Chadha, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 06/30/2023
* USD 436,035.00

Computer programs and cryptographic protocols are increasingly being used to
access confidential and private information on the Internet. Due to their
complex nature, they often have subtle errors that can be exploited by malicious
entities. As security flaws can have serious consequences, it is important to
ensure that computer programs and cryptographic protocols achieve their security
objectives. As such systems have a large (potentially infinite) number of states
due to presence of malicious adversaries and the concurrent nature of Internet,
`pen and paper' reasoning about their correctness is challenging. In addition to
the state explosion, reasoning about correctness is also challenging within the
context of security because standard security objectives such as confidentiality
and privacy turn out to be hyperproperties. The challenge lies in the fact that
when reasoning about hyperproperties, one has to reason about correctness of the
set of all executions of a system as a whole instead of correctness of
individual executions. Therefore, the development of techniques to automate this
reasoning is of vital importance, and is the research focus of this project.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Formally, hyperproperties generalize properties that are
used to express safety and liveness guarantees in classical automated
verification. A property is a set of allowable executions. A system violates a
property if it exhibits an execution that is not allowed. In contrast, security
objectives such as confidentiality, non-interference, privacy, and anonymity are
hyperproperties. A hyperproperty is a collection of allowable sets of
executions. A system violates a hyperproperty if the set of its executions is
not in the collection specified by the hyperproperty. Current state-of-the art
automated tools for verifying security guarantees do not scale very well as they
are often aimed at certain security guarantees and often make restrictive
assumptions on the systems. This project aims to develop new scalable state-of-
the-art techniques in automated verification of hyperproperties by undertaking
primarily three research tasks. First, we will develop and implement new
symbolic algorithms for verifying finite-state systems against an expressive set
of hyperproperties. The second task shall be devoted to scaling the analysis by
a novel combination of automated analysis and automated counterexample
generation designed specifically for hyperproperties. Finally, we shall
establish theoretical results that shall reduce the problem of verifying
cryptographic protocols in the presence of unbounded message sizes and nonces to
the finite case. The research aims of the proposal will be paired with
curriculum development at the University of Missouri where a new concentration
in security will be introduced in the undergraduate curriculum that will
integrate security design with software development. The results of this project
will be integrated in the courses, and the project will support both
undergraduate and graduate student research.