* 1553137
* CAREER: Molecular Understanding and Catalyst Design for the Direct Synthesis of H2O2
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2016,02/28/2022
* David Flaherty, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 02/28/2022
* USD 648,354.00

Abstract (Flaherty; 1553137)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Currently millions of tons of
hazardous chlorinated compounds are used for selective oxidation and bleaching
reactions in the manufacture of pulp, paper, and commodity chemicals each year.
Hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) represents a "green" alternative to chlorinated
compounds, but it is not widely used because the current production method is
economically viable only at very large scales. The proposed study will
investigate an alternative catalytic approach - direct synthesis of H2O2 from
hydrogen (H2) and oxygen (O2) gases - that would enable H2O2 production on-site
for use in smaller, more common processing facilities. The proposed research is
integrated with educational programs focusing on young women with emphasis on
building research and research-mentoring skills.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research will combine catalytic kinetic and in situ spectroscopic measurements
in a systematic investigation to determine: 1) the mechanism for direct
synthesis of H2O2, 2) the roles of surfaces, solvents, and liquid-phase
intermediates in forming reactive intermediates, and 3) the combined effects of
catalyst composition and solvent properties on reaction rates and selectivities.
The initial work will focus on palladium (Pd) and palladium-gold (PdAu) clusters
as the active catalytic materials, but learning derived from those materials
will be used to generate guiding principles and activity descriptors to identify
inexpensive alternatives to PdAu catalysts. To achieve these goals, a
combination of kinetic and (ex situ and in situ) infrared spectroscopic
techniques will be employed to probe the catalytic chemistry at the liquid-solid
interfaces of supported metal clusters. This investigation will involve design
parameters such as: size and composition of the metal clusters, the role of
electrophilic adsorbates, and solvent properties such as pH and polarity.
Although these studies specifically target the direct synthesis of H2O2, the
work will develop tools and expertise needed for future investigations of a
broad range of oxidative and reductive chemistries at liquid-solid interfaces.