* 1553030
* CAREER: Initiation of Cell Size Patterning in Arabidopsis
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2016,02/29/2024
* Adrienne Roeder, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Kimberly Gallagher
* 02/29/2024
* USD 1,024,853.00

With a rapidly growing population and decreasing farmland, the world will need
to dramatically increase crop yields. The cells in the edible parts of corn,
beans, rice, wheat, and peas undergo a specialized process called
endoreduplication where the cells replicate their DNA many times. Although
individual cells undergo different amounts of endoreduplication, the proportion
of cells remains constant from plant to plant. When geneticists try to increase
endoreduplication, they find that the response of seemingly identical cells is
somewhat random: some cells respond strongly, some moderately, and some not at
all. This observation raises one of the biggest questions in developmental
biology: how do identical cells make different decisions? The proposed research
will investigate the counterintuitive hypothesis that individual plant cells
make these decisions about how much to endoreduplicate utilizing small, random
molecular differences. This hypothesis is surprising: biologists would normally
expect randomness to be suppressed, since development is highly reproducible,
always creating the same proportion of endoreduplicated cells. Instead,
randomness may in fact be required to produce this regular portion of
endoreduplicated cells. Testing this hypothesis will require advanced use of
computers to examine individual cells over time. University students and middle
school girls will simultaneously be involved in this analysis as well as being
trained in computational skills.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Endoreduplicating cells of
crop plants are buried deep within the seed coat where they are experimentally
inaccessible. Endoreduplication will thus be studied in Arabidopsis thaliana
sepals, whose epidermal cells are accessible for live imaging as they
endoreduplicate. The transcription factor Arabidopsis thaliana MERISTEM LAYER1
(ATML1) drives sepal endoreduplication, and may cause it to occur randomly.
Since ATML1 is expressed in all epidermal cells, it is unclear how ATML1 causes
only a few cells to endoreduplicate. Preliminary data show that ATML1 triggers
endoreduplication in a dosage-dependent manner: high ATML1 makes all epidermal
cells endoreduplicate, low ATML1 prevents any endoreduplication, and individual
sepal cells have varying levels of ATML1. The hypothesis tested here is that
randomly fluctuating ATML1 causes different levels of endoreduplication in
different cells; a few cells exceed ATML1's threshold, triggering
endoreduplication, while other cells remain below the threshold and do not
endoreduplicate. In Aim 1, we will determine whether ATML1 fluctuations initiate
endoreduplication. The associated education goal will be to work with
undergraduate students to analyze images generated in this aim. For Aim 2, we
will determine whether ATML1 feedback loops drive endoreduplication by
amplifying differences in ATML1 expression and, in an associated educational
aim, students will write and publish a computational modeling glossary to better
understand the newly generated models. Finally, in Aim 3 we will determine the
molecular mechanism through which ATML1 induces endoreduplication in a dosage-
dependent manner. We will also develop an outreach to middle school students for
the analysis of images from Aim 3 in a hands-on, web-based image analysis
workshop.