* 1553355
* CAREER: Understanding novel characteristics of defects in concentrated solid solutions from first principles calculations
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2022
* Maryam Ghazisaeidi, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Madison
* 05/31/2022
* USD 499,687.00

Nontechnical Summary:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mechanical properties, such as
strength and fracture resistance, of metal alloys are governed by crystal
defects-e.g dislocations, grain boundaries, and solutes. Designing new metal
alloys, with enhanced properties, requires detailed knowledge of the properties
of these defects. This project provides a new understanding of the structural
defects and plasticity in high entropy alloys, a new class of multicomponent
alloys with desirable and nonconventional properties. The research program
stimulates the study of complex multi-component alloy compositions that have
never been considered before, creating a great potential for discovery of new
materials to address the ever-increasing technological needs of the twenty-first
century such as energy and efficient transportation. In addition, novel
properties of high entropy alloys encourages new ways of viewing fundamental
aspects of physical metallurgy, yielding new insights that are applicable to a
wide range of metallic alloys. The integrated research and educational program
seeks to "advance discovery and understanding while promoting teaching,
training, and learning" to train the next generation of diverse and globally
competitive research scientists and engineers. The educational component,
drawing from the research theme, enhances teaching/learning of difficult
materials science concepts using simulations. In addition, the outreach
activities establishes a connection between the PI and Columbus School for Girls
(CSG), a local all-girls K through 12 school in Columbus, Ohio, to encourage and
mentor young women towards career paths in science and engineering
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER
project aims to understand the fundamental deformation mechanisms responsible
for the remarkable mechanical properties of high entropy alloys (HEAs), a class
of multicomponent metallic alloys in (near) equal atomic percent that,
strikingly, crystalize as single-phase solid solutions. The research goal of
this proposal is to test the hypothesis that the atomic-scale deformation
mechanisms in single-phase, concentrated multi-element alloys (CMAs) "of which
the single phase HEAs are an interesting subset" are fundamentally different
from those in dilute alloys. The specific objectives are: (1) Computing
dislocation and stacking fault structures and energies in CMAs with density
functional theory (DFT). (2) Developing new computational tools that enable
dislocation modeling in CMAs with DFT. (3) Generating a new solid solution
strengthening model applicable to CMAs. The outcomes of this proposal are not
restricted to specific CMAs and are applicable to the broad category of
concentrated solid solutions, providing new ways of thinking about fundamental
aspects of physical metallurgy and yielding new insights that are applicable to
a wide range of metallic alloys with new compositions for tailored
properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The education and outreach goals of this
proposal are (i) to enhance teaching/learning of materials science via
simulation-based visualizations and (ii) to increase the representation of women
and minorities in science and engineering careers. These goals are achieved via
(1) creating and disseminating short videos on atomic-scale deformation
mechanisms, as course enrichment modules at various levels and (2) providing
mentorship, research opportunities and hands-on activities for K-12 students in
Columbus School for Girls-- a local all-girls K through 12 school.