* 1553338
* CAREER: Functional Analysis of microRNAs in Early Development
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/2016,01/31/2023
* Jia Song, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* Anna Allen
* 01/31/2023
* USD 560,944.00

To understand how a newly fertilized egg becomes a multicellular organism, it is
critical to examine how cells within the early embryo integrate various signals
to drive development. This research focuses on understanding how cells adopt a
specific cell fate as they traverse through the embryo. The cells within the
early embryo turn on specific genes, in part, in response to chemical cues they
receive from their neighboring cells. This project will discover how genes are
controlled by a group of regulatory RNAs. These regulatory RNAs control the
level of gene expressions of many genes in several cell types to ensure proper
development. Thus, this work contributes to the fundamental understanding of
animal development. The project includes education activities that are
synergistic to the proposed research project. The first educational activity
involves an outreach program at the Delaware Children's Museum where the PI and
her students develop a mobile microscope for young children to conduct hands-on,
exploratory activities. The second educational activity is to enhance the
knowledge base of future early childhood teachers by instilling confidence in
science teaching, and by supporting science curriculum development. Inexpensive
smartphone microscope platforms are placed in the hands of student teachers to
foster future use in their own classrooms. This project is integrated into
research training of undergraduate and graduate students and courses taught at
the University of Delaware. The proposed educational activities incorporate the
PI's expertise in development biology, microscopy, and ongoing research
collaborations.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are highly conserved
regulatory RNA molecules that control a myriad of biological processes,
including development. In early development, cell specification and pattern
formation are controlled by cross-regulation of gene regulatory networks (GRN)
and signaling pathways. Signaling morphogen gradients are critical regulators
that need to be tightly controlled in order to ensure that the precise
organization of the embryo is achieved. This project addresses the overarching
hypothesis that miRNAs perform this critical regulatory function. Its goal is to
understand how miRNAs integrate GRNs and signaling pathways to drive
development. To accomplish this goal, this study uses the sea urchin to study
complex developmental processes that are shared by a wide range of organisms.
The sea urchin has an exceptionally well-studied GRN and most of its miRNA
families consist of a single species, which makes it amenable to unique,
powerful functional analysis. To determine the mechanisms by which miRNAs
control cell fate specification and directed cell movement during early
embryogenesis, the PI will determine regulatory mechanisms of a highly conserved
microRNA, miR-31, in the skeletogenic primary mesenchyme cell (PMC) lineage.
This project examines how miR-31 coordinately suppresses PMC GRN components and
cross-regulates signaling pathways to drive PMC development, using proteomic,
transcriptomic, imaging, embryo transplantation, and molecular approaches.
Overall, this study will advance the field of miRNA research and contribute to
the fundamental understanding of early developmental processes.