* 1553494
* CAREER: Cyber Physical Solution for High Penetration Renewables in Smart Grid
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2022
* Arif Sarwat, Florida International University
* Continuing Grant
* Ralph Wachter
* 04/30/2022
* USD 452,977.00

Effective integration of large amounts of renewable energy into the grid is of
utmost importance for sustainable future and greener smart cities. Due to the
unpredictable variations in weather, over 80% of the available renewable energy
from solar and wind sources cannot be harnessed effectively. Large scale and
cost-effective integration of photovoltaic energy into the smart grid is
challenging due to: (a) unpredictability and intermittency of weather pattern,
(b) fast morning ramp up and afternoon ramp down of solar generation that
triggers instabilities in the grid, (c) unavailability of solar generation at
sun down requiring the need for locational energy storage facilities, and (d)
lack of technologies for efficient and intelligent on-demand sharing of solar
generation with conventional power generation in the grid. Current technologies
of solar integration are based on unreliable weather prediction and ineffective
load sharing that make the overall grid performance unreliable and inefficient,
thus necessitating the need for a broader outlook of the whole picture.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research brings a holistic vision of the future smart
grid as a synergistic integration of its various components with novel
computational tools for forecasting and intelligent load sharing with
distributed energy storage. The study collects real-time Photovoltaic (PV) data
from the plant, conducts high-end modeling, analysis and visualization on
various datasets to understand, predict and mitigate the system instabilities
and fluctuations triggered by PV intermittencies. This solution can be used in
the planning process at the command and control centers for electric
utilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The developed approach, which is an adaptive,
resilient, efficient and effective integration of renewables, will be applicable
broadly in the energy sector thereby reducing carbon footprint and making the
system stable under expected high penetration of renewable sources and
unanticipated intermittencies. This solution fills the gap that will help our
nation steer closer to the ultimate goal of a sustainable future involving a
smart clean power grid. This project will pursue several outreach activities to
engage with students from underrepresented groups.