* 1553715
* CAREER: Ecosystem-driven Accelerations and Oscillations in the Coupled Earth System
* GEO,AGS
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2022
* Abigail Swann, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Varavut Limpasuvan
* 03/31/2022
* USD 685,218.00

The current unprecedented rate and scale of climate change has raised concern
about the effects of climate on the biosphere and the onset of a "6th mass
extinction" of life on Earth. Biologists have widely documented how plants are
influenced by their local environment. Recent findings support the idea that the
influence also flows in reverse: where plants grow and how they function can
directly modify both local and global scale climate. Yet beyond a few specific
examples, researchers have not explored the multiple roles plants play in the
climate system. Swann's work to date has demonstrated that changes in where
plants grow in the Arctic, mid-latitudes, and tropics can alter local climate
and influence atmospheric circulation at global scales, causing changes in
patterns of where rains with consequences for plants that live in locations far
from the original change. In other words, there can be unanticipated, globally
reaching effects from changes in where ecosystems are located and how they
respond to changes in their local environment. However, the question remains,
could the response of ecosystems alter climate enough to accelerate the Earth
system's response to change or create oscillations? This research will focus on
critical unanswered questions about when, where, how, and over what timescale
ecosystems change the behavior of Earth in response to big changes including
past and future climate change. Swann will address these questions using a
numerical simulation models that range in complexity from primarily conceptual
models to full global climate models that include dynamical interactions in
ecosystems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scientific community currently lacks an
understanding of where and how ecosystems modify the climate system. Knowing the
role that ecosystems play in modifying how the Earth functions is crucial for
predicting how climate will change under conditions that are different from
today. Additionally, this research will help to identify the most impactful
aspects of ecosystem dynamics and the most sensitive regions on Earth therefore
guiding future research into aspects of the Earth system responsible for
producing the greatest uncertainty. This project will integrate the scientific
themes of Swann's research into teaching and outreach at all levels (K12,
undergraduate, and graduate) through formal and informal education providing a
strong foundation for career-long integration of research and teaching. The
proposal will directly support the development of project-oriented approach in
an out-of-school program for middle school girls (still underrepresented
minorities in STEM) at the Burke Museum. The joint research and educational
efforts aim to engage and inspire students of all ages in better understanding
of the interaction between components of the Earth system as well as a greater
appreciation for the scientific process itself.