* 1553945
* CAREER: Multiscale Study of the Structure and Dynamics of Nanoparticle-Protein Coronae
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2016,09/30/2022
* Feng Ding, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 09/30/2022
* USD 515,569.00

Proposal: 1553945&lt;br/&gt;PI: Ding, Feng &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the rapid
development of nanotechnology, engineered nanoparticles (NPs) may be released to
the environmental and biological systems either purposely or accidentally. With
many proteins enriched in the environmental and biological media as the
functional building blocks, they can be absorbed onto the NP surface, forming
the so-called NP-protein corona. It is the protein coronae rather than the
original NPs that are "seen" by cells and tissues and subsequently determine the
biological and/or pathological functions of these released NPs. The objective of
this proposal is to develop and apply state-of-the-art computer simulation
methods to understand the fundamental aspects of the corona formation and to
determine the physical and chemical properties of NPs that dictate the protein
absorption. The obtained knowledge will help guide the design of novel NPs that
promotes the intended biological functions and prevents the unintended
pathological responses, enabling the "safe-by-design" to the broad scientific
and engineering community for modeling and predicting corona formation and rapid
risk assessment of NP exposures. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this CAREER proposal,
the PI proposes to apply the multiscale discrete molecular dynamics (DMD)
methodology to characterize the structure and dynamics of NP-protein corona and
to identify the physicochemical determinants of the NP-protein interactions. The
objective of this research will be accomplished by pursuing the following
specific aims: 1) Develop NP models and their interactions with biomolecules for
DMD simulations; 2) Uncover the physicochemical determinants of NP-protein
binding; 3) Characterize the structure and dynamics of protein aggregation in
the corona; and 4) Extend the research and education in classroom and laboratory
more broadly to other education and scientific research community. The developed
and validated computational methodology will be shared with the broad scientific
research communities. The proposed research projects will uncover the structural
and dynamic properties of NP-protein corona at the molecular and atomic level
and determine the physicochemical determinants of the molecular complex
formation. The obtained results from the proposed mechanistic studies will be
pivotal in designing more efficient and safe NPs with optimal properties to
promote intended biological functions and minimize the pathological implications
of NP exposure. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts of this proposal include
the sustainable development of nanotechnology and improves applications of
nanomedicine. Funding of this research will also support students training at
the interfaces of physics, material science, biology, and environmental science
and engineering, update physics curriculum to reflect the current trend in
science, and increase the diversity of physics education and research. The
proposed research will develop and validate critical predictive tools to
effectively and efficiently model the nano-bio interface, which can be used for
engineering NPs with novel biological functions as well as for NP risk
assessment. In addition, easy accessibility and enhanced usability of the
developed tools will benefit the broad science and engineering community working
in the field.