* 1553564
* CAREER:Two Higgs are Better than One: Investigating Electroweak Symmetry Breaking at the LHC and Beyond with Real-Time Charged Particle Reconstruction
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2016,12/31/2022
* Lauren Tompkins, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* James Shank
* 12/31/2022
* USD 825,000.00

This award supports a Career Award for the PI, a new assistant professor at
Stanford U, to work on the ATLAS experiment at the Large Hadron Collider (LHC)
at CERN, a particle physics laboratory in Geneva, Switzerland. The LHC machine
and ATLAS, a large particle detector facility, were built as basic science tools
using funds from NSF and other agencies around the world. One of the primary
objectives of the LHC at the time of construction was to find the Higgs Boson -
the last particle in the historically successful "Standard Model" (SM) that
accounts for so much of the existence of and forces between known particles
forming the visible matter in the universe. The search for the Higgs Boson was
successful, so the discovery of the particles that lie within the realm of
particle physics physics beyond the SM is now the goal. This award is for work
that could lead to such a discovery by filtering out events with two Higgs
Bosons in them.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Principal Investigator Lauren Tompkins is
starting a new experimental high energy physics group at Stanford University
which will pursue a number of software algorithms that, working with a new real
time hardware track reconstruction module (the FTK), will lead to a greatly
enriched sample of Higgs pair candidates. She will take primary roles within the
collaboration to carry this out. The group will support a vigorous and carefully
planned broader impact program through courses for Stanford students and also
outreach to local schools. One of the principal aims is to increase enrollment
in physics. She will also mentor under-privileged students from Cal State
institutions during summer break. These students will obtain hands-on experience
with both hardware and software.