* 1553250
* CAREER: Design, Construction, and Validation of Modular Chassis Cells for Efficient Combinatorial Biosynthesis of Chemicals
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/2016,01/31/2021
* Cong Trinh, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Continuing Grant
* Bianca Garner
* 01/31/2021
* USD 516,835.00

The envisioned rapid development of novel, biology-derived platforms for the
production of industrial chemicals from renewable feedstocks requires the
development of innovative new tools. The overarching goal of this project is to
incorporate modular molecular design principles into microbial manufacturing
platforms to enable the highly efficient synthesis of targeted chemicals from
easily interchangeable genetic modules. The success of the project will advance
frontiers of synthetic biology and metabolic engineering, advance
biomanufacturing, train a large cohort of undergraduate and graduate students as
innovators and leaders as well as expose K-12 students to STEM disciplines
through hands-on experiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will address
three fundamental questions: What is a modular cell? How can microbial
manufacturing platforms be constructed from a minimal cell using exchangeable
modules for the highly efficient combinatorial biosynthesis of novel chemicals?
What classes of modules are particularly suitable to couple with the proposed
modular cell? First, MOCELL computational tools will be developed to aid the
design and implementation of several microbial biosynthetic platforms. Second,
these MODCELL platforms will be tested after introduction of exchangeable
modules that encode enzymes for specific fermentative pathways. Third, The
MODCELL design will be experimentally validated for efficient combinatorial
biosynthesis of targeted esters.