* 1553751
* CAREER: The Geometry of Polynomials in Algorithms and Combinatorics
* CSE,CCF
* 02/01/2016,01/31/2021
* Nikhil Srivastava, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 01/31/2021
* USD 418,836.00

Graphs and matrices are central objects in computer science. Two of the most
successful paradigms for manipulating and optimizing over them are spectral
methods, which study eigenvalues and eigenvectors, and semidefinite programming,
which allows efficient optimization over certain convex sets defined by putting
constraints on these eigenvalues. The goal of this proposal is to investigate a
new technique for controlling eigenvalues which relies on tools from an area
known as the geometry of polynomials. This alternate perspective was shown to be
very powerful in recent work of the PI on Ramanujan expander graphs and the
Kadison-Singer problem, and the PI believes that a more complete understanding
of it will be fruitful both for theoretical computer science and for
mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At a technical level, the PI will focus on two
points of contact between the geometry of polynomials and computer science: (A)
The method of interlacing families of polynomials, a new analogue of the
probabilistic method recently introduced by the PI and collaborators, based on
studying random polynomials with real roots. (B) Hyperbolic programming, a
generalization of semidefinite programming which is intimately related to the
polynomials appearing in (A).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More specifically, the
proposal has the following goals: (i) Develop a more systematic and general
understanding of (A) and use this to attack central linear-algebraic and
combinatorial problems in TCS and applied math. (ii) Find efficient algorithms
for producing the useful objects guaranteed to exist by (A), which currently
require exponential time. (iii) Explore the power of (B) as an algorithmic
primitive in combinatorial optimization, in particular as an approach to graph
partitioning problems, and understand whether it is actually more powerful than
semidefinite programming.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The problems outlined in the
proposal have the potential to impact various fields, such as signal processing,
quantum computing, pseudorandomness, complexity theory, and operator theory. The
subject is accessible to students of from diverse backgrounds across math and
computer science, so this project uses to integrate research and education for
both graduate and undergraduate students working between these fields.