* 1553667
* CAREER: Physiological responses of neural stem cells to low-level silver nanoparticles.
* ENG,CBET
* 03/15/2016,09/30/2022
* Nadja Spitzer, Marshall University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 09/30/2022
* USD 540,528.00

Proposal: 1553667 -&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI: Spitzer, Nadia
Ph.D.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Consumers today are in contact with hundreds of
products that boast antimicrobial properties because they contain manufactured
silver nanoparticles. These products include wound dressings, food containers,
toys, toothbrushes, clothing, cosmetics, and household appliances. The silver
nanoparticles may be shed from these products resulting in exposure. The
antibacterial properties of silver have been recognized since before modern
medicine; however, the specific shape and size of silver nanoparticles make them
act differently than larger forms of silver. Specifically, they may cross
barriers that other forms of silver cannot, following repeated exposures. This
project examines the responses of brain cells to low-levels of silver
nanoparticles such as those that might result from daily exposure. The PI use a
special type of brain cell, adult neural cells. The results of this research
will improve our understanding of the impact of widespread incorporation of
silver nanoparticles in consumer products. It will also contribute to regulatory
policies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work will investigate the cellular
and molecular effects of chronic low-level exposures to silver nanoparticles
(AgNPs) on neural physiology and development. It utilizes adult neural cells as
a model to test the effects of low levels of AgNPs on neural cell physiology in
identified cells in vitro and in vivo. In vitro studies&amp;#8232;will identify
the intracellular signaling pathways targeted by AgNP exposure to mediate
deficits&amp;#8232;in cytoskeletal structure and function. This will be assessed
by combining pharmacology with immunocytochemistry, immunoblot, and time-lapse
microscopy of differentiating adult neural cells in culture. The passive and
active membrane properties of living cells exposed to low-level AgNPs will be
measured by patch clamp electrophysiology to quantify effects on cell physiology
during differentiation. Building on in vitro findings, neurogenesis in the brain
after chronic, sub-lethal oral AgNP exposure will be investigated using rats.
This work represents a critical step towards understanding the cellular targets
of sub-lethal AgNPs on neural cells with respect to the physiological mechanisms
operating in individual cells. The proposed work includes a significant public
education effort that involves undergraduate students in bringing science to
elementary schools throughout rural West Virginia. Children will learn
scientific concepts in fun interactive ways and meet accessible role models for
choosing careers in science or technology.