* 1553022
* CAREER: Electron correlation and optical spectra with a nonlocal energy-optimized (NEO) kernel
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2021
* Adrienn Ruzsinszky, Temple University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 05/31/2021
* USD 540,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY This CAREER award supports theoretical and computational
research and education aimed to improve theoretical and computational methods
for computing properties of molecules and materials.

The PI aims to develop a computationally efficient and usefully accurate
correction to present computational methods of calculating the properties of
materials starting from constituent atoms based on the density-functional-
theory. The approach appeals to an approximation within another theoretical
formulation of the quantum mechanical description of many interacting particles
that would be computationally very expensive to evaluate. The approximation is
known as the random phase approximation. The PI's method should have a higher
accuracy and be computationally inexpensive compared to many currently existing
methods. It should also enable higher accuracy calculations of systems in which
the configuration of electrons leads to a higher energy than the lowest or
ground state energy of the system. The operation of a solar cell provides
examples which the research will explore. The PI will test her method through
calculations of materials properties and comparisons with results from other
theoretical and computational methods, and experiments. . This award supports an
educational activity focused on graduate, undergraduate and high-school
students. A thrust of this activity is linked to the TUTeach program which
trains high-school teachers. The students in this program are physics majors,
who will work as learning assistants for the PI and learn about the PI's
research. These students are also outreach ambassadors in the high schools.
TUTeach students will work with the PI to deliver computational physics lectures
to high-school students. The PI will also mentor students within the local
provost's research-experiences-for-undergraduates program. Another significant
component of the PI's education program is to develop a new active-learning-
based Computational Materials Physics course.

TECHNICAL SUMMARY This CAREER award supports theoretical and computational
research and education to develop more accurate density functional theory-based
calculations of ground-state energies and excited state properties of materials.
The PI has two goals through this project: (1) To develop a computationally
efficient correction to the ground-state correlation energy of the random phase
approximation. Without a correction, the random phase approximation would not be
accurate enough to become a benchmark in chemistry and materials science. Some
of the currently existing corrections are accurate, but the price is a high
computational cost. (2) To make the computationally efficient time-dependent
density functional theory competitive in accuracy with more complex quantum
many-body techniques. Time-dependent density functional theory is an extension
of density functional theory to time-dependent potentials. Time-dependent
density functional theory has become a very popular tool to compute excitation
energies. It is computationally efficient, but its accuracy is moderate compared
to quantum many-body Green's function-based methods. The most commonly used
adiabatic local density kernel misses excitonic effects.

The PI will further develop a nonlocal energy-optimized kernel model that is
computationally efficient and can capture these effects. Both for ground and
excited states the same nonlocal exchange-correlation kernel is to be added to
the Coulomb electron-electron interaction kernel in the frequency-dependent
linear response function of the ground state. The nonlocal energy-optimized
kernel will be applied to molecules and materials. The kernel correction will be
tested and applied to many ground-state properties, such as atomization
energies, cohesive energies, structural phase transitions, clusters and
adsorption problems. The kernel correction to time-dependent density functional
theory will be applied to excitation energies including those in semiconductors
with a particular focus on photovoltaic materials for solar cell applications.

This award supports an educational activity focused on graduate, undergraduate
and high-school students. A thrust of this activity is linked to the TUTeach
program which trains high-school teachers. The students in this program are
physics majors, who will work as learning assistants for the PI and learn about
the PI's research. These students are also outreach ambassadors in the high
schools. TUTeach students will work with the PI to deliver computational physics
lectures to high-school students. The PI will also mentor students within the
local provost's research-experiences-for-undergraduates program. Another
significant component of the PI's education program is to develop a new active-
learning-based Computational Materials Physics course.