* 1553053
* CAREER: Habitat Specialization and the Evolution of Dispersal
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2024
* Nancy Emery, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 05/31/2024
* USD 913,682.00

This project evaluates the evolution of dispersal in annual herbs called
'goldfields' that grow in vernal pools in California, to understand the
evolutionary feedbacks between the dispersal traits of organisms and their
habitat specialization. Organisms rely on dispersal to remain in suitable
habitat when their environments vary in space and time. The tendency for an
organism to disperse, and the distance it will travel, is influenced by traits
that can evolve by natural selection. In turn, the costs and benefits of
dispersing will depend on the availability and distribution of suitable habitat
in the organism's environment. This work will provide important insights into
the mechanisms by which organisms navigate complex environments, and how these
mechanisms change over time as both a cause and consequence of adaptation to
specific habitat types. An understanding of the causes of dispersal is
particularly critical in this time of rapid environmental change, in which
natural dispersal patterns for many species are severely modified by human
activities, and dispersing organisms experience unprecedented levels of change
in the size and distribution of suitable habitat. This research will be largely
conducted in undergraduate courses, senior design projects, and high school
internships to provide students with authentic research experiences that
integrate biology, mathematics, and engineering. This project also will support
the development of a bilingual outreach program for elementary school students
that explores the diversity of plant dispersal strategies through field trips
and classroom-based experiments. In addition, results will be communicated to
the general public through guided tours that take place at the primary field
site, and shared with agencies and organizations involved in the conservation,
management and creation of vernal pool habitats.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research will use experimental and modeling approaches to evaluate how dispersal
evolves in response to spatial and temporal variation in an organism's habitat.
The system consists of three plant species in the genus Lasthenia that co-occur
in vernal pool landscapes of the California Floristic Province. Lasthenia
species occupy different habitats within vernal pool landscapes and exhibit
extensive variation in traits that influence seed dispersal propensity and
distance. The first step of this project will be to conduct a functional
analysis of dispersal phenotypes in Lasthenia under controlled wind conditions
in wind tunnels, and in collaboration with engineering students. Next, field
experiments will quantify selection on dispersal strategies in populations of
three different Lasthenia species that occupy different habitats within a common
vernal pool landscape. Environmental components of dispersal trait variation
(i.e., dispersal plasticity) will be measured across a range of experimental
treatments that will be imposed under controlled greenhouse conditions in the
context of CURE (course-based undergraduate research experience) classes.
Finally, mathematical models will evaluate the joint evolutionary dynamics of
dispersal traits and habitat specialization in Lasthenia, and more generally
across a broader range of parameter values.