* 1553234
* CAREER: Photonic spectrum splitting with nanocrystal luminophores
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2016,09/30/2022
* Vivian Ferry, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 09/30/2022
* USD 501,589.00

The sun represents the most abundant potential source of sustainable energy on
earth. Solar cells that capture the sun?s rays and convert this energy into
electricity can potentially be improved through the science of photonics, which
uses advanced materials to guide the light pathway through the device. This
project will develop photonic structures which contain nanocrystal-polymer
composite materials that split and concentrate the solar spectrum into its
component wavelengths, and then direct the concentrated specific wavelengths to
semiconductor materials that are best able to convert these wavelength energies
into electricity. Through the combination of these processes, the overall
efficiency for solar energy conversion can be increased. The proposed research
targets designs that can be readily implemented with existing solar cell
fabrication processes and could also be integrated into architectural features
for buildings. These photonic materials may also find other applications in
biological imaging for medical diagnostics, solid-state lighting, and display
technology. This project also has broad educational goals coupled to the
research activities, aimed at encouraging women and underrepresented minorities
into STEM careers through project-based learning about solar
energy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will address a fundamental challenge
in solar photovoltaic conversion of sunlight to electricity - the mismatch
between the broad solar spectrum and semiconductors that only efficiently
convert light at wavelengths near their bandgap energy. In conventional multi-
junction solar cells, the light must transfer through a stack of semiconductor
layers designed to capture a portion of the solar spectrum. The transfer of
light through this stack results in absorption losses that lower the
theoretically-attainable solar energy conversion efficiency. The splitting of
the solar spectrum into component wavelengths and the direction of these
wavelengths to adjacent semiconductors, as opposed to within a stack, can reduce
losses and improve solar energy conversion efficiency. The overall goal of the
proposed research is to develop an efficient spectrum splitting system for
enhancing solar energy harvesting using optical materials that combine photonic
structures with luminescent nanocrystal-polymer composite materials. Towards
this end, the proposed research seeks to gain a fundamental understanding of the
interaction of these nanocomposite materials with various photonic structures
for harvesting of light. The research plan has three primary objectives. The
first objective is to consider photonic routes for enhancing the efficiency of
solar spectrum splitting based on nanocomposite luminescent concentrators. For
example, by incorporating light trapping elements such as Bragg mirrors into
luminescent concentrators, luminophore quantum yield can be increased. The
second objective will address loss mechanisms by tuning the properties of
luminescent nanocrystal-polymer composite materials. For example, a photonic
crystal consisting of alternating high index and low index nanocrystal-polymer
composites could reduce losses within the luminescent concentrator. In the third
objective, photonic nanocrystal-polymer composite materials will be integrated
into single-junction solar photovoltaic cells to serve as luminescent
concentrators that provide controlled angles of emission, reduced absorption
loss, and enhanced radiative decay rate. The design principles established
through the single-junction device will be used to develop a spectrum splitting
and concentrating system for multi-junction solar cells that harvest a larger
fraction of the solar spectrum using nanocrystal luminophores engineered with
different bandgaps. Theoretical approaches will link nanoscale properties and
photonic structures to their performance as waveguides that accept diffuse
sunlight and direct it to adjacent solar cells. This information will used to
predict the upper limits of efficiency for single and multi-junction solar
cells. Experimental work will include synthesis of nanocrystal-polymer
composites, correlation of the composite nanostructure to optical response, and
fabrication of photonic structures. Optical spectroscopy and electron microscopy
will be used to characterize the light propagation inside the concentrators. The
proposed research is integrated with educational activities that focus on
project-based learning about solar energy across educational and outreach
platforms, including the development of introductory lecture and laboratory
coursework materials, the creation of a program for undergraduate women to learn
about undergraduate research opportunities in solar and related sustainable
energy systems, and outreach to K-12 students that emphasizes the role of
engineering in addressing societal goals.