* 1553638
* CAREER: Stretchability by Design - Understanding Mechanical Phenomena in Microarchitectured Soft Material Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2021
* Christian Linder, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 06/30/2021
* USD 599,999.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) program will investigate
mechanical phenomena in microarchitectured soft materials such as conjugated
polymers to achieve stretchability by design and thereby stable device
performance under large stresses. Conjugated polymers are considered as the
basic material for organic semiconductors, which are used for various electronic
material systems and sensing devices for applications in energy, healthcare,
biomedical, civil, mechanical, aerospace, and chemical engineering. However,
conjugated polymers are not stretchable. While generally flexible, their
stretchability is restricted up to a few percent. At large deformations, cracks
can deteriorate electronic device performance. This weakness limits their use in
industrial applications that require large stretchability and new applications
demanding complete flexibility. Society will benefit from new methods to predict
material properties via mechanics-driven simulations for use in flexible hybrid
electronics. The award will create science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics opportunities for high school to graduate students in
microarchitectured material design and macroarchitectured sustainable systems,
and will impact on diversity by reducing barriers of first generation college
students to pursue an engineering degree.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Currently, no
theory reliably predicts all the complex interactions and non-equilibrium
mechanisms arising during instability-induced phase separation of polymer
blends, being a promising technique to increase stretchability in soft material
systems. Nor is there a theory to predict failure behavior of the resulting
conjugated/amorphous polymer blend material and the large deformation those
materials must withstand in flexible hybrid electronics applications. The wide
range of length and time scales of those mechanisms results in simulations
merely able to capture experimentally observed phenomena in a qualitative way.
This project aims to close this gap by an integrated theoretical, computational,
and experimental approach. The astonishing advancements of theoretical
mechanics, high-performance computational resources, and experimental testing
and visualization techniques, make this award particularly timely. This research
will contribute to developing computational scale bridging techniques to
predict, quantitatively, the effect of varying polymer, solvent, and substrate
properties, blend ratios, or evaporation rates on induced instabilities, blend
morphologies, nanoconfined polymer properties, and failure mechanisms in polymer
blends.