* 1553183
* CAREER: High-Density Non-Fouling Bioactive Coatings for Processing of Biological Fluids
* ENG,CBET
* 02/15/2016,01/31/2021
* Kate Schilke, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 01/31/2021
* USD 533,019.00

CAREER 1553183 - Schilke

Bacterial sepsis is a common and life-threatening condition which kills hundreds
of thousands of Americans and costs ~$20 billion every year in the U.S. alone.
Sepsis is currently treated with antibiotics, but this does not remove the
circulating dead bacteria and fragments of their cell membranes (endotoxin),
which could cause a serious immune response. One promising method to mitigate
this risk involves passing a patient's blood through a device to capture
circulating endotoxin, helping to stabilize the immune system and potentially to
improve their prognosis. However for this application, all materials in contact
with blood must be biocompatible (i.e. resist fouling or clotting, and not
induce an adverse biological response). For treatment of sepsis, surfaces must
also present endotoxin-binding agents in controlled orientations and at high
density. These bioactive and biocompatible coatings must be inexpensive and easy
to apply to a wide range of materials, including plastics used in medical
devices, needles, flexible tubing, and other associated equipment. Biocompatible
and bioactive coatings could have transformative impact on the safety and
efficacy of treatment of sepsis, in which even a modest improvement could result
in many lives and much money saved. In other biomedical applications, the
technology could also impart biological activity to a variety of other
household, consumer and industrial products. The integrated educational
activities of this project are expected to achieve the following benefits: (a)
research concepts will be incorporated into bioengineering coursework at Oregon
State (OSU) and hands-on learning modules will be adapted for OSU's STEM Academy
for pre-college students and (b) the PI will work with the OSU business school
to provide a summer "Entrepreneurship Boot Camp" for the group's graduate
students and faculty mentors.

The project's research will result in the development of high-density, non-
fouling bioactive coatings (HNB's) by living polymerization from surfactant-
based immobilized initiators, producing branched, hydrophilic polymer brushes on
the surface. This coating, essentially an ultrathin immobilized hydrogel, will
provide excellent resistance against protein adsorption and cell interactions
(biocompatibility). To impart bioactivity at the hydrogel surface, a nearly-
ideal bioorthogonal ligation (BOL) will be used to immobilize enzymes, peptides,
polysaccharides, or other biologically active molecules at the periphery of the
brush. This chemistry enables quantitative conjugation from even dilute
solutions of the active molecule, allowing precise control of surface
functionalization. Unreacted groups are biologically compatible and chemically
inert. Economical immobilization of peptides or proteins is provided by Genetic
Code Expansion (GCE), in which engineered microbes express active proteins with
BOL reactive groups incorporated at genetically-controlled positions. The
resulting specific immobilization of only the desired proteins from a crude cell
lysate eliminates costly purification or pre-concentration steps, and guarantees
that the protein is in a precisely defined orientation for maximal biological
activity. Although the main objective of this work is to demonstrate
biocompatible and bioactive coatings for devices to capture pathogens from
blood, myriad other potential uses include safer medical devices, food
processing, pharmaceutical production, active packaging, and self-cleaning
fabrics, as examples.