* 1553228
* CAREER: Understanding human embryonic development from the bottom up
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/2016,01/31/2021
* Aryeh Warmflash, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* Charles Cunningham
* 01/31/2021
* USD 996,238.00

The cells of the developing human embryo all carry the same genetic material,
but they specialize into more than 200 different cell types that perform
specific functions. These different cell types develop in precise spatial
patterns that form the body plan of the embryo. Decades of genetic and
biochemical studies have revealed that cells communicate using secreted
signaling molecules, and that the signaling pathways activated inside the cell
by these molecules are essential for conveying positional information to each
cell, so that it specializes correctly. While many of the components of these
pathways have been discovered, how the processes of signal interpretation and
specialization occur has remained obscure due to the difficulty of observing and
perturbing embryonic development. This challenge is particularly acute for
mammalian embryos that develop in utero. Human embryonic stem cells (hESCs)
represent a potential solution to these challenges, as they are capable of
following developmental programs in a culture dish, enabling elucidation of
human development to a degree that is otherwise impossible. This project
combines experimental studies of hESCs grown in particular spatial patterns and
mathematical modeling to dissect how cells interpret signals and differentiate
in spatial patterns during the earliest stages of development. Coupled with this
research program is a spectrum of educational activities aimed at training the
next generation of scientists to perform interdisciplinary, quantitative
research in the biological sciences. Planned activities include outreach to K-12
students, education aimed at high school advanced placement teachers, and
innovative undergraduate and graduate courses. Following successful introduction
at Rice University, these courses will be widely distributed through the
Coursera online platform.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mechanistic studies of pattern
formation during mammalian development are challenging due the difficulty of
observing and manipulating the embryo in utero. This project takes advantage of
a recently developed in vitro system in which patterns form in hESC colonies
grown in controlled geometries using micropatterning technology. The patterns
form from the combination of an inductive signal added to the culture medium
(BMP4) as well as paracrine signals between cells that have been identified as
Wnt and Activin-Nodal signals. The project will use this system to
quantitatively deconstruct the mechanisms of early patterning in the mammalian
embryo. First, similar micropatterning technology will be used to isolate
extremely small colonies of hESCs (1-10 cells). Colonies with a single cell will
be used to directly measure the response to the inductive signal without
interference from neighboring cells. Colonies with two cells will be used to
understand the response to the paracrine signals in a simplified system, while
those with larger number of cells will be used to measure how cells integrate
signals from multiple neighbors. Results from these small colonies will be used
to create mathematical models capable of predicting patterning in larger
colonies of thousands of cells that display the full spectrum of embryonic
fates. These models will be validated and further developed by experiments using
live-cell imaging reporters for the activity of the BMP, Wnt, and Nodal
signaling pathways together with reporters for cell fates. These dynamic
observations are only possible in the in vitro development system, and will be
used to correlate the dynamics of signaling in each individual cell with the
fate it ultimately adopts. Taken together, these results will provide
unprecedented understanding of early mammalian development and reveal principles
of paracrine signaling and in vitro tissue self-organization.