* 1553613
* CAREER: Characterization of Epigenetic Factors and their Regulatory Roles in Modulating Transposable Elements, Plant Immunity and Transgenerational Inheritance
* BIO,IOS
* 03/15/2016,02/28/2023
* Hong-Gu Kang, Texas State University - San Marcos
* Continuing Grant
* Courtney Jahn
* 02/28/2023
* USD 787,913.00

Transposable elements (TEs), also known as jumping genes, comprise a major
portion of eukaryotic genomes, although their functional contribution is still
one of biology's big mysteries. Due to the potentially mutagenic nature of their
transposition activity, it has been assumed that TEs are heavily suppressed, if
not completely silenced, predominantly through epigenetic mechanisms, i.e., non-
inheritable chemical modifications introduced into chromosomes. The researchers'
analyses suggest, however, that TEs are rapidly and transiently derepressed in
response to pathogen infection. Based on these findings, it is hypothesized that
TEs play important roles in transcriptional reprogramming/activation in response
to biotic stress and that their activity leads to phenotypic plasticity and
stress adaptation. For the host plant, the proposed ability of TEs to transduce
environmental challenges into epigenetic modifications that lead to stable
genetic changes should confer significant evolutionary advantages. Therefore,
elucidating the molecular mechanisms through which stress adaptation is mediated
by epigenetic changes and clarifying their relationship to TE activation
following biotic stress will be tremendously valuable for developing new traits
in the plant breeding industry. The proposed research also will allow
undergraduate students, as well as high school students and their teachers, to
investigate solutions to a real-world problem via experimentation using high-
throughput assays that will provide a robust dataset after a limited training
period. The results of these analyses will be presented at local, state and
national science fairs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers' analysis of
genome-wide chromatin accessibility suggests that the promoters and/or 5'
proximal regions of many defense genes contain TEs that display heightened and
dynamic chromatin accessibility in Arabidopsis after pathogen infection. These
TE-associated chromatin regions exhibit infection-induced dynamic interactions
with MORC1, a protein implicated in both RNA-dependent DNA methylation (RdDM)
and immunity in plants. Given that i) TEs are suppressed mostly by RdDM, ii)
pathogen infection induces a burst of TE expression, and iii) both TE
transcription and mobility are modulated by the RdDM pathway, epigenetic factors
involved in RdDM will be investigated to test the role(s) of RdDM and TEs in the
induction of defense genes following pathogen infection. To this end, specific
TEs and RdDM components will be silenced or knocked-out to monitor DNA
methylation, chromatin accessibility and transcription levels for both targeted
TEs and their proximal defense genes following infection. TEs' role in stress
adaptation will also be examined by inducing biotic stress-induced TE
transposition and determining if novel TE insertions confer stress-induced
transcription of their proximal genes in subsequent generations. Altogether,
this project seeks to significantly advance our understanding of the
relationship between TEs and both immunity and stress adaptation.