* 1553202
* CAREER: Structure-borne Noise and Vibration Mitigation via Nonlinear Interactions in Phononic Structures
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/01/2016,09/30/2022
* Jinkyu (JK) Yang, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Harry Dankowicz
* 09/30/2022
* USD 574,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project aims at developing a new
class of structural materials, also known as "phononic", whereby engineered
nonlinear interactions suppress structure-borne noise and vibrations directly by
manipulating the propagation of stress waves. This will be enabled by wave
mixing effects inherent to the engineered nonlinear interactions that mimic
phenomena observed at the atomic level. In transportation systems, structural
components are susceptible to harsh mechanical environments, including
vibrations, engine noise and aerodynamic/acoustic loads. The suppression of
noise and vibration is highly critical, since it is associated directly with the
long-term durability of mechanical/electrical components and the comfort level
of passengers. Current techniques for noise reduction rely heavily on classical
methods based on damping absorbers, such as soft foam, rubber wedges, and
insulating blankets. While these methods are efficient in suppressing high
frequency noise and vibrations, attenuation of low frequency components through
a structure-borne path remains a formidable challenge. This research will
contribute to the development of next-generation structural materials that are
inherently capable of reducing structure-borne acoustic noise and rejecting
unwanted vibrations in an efficient and controllable manner. From an educational
standpoint, this project will attract young minds to science and engineering by
enhancing their understanding of mechanical wave propagation through the "Catch
a Wave" campaign.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project involves designing,
fabricating, and testing of a new type of engineered periodic lattices called
"nonlinear phononic structures." These phononic structures will feature novel
mechanisms that couple the propagation of different stress wave modes
coherently. One example is a variable stiffness mechanism that leverages
geometrical nonlinearities of thin-walled structures. These nonlinear phononic
structures will naturally allow us to dynamically manipulate one stress wave
mode via another, which is analogous to the working principles of electrical and
optical energy flow devices (e.g., transistors). From a fundamental viewpoint,
this project will shed light on the nonlinear wave dynamics of engineered
lattice structures, leading to the discovery of new physical phenomena in terms
of wave dispersion, disintegration, and scattering, unprecedented in
conventional material systems and structures. From an engineering standpoint,
the findings will open a new paradigm in filtering and mitigating structure-
borne noise and vibration by dynamically controlling waves' speed, waveforms,
and transmission gains.