* 1553407
* CAREER: Optimization, Control, and Incentive Design for Power Networks with High Levels of Distributed Energy Resources
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/01/2016,09/30/2022
* Na Li, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Nash
* 09/30/2022
* USD 500,003.00

To improve the energy and environmental sustainability, the power grid is
increasing the penetration of distributed energy resources, such as photovoltaic
(PV) arrays, wind turbines, electric vehicles, batteries, and responsive
demands. However, high levels of distributed energy resources can change the
behavior of the grid, with potential undesirable effects on the grid stability
and power quality. This necessitates transformative approaches to coordinate the
large number of distributed energy resources. These approaches need to handle
the high uncertainty involved in the renewable generation and to call upon
customers to actively participate. Additional challenges are placed by the
still-undeveloped sensing, communication, and computation resources for the
grid. To address these challenges, this CAREER proposal is to develop
distributed coordination rules to optimize, control, and incentivize the
distributed energy resources in order to ensure efficient, adaptive, and
reliable performance of the grid. The proposal will integrate multidisciplinary
approaches, in particular, mathematics, engineering, and economics. Results can
also be transferred to other large-scale socio-technical systems, such as
transportation systems and water/gas distribution systems. Broad impacts will
follow from an integrated educational dissemination plan, involvement of
undergraduates especially under-represented groups in research, transition of
new ideas to industry, and outreach to the general public and K-12
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As a socio-technical system, two factors
distinguish the power grid from other networks, its intrinsic physics and its
close human interactions. Accordingly, this proposal will design automated
distributed algorithms to optimize the performance of the energy resources at
slow-time scales and to control them to ensure energy balance at fast-time
scales, and design incentive schemes such as pricing, rewards, payoff, and
trading rules to promote human participants to take desired actions. The
automated algorithms will tackle the challenges brought by the power system
physics (e.g. physical laws such as Kirchhoff's law and system dynamics such as
swing dynamics), limited communication, and uncertain generation/consumption.
The algorithms will also maximize the use of physics in order to lower sensing,
communication, and computation overhead. The incentive schemes will tackle the
challenges brought by the self-interested nature of humans. Owners of
distributed energy resources are mostly profit-maximizing entities, seeking
their own best interest and lacking incentives to reveal truthful private
information. Lastly the proposal will jointly design the distributed
architecture, algorithms and incentive schemes by strongly integrating the
engineering and economics in order to ensure high-performance and high-
confidence operation of distributed energy resources to facilitate a smoother
transition for the grid into the next age of a smarter grid.