* 1553075
* CAREER: Advancing Multidimensional Data Science via New Algebraic Models and Scalable Algorithms
* CSE,CCF
* 05/15/2016,04/30/2023
* Shuchin Aeron, Tufts University
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 04/30/2023
* USD 554,157.00

Building upon the rapid advancements in monitoring, networking and sensing
technologies, most modern data collected are inherently multidimensional in
nature, that is, each datum is influenced by a variety of factors. For example,
a pixel in a remote sensing video is a function of time, color (wavelength) and
spatial location. Another contemporary example comes from the widely used rating
and recommendation systems, where a rating depends on the user, user
demographic, product being rated and time. In fact, this is the case for
numerous other applications such as cellular network performance statistics,
geophysical systems for earth sciences, and education statistics in interactive
learning and collaboration environments. This research addresses the need to
advance data science for reliable and scalable information acquisition and
processing for these complex and large-scale multidimensional data.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;In particular, the research builds and investigates a novel linear
and multilinear algebraic framework to model multidimensional data. Using this
framework one can tap into the well-developed body of vector space methods and
adapt them to process multidimensional data in a principled manner to realize
orders of magnitude performance gains over current methods. The research also
addresses the challenges, which arise in deploying the framework for large-scale
applications and investigates numerical and memory efficient algorithms.
Integration of research and education is enabled through new cross-cutting
curriculum development, continued undergraduate mentoring, and through
integration of the research outcomes with existing undergraduate curriculum. The
broader impacts are realized through a number of collaborative efforts
involving, Tufts Interactive Learning and Collaboration Environment (InterLACE)
program, Brigham and Women?s Hospital and AT&amp;T research.