* 1553436
* CAREER: Low Latency, Parallel, and Context Aware Vision in Computed Tomography
* CSE,OAC
* 05/15/2016,09/30/2022
* James Shackleford, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Juan Li
* 09/30/2022
* USD 472,513.00

The increasing availability and maturity of non-invasive volumetric imaging
techniques has provided the scientific, engineering, and medical communities
with powerful methods of acquiring dense quantitative representations of both
animate and inanimate objects---providing us with powerful methods of
information capture. This research effort concentrates on approaches for
identifying and labeling representations within the captured data that integrate
a priori structural and spatial configuration knowledge. The automatic
identification and labeling of volumetric pixels (voxels) produced by volumetric
scanners presents challenging ill-posed problems that presently remain unsolved.
Even for well trained clinicians, determining organ boundaries when applying
anatomical labels to low contrast medical images can be highly subjective,
despite possessing strong prior anatomical knowledge of structure and shape.
Consequently, an anatomical delineation performed by different clinicians, even
for the same patient image, fails to provide consistency. More difficult ill-
posed problems, such as matching corresponding voxels between images of a
patient taken at different times---or, more difficult yet, between two entirely
different patients---are so subjective that humans rarely provide consistent
answers. This research effort aims to develop algorithmic solutions to these
problems in order to provide consistent quantitative analysis across volumes;
thereby removing subjectivity attributable to inattentional blindness or
unintentional bias. With further advancement, such algorithms will be adequately
fast and robust to extract anatomic structural information and perform patient
correspondence autonomously at massive scales; thereby enabling powerful data
analytics paving the way for the future of data driven medicine. Through
classroom integration and curriculum development, the PI will train science and
engineering students to work with this next generation of image processing
algorithms. The PI will recruit and mentor researchers at both the undergraduate
and graduate levels with emphasis on the recruitment of underrepresented groups
within STEM related fields. Therefore, this research aligns with the NSF mission
to promote the progress of science and to advance the national health,
prosperity and welfare.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project consists of
three primary efforts: first, the simultaneous segmentation of multiple
structures using spatial relationship priors (i.e. situationally aware
segmentation); second, the development of structurally aware registration
algorithms (leveraging segmentation results); and third, the development of
these algorithms specifically targeted to data parallel computer architectures.
Situationally aware algorithms developed by the PI will aim to perform
simultaneous multi-target segmentations as well as anatomically specialized
inference of organ deformation and motion that are robust to imaging
inconsistencies, setup variations, and low-dose imaging. The PI will investigate
algorithmic methods possessing robustness to noisy, incomplete, or otherwise
challenging image acquisitions by solving multiple inverse problems
simultaneously and achieving higher accuracy through the coupling of solutions
and exploitation of signal sparsity under certain basises. The algorithms
produced by this research will have broad societal impacts on fields employing
computed tomography including archeology, soil sciences, the timber industry,
biological sciences, industrial X-ray based inspection, and the aviation
security industry. In addition to the dissemination of the novel algorithms, the
PI will develop high-performance parallel implementations as a library released
under a permissive open-source license. Development will occur in the open using
Git; thereby enabling agile decentralized development that encourages increased
utilization by and contributions from scientists and developers extramural to
the project. Algorithmic facilities initially selected for inclusion are areas
of principal investigator's expertise and cover a wide spectrum of applications
including motion estimation, image stitching, segmentation, 3D volume
reconstruction (computed tomography), and registration/image fusion. Through
consortia and workshops, domain experts will be encouraged to contribute their
expertise in established and emerging fields (e.g. digital image forensics);
enabling scientific cross-fertilization and collaboration across domain specific
fields.