* 1553895
* CAREER: Probing the Neural Integration of Sensorimotor Signals for Limb Motor Coordination and Perception
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2016,03/31/2019
* Wilsaan Joiner, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 03/31/2019
* USD 503,225.00

PI: Joiner, Wilsaan Proposal Number: 1553895

The human brain issues commands to produce movement. However, relying solely on
the sensations that result from movement would be insufficient to quickly adjust
and update future motor plans due to the inherent delays in the communication
and processing within the central nervous system. There is strong behavioral
evidence that to ensure sufficient control the brain uses information about the
issued motor commands to form a prediction of the expected sensations that
result from body motion. Despite this evidence, it remains largely unknown how
the brain combines these predictions of sensory feedback with actual motion-
induced sensations for movement control and self-movement perception. This
CAREER proposal, through student involvement and outreach activities, lays the
foundation for a long-term research and educational career to address these gaps
in knowledge. Utilizing a diverse set of techniques, the investigator will
systematically examine the contributions of actual and predicted sensory
feedback to upper limb behavior.

Corollary discharge (CD, also referred to as efference copy) is the internal
duplicate of a motor command made at the same time the motor signal is
generated. This signal is used to predict the future state of the body and the
expected sensory consequences due to movement. The integration of this internal
state information with delayed sensory signals is critical for accurate movement
control and motion perception. However, little is known about the properties of
this signal in humans or how this internal movement information is integrated
with reafferent sensory feedback. Despite being poorly understood, internal
state estimation remains a critical feature of computational models of limb
movement and feedforward control. To directly address the current gaps in
knowledge, the proposed studies aim to (1) quantify the accuracy and sensitivity
of proprioception and internal limb state estimation, (2) computationally
describe how these signals are combined to aid perception and motor
coordination, and (3) determine the causal relationships between behavior and
the neural processing of these signals through the application of transcranial
magnetic stimulation to areas within the parietal cortex and cerebellum.
Pursuing the project goals will utilize different techniques (computational
modeling, noninvasive neural stimulation and quantitative behavioral analysis)
in order to advance the computational frameworks for sensorimotor integration
and control. Increasing the understanding of this neural integration could
potentially (1) provide the foundation for understanding how actual and
predicted sensory information contribute to complex behaviors (e.g., eye-hand
and bimanual coordination), (2) help define the constraints (e.g., timing and
acuity) of the different sensory information required for effective neural
prostheses and brain?machine interface control and (3) assist in distinguishing
the basis of feedforward motor control deficits in several neurological
diseases. Importantly, the project promotes the inclusion and training of
students from various backgrounds, particularly minority students, and
encourages the outreach and dissemination of the scientific research to a broad
spectrum of participants within the community, from grade school students to
retired individuals.