* 1553485
* CAREER: Advancing the Frontier in System Architectures for Artificially Intelligent Services and Applications
* CSE,CCF
* 01/15/2016,12/31/2020
* Jason Mars, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Yuanyuan Yang
* 12/31/2020
* USD 470,000.00

The way society interacts with today's mobile technologies is rapidly changing
as such devices - omnipresent in our lives - become increasingly personal and
knowledgeable. Intelligent assistants (IAs), such as Apple's Siri, Google's
Google Now, Microsoft's Cortana, and Amazon's Echo, are continuing to become
more sophisticated and are expected to grow in popularity as wearables continue
to gain traction. The computing capabilities required to support these
technology trends continue to evolve toward intelligent systems that use
sophisticated machine learning and computer vision algorithms on the critical
path of audio and vision interactions. In this proposed work, PI Jason Mars aims
to understand how future cloud and mobile systems should be designed (and co-
designed) to support increasing demand from users. This proposed work advances
both 1) the efficiency of current computing platforms to reduce their energy,
cost, and environmental footprint, and 2) the expansion of open end-to-end
systems with state-of-the-art algorithmic capabilities to enable new, more
sophisticated, intelligent technologies and usher in future research and
inquiry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI Mars' technical approach
incorporates three pillars of innovation. These pillars span application
insights, to inform the design of underlying systems, vertical innovation to
advance the cross-layer design of the system stack for emerging applications and
services, and horizontal innovation to reason about a computational fabric
spanning mobile hardware and cloud hardware to create a unified platform for
computation. In addition to having impact on national interests, economic
advancement, and technology in general, this proposed work incorporates
significant innovation in undergraduate, and graduate education. The Intelleco
and DeepSirius systems described in this proposal will be used to design an
undergraduate and graduate course for state-of-the-art datacenter design. In
addition all artifacts and teaching materials will be disseminated broadly
through open source and creative commons.