* 1553167
* CAREER: Inspecting Personal Informatics: Reflection Practices to Unlock Value in Self-Tracked Data
* CSE,IIS
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2023
* Sean Munson, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 04/30/2023
* USD 591,642.00

This project will study how people reflect on personal informatics data by
designing, building, and deploying novel tools for exploration of personal data.
Fitness tracking devices, smartphone applications, and other tools based on
computer technology that help people automatically track data about every facet
of their lives are becoming increasingly prevalent. Despite considerable
progress in improving how people collect data for self-tracking, there has been
little research on how technology can help people reflect on the collected data.
Consequently, people often are overwhelmed by the data they collect, do not know
what conclusions to draw, and become frustrated or discontinue use. The research
will study approaches to reducing barriers to making sense of tracked data, both
individually and in collaboration with friends, family, peers, and experts. To
understand and enhance practices for reflecting and acting on personal
informatics data, the research will build and deploy tools that help people
explore their data and identify opportunities for change. The project includes
integrated outreach and educational activities for high school, college, and
graduate students and the community. The initial focus will be on designing
tools that support exploration of tracked data from several sources - such as
physical activity, mood, sleep, location, weather, weight, and personal finances
- and evaluating how these tools augment abilities to reflect and to identify
opportunities for change. The research will survey existing practices for
sharing data among family and with experts, friends, and peers. Interviews with
financial planners, life coaches, and personal trainers will document how they
engage with client data. What data and views does each audience need, and how
should this be integrated into their process for reflecting and acting? What
tensions arise when sharing? How can personal informatics records help bridge
different levels and types of expertise? Results will lead to new design
approaches that make personal informatics data more valuable to people who
already track and that will make self-tracking accessible to more people. The
research will improve systems that help people make sense of their tracked data,
which will lead to better personal informatics systems and, more broadly,
improved practices for open-ended exploration of large, disparate data streams.
Results will also contribute to theory about how people reflect on personal data
individually and collaboratively, particularly among people with different
levels of expertise.