* 1553519
* CAREER: Engineering Structure and Ionic Conductivity in Li7La3Zr2O12 Nanowire-Based Solid Electrolytes
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2022
* Candace Chan, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 05/31/2022
* USD 550,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: Lithium ion batteries are ubiquitous in laptops and
cell phones and may gain more use in transportation applications in the near
future. However, these batteries suffer from safety issues originating from the
flammable liquid electrolyte that is used to transport lithium ions within the
battery. One of the most promising candidates for a safer, replacement
electrolyte is the ceramic lithium lanthanum zirconate (LLZO), which has good
thermal/chemical stability and ionic transport properties. Nonetheless, there is
still much fundamental research needed in order to improve understanding of
several critical issues in LLZO and how to improve its performance. This project
investigates novel LLZO nanowire structures and composites with unique nanoscale
properties that can improve their conductivity for lithium ions and integration
into safer, all-solid-state batteries. This project also supports education and
outreach activities that focus on improving the pipeline and retention of female
students in science and engineering through hands-on experiences that will
increase understanding and retention of engineering concepts and stimulate the
students' interests in research. Outreach to local middle school girls through a
battery-related challenge to provide context on issues related to electric cars
and research opportunities to high school, undergraduate, and graduate students
are example activities. Educational efforts include international exchange of
teaching methodologies with faculty in South Korea to understand strategies that
promote female student achievement, as well as how to best engage students from
diverse backgrounds in student-centered learning
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: This research project aims
to correlate composition, grain boundary structure, and crystal phase with ionic
conductivity in LLZO nanowire materials prepared using electrospinning. Nanowire
solid electrolytes can offer characteristics that are beneficial and
advantageous compared to bulk materials - namely milder calcination conditions
for crystallization, stabilization of metastable phases, and opportunities for
unique structures such as core-shell composites. These characteristics can lead
to properties that improve the ionic conductivity, sintering ability, and
integration of the electrolytes into all-solid-state batteries. The nanowires
are used to understand the LLZO phase stability, crystallization, and sintering
processes. Core-shell nanowire structures are used to investigate interfacial
properties and transport in composites to understand how to maximize highly
conducting pathways for lithium ions and uniformly modify grain boundaries.
Additionally, detailed in situ and aberration-corrected transmission electron
microscopy is used to understand processes such as crystallization of
electrospun nanowires, impurity segregation to grain boundaries, sintering in
networks of nanowires, and interdiffusion at the electrolyte/cathode interface.
This information is being correlated with ionic conductivity and electrochemical
cycling tests on the nanowire solid electrolyte materials and compared to bulk
materials. The insights gained from this work are enabling better control of
composition, stabilization of metastable phases, sintering processes, and Li ion
transport, which can ultimately lead to higher ionic conductivity ceramic
electrolytes.