* 1553780
* CAREER: Controlling Polymer Degradation, Microstructures, and Sequences via Living Alternating Polymerization of Cyclopropenes and Low-Strain Cyclic Olefins
* MPS,CHE
* 03/01/2016,09/30/2021
* Yan Xia, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 09/30/2021
* USD 675,000.00

Polymers are ubiquitous and serve as important and versatile materials in a
myriad of societal sectors, and their properties are dictated by the polymer
structures. In this project funded by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and
Nanochemistry Program of the Chemistry Division, Prof. Yan Xia of Stanford
University develops new synthetic strategies to collectively address the
challenges in controlling polymer structure, functionality and degradability.
Fundamental studies and method development of this project aim to enable the
synthesis of highly functionalized and precisely structured polymers with
tailored properties. This project provides valuable training experiences for
undergraduate and graduate students to continue to advance our ability to
synthesize complex macromolecular structures. This program integrates
educational endeavors at several levels to 1) use after-school educational
activities and social media to facilitate recruitment and retention of high
school students, especially underrepresented students in the Bay Area; 2)
enhance the public awareness of soft materials, both commodity and high-end
plastics, enabled by new chemistry and engineering; 3) interface organic
chemistry with materials science in undergraduate and graduate education to
cultivate interdisciplinary researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this
research is to provide new insights of metathesis chemistry, new patterns of
monomer reactivity, and new synthetic strategies to prepare well-defined
polymers and materials with tailored properties. This project develops living
alternating ring-opening metathesis polymerization (AROMP) and thermodynamically
driven single monomer additions to control polymer backbone and side chain
functionalities, microstructures, and monomer sequences. The approach to tune
materials properties and assembly behaviors of the resulting polymers is by
controlling the structural regularity.It also integrates broader educational
endeavors to: 1) facilitate recruitment and retention of underrepresented
students in the Bay Area in science majors through local visits and social
media; 2) enhance the public awareness of both commodity and high-end plastics
enabled by new chemistry; and 3) interface organic chemistry with polymer
science in Stanford undergraduate courses to cultivate future interdisciplinary
researchers.