* 1553018
* CAREER: RUI: Understanding Human Cognition in Computer Network Defense
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2023
* David Schuster, San Jose State University Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 06/30/2023
* USD 596,000.00

The cyber security threat to organizations and governments has continued to grow
with increasing dependence on information technology; meanwhile, the entities
behind cyber attacks increase in sophistication. Cyber security professionals,
the individuals responsible for keeping organizations secure, investigate
network activity to find, identify, and respond to threats. These individuals
are among the last lines of defense for an organization. Cyber security
professionals depend on automated tools to perform their jobs but must make
critical decisions that impact security. Therefore, successful defense against
cyber attacks depends on human decision making. This research identifies
cognitive outcomes that predict successful threat response. The researchers are
investigating the content and structure of cyber security professionals'
knowledge, creating assessments of cyber security professional cognition, and
developing training techniques for cyber security decision making. This
project's broader impacts address the large need for cyber security workforce
development. The training developed through this research will make cyber
security careers more accessible to individuals beyond traditional computer
science career paths. Threat response training for network defense provides a
strategic advantage against cyber adversaries and increasingly sophisticated
threats.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Effective human decision making is a determinant
of effective cyber security. Situation awareness and mental models are cognitive
outcomes that predict human performance. Situation awareness, defined as goal-
relevant knowledge held during task performance, predicts good decision making.
Security professionals also utilize internal representations of the task
environment, such as how computers are interconnected, in the form of mental
models. Because multiple mental models support situation awareness and vary as a
function of task and expertise, understanding decision making in computer
network defense requires identifying critical mental models. This research is
identifying cognitive outcomes, including mental models and situation awareness,
that predict successful threat response in computer network defense and
leveraging them to improve training for cyber security professionals. Informed
by knowledge of mental models, the research will lead to new training techniques
that transfer broadly to cyber security decision making. This training will
increase access to cyber security careers, especially to members of
underrepresented groups. Threat response training provides a strategic
advantage, not only against known threats, but against novel and increasingly
sophisticated threats.