* 1553042
* CAREER: Trading Communication and Storage for Computation to Enhance Energy Efficiency
* CSE,CCF
* 02/01/2016,01/31/2022
* Ulya Karpuzcu, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Yuanyuan Yang
* 01/31/2022
* USD 486,525.00

Looking forward, a fundamental challenge in computer systems is the Power Wall,
where, due to imbalances in technology scaling, not all the compute engines that
find place on chip can be powered on at the same time. The Power Wall is
transforming all levels of the system stack, including the parallel architecture
landscape. Communication power, as induced by data movement and the
orchestration thereof, along with storage power, dominates computation power. As
the degree of concurrency increases, communication power becomes even more
prominent due to more frequent data transfers. At the same time, emerging memory
technologies are not mature enough to keep up with the corresponding capacity,
bandwidth, and performance requirements within a tight power budget. An amnesic
processor, can minimize, if not eliminate, the power and performance overhead
associated with data storage, retrieval, and communication, thus, operate more
energy efficiently. The limited storage of the amnesic machine represents the
short-term memory, which lacks long-term memory by
construction.Â &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;When compared to its classic counterparts,
an amnesic machine can facilitate more compute engines to occupy the area once
devoted to (long-term) memory, which can further be harnessed for recomputation.
Recomputation can transparently convert workloads to become more compute
intensive such that they can make a better use of classic architectures
optimized for performance, as opposed to energy efficiency. This project intends
to unlock the energy efficiency premise of amnesic machines. To this end, the PI
proposes to explore compiler and microarchitecture support to decide when to
replace remote loads with re-computation. The research has three major thrusts:
(i) at compiler time, integer linear programming based optimization will be
performed to generate a probabilistic energy-minimal re-computation schedule;
(ii) runtime controller will be designed to decide when to re-compute based on
the information the compiler provides; and (iii) memory hierarchy will also be
explored to maximize energy efficiency. Interaction with emerging technologies
and reliability issues will also be considered. The integrated education and
outreach plan includes workshop organization, undergraduate curriculum, and
Eureka! program for K-12 girls .