* 1553767
* CAREER: Seeing in the Dark--Engineering Cytotoxic T Cells to Detect and Respond to Intracellular Cancer Markers
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2021
* Yvonne Chen, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie George
* 06/30/2021
* USD 516,284.00

PI: Chen, Yvonne Y. &lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
1553767&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Tumor-targeting T cells a type of white blood cells
that can be harvested from cancer patients, genetically modified to recognize
tumor cells, and then re-injected into the same patients have shown remarkable
curative potential against advanced cancers. However, a major challenge in
T-cell therapy is off-tumor toxicity, in which T cells attack healthy tissues
that display the same markers as tumor cells on their surfaces. Off-tumor
toxicity can result in severe side effects, including patient deaths that have
been observed in several clinical trials. This research proposal aims to reduce
off-tumor toxicity by enabling T cells to interrogate the interior of a target
cell before making a killing decision. This will be achieved by a new class of
engineered proteins that are produced and delivered by T cells into target
cells, but become toxic if and only if they encounter a tumor-specific protein
inside the target cell. Successful development of the proposed technology will
increase the safety and efficacy of adoptive T-cell therapy for cancer by
improving the specificity of tumor targeting and by expanding the types of
cancers that can be targeted. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed study aims
develop a new class of sense-and-respond protein devices?termed Cytoplasmic
Antigen Detectors and Extermination Triggers (CADETs)?that enable T cells to
search inside the target cell for disease markers prior to unleashing toxicity.
CADETs will be constructed by accessorizing the cytotoxic protein granzyme B
with regulatory domains that respond to specific intracellular oncoproteins,
such as SUMO-specific protease 1 (SENP1) and human telomerase reverse
transcriptase (hTERT). A SENP1-responsive CADET has been constructed by rational
design, in which an inhibitory domain blocks CADET?s enzymatic activity until it
is cleaved off by SENP1. This architecture can be generalized to other tumor-
associated proteases with well-defined cleavage targets. A high-throughput
screening process will be developed to enable optimization of CADET molecules
that respond to non-proteolytic ligands, such as hTERT. This fluorescence-based
screening process will be performed in Pichia pastoris yeast cells, and top-
performing CADET sequences will be characterized in primary human T cells for
production and delivery efficiency as well as hTERT-activated toxicity. The
optimal CADET molecule will be co-expressed with chimeric antigen receptors in T
cells and evaluated for the ability to selectively kill oncoprotein-expressing
tumor cells while sparing off-tumor target cells in mice. In partnership with
the Boys and Girls Club of Santa Monica (SMBGC), this proposal will also develop
an outreach program for children between the ages of 12 and 14 to introduce the
proposed research and discuss potential paths to future careers in engineering.
The proposed technology combines synthetic biology and T-cell engineering to
address an important biomedical challenge, and it will serve as an exciting
demonstration of the possibilities that an engineering career could offer.