* 1553366
* CAREER:  Fuels, Additives and Emissions in Low-Temperature Combustion
* ENG,CBET
* 02/15/2016,01/31/2023
* Claude Goldsmith, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Harsha Chelliah
* 01/31/2023
* USD 613,010.00

CBET-1553366, Goldsmith&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One strategy to reduce the engine
exhaust emissions is to control the combustion at a temperature lower than the
conventional value. Low-temperature compression-ignition engines represent a new
class of internal combustion engines that could meet the stringent and imminent
fuel economy requirements. Engineers typically add additives to the fuel to
improve the engine performance. The most commonly used additive contains
nitrogen, yet the fate of fuel-bound nitrogen in low-temperature combustion is
poorly understood. Although some of the ultimate combustion byproducts formed by
nitrogen-containing additives in these engines may be comparatively benign,
other byproducts are highly toxic, and the relative yield of these toxic
byproducts is not known. The goal of this proposal is to discover the fate of
fuel-bound nitrogen in advanced engines. Over the course of five years, the PI
will combine novel experimental, theoretical, and modeling techniques to provide
quantitative measurements and kinetic predictions for the combustion byproducts
of nitrogen-containing additives under engine-relevant conditions. This research
will provide engineers with the tools to quantify the interactions between
additives and transportation fuels in internal combustion engines, and to
predict how changes to the additive, the fuel, or the engine will affect the
emissions. Additionally, this research will benefit atmospheric chemists by
improving their forecasts of smog and related problems. Finally, the PI will
develop a series of educational modules that illustrate how changing the
structure of a fuel changes its combustion properties, and will create hands-on
design projects in which students build different combustion
devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The most widely used fuel additive in low-
temperature compression-ignition engines is 2-ethyl-hexyl nitrate (2EHN). The
hypothesis is that a significant percentage of the nitrogen in 2EHN exits the
cylinder as hydrogen cyanide and other highly toxic compounds. To test this
hypothesis, shock tube experiments, electronic structure theory, and kinetic
modeling studies will be combined to quantify the various nitrogen containing
products and establish the reaction pathways that produce them. Additionally,
the PI will collaborate with engineers at Argonne National Laboratory to develop
computational models to predict how 2EHN will interact with real-world
transportation fuels, such as n-heptane, iso-octane, and toluene. Many key
pathways in low-temperature compression-ignition engines are kinetically
controlled, so these engines produce different combustion byproducts than
conventional, high-temperature engines. Knowledge of these pathways is
particularly important for fuel additives that contain nitrogen. The majority of
our understanding of nitrogen chemistry is limited either to high temperatures
in excess of the thermal NOx limit, or low temperatures in the atmosphere. This
proposal will fill in a crucial gap in our understanding of nitrogen chemistry
by elucidating the key chemical pathways for the oxidation and reduction of
nitrogen containing species below the thermal NOx threshold.