* 1553114
* CAREER: Testing The Predictability of Flower Color Evolution at a Phylogenetic Scale in the Petunieae Clade (Solanaceae)
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2016,02/29/2024
* Stacey Smith, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Matthew Fujita
* 02/29/2024
* USD 1,034,984.00

Evolutionary biologists have long recognized that species can evolve many
different forms (phenotypes) using the same sets of genes. One explanation for
this pattern is that new forms can arise by changes in gene regulation, that is,
shifts in when and where those genes are active. Although regulatory differences
are known to underlie changes in features as complex as eyes and wings, it
remains unclear how broadly this regulatory hypothesis applies and whether, in
some cases, changes in the genes themselves are more important. This project
will address this question by tracing the evolutionary changes involved in
flower color transitions across Petunieae, a group of 140 species that includes
the ornamental petunias. The genes that produce floral pigments are well
studied, making it possible to characterize the genetic changes associated with
flower color evolution even at this broad scale. As a part of this work, the
researchers will create and present color-themed activities to diverse groups of
K-12 students and undergraduates in order to enhance teaching and learning about
the connections between genes, pathways, and phenotypes across the tree of
life.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will test the role of regulatory
evolution in the color diversification of Petunieae through three specific aims.
The first aim will infer the history of flower color shifts in the clade using a
new phylogeny constructed from transcriptomic data. Building on this
phylogenetic framework, the second aim will use comparative methods and
biochemical profiling to quantify the evolutionary relationship between changes
in the expression of pigment pathway genes and color variation. Given the
modular nature of the regulation of these genes, the third aim will test for
correlated evolution of gene expression across the phylogeny. These aims will be
carried out through collaborations with botanists from Brazil and Argentina, who
will participate in research exchanges to foster the sharing of knowledge and
techniques. At a local scale, the research activities will be integrated into
outreach events as well as inquiry-based course modules for undergraduates and
upward-bound high school students. These innovative teaching approaches will be
coupled with new tools to assess learning gains and guide improvement.