* 1553166
* CAREER:  Bridging the gap between theoretical and experimental self-assembly through computational modeling
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2023
* Matt Patitz, University of Arkansas
* Continuing Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 06/30/2023
* USD 501,561.00

The goal of this project is to develop software which enables techniques from
theoretical modeling of self-assembling systems based on DNA nanotechnology to
be developed and evaluated using rigorous molecular dynamics simulations, and
then incorporated into physical molecular designs and implementations. The
software to be developed will consist of a fully integrated suite of open source
software which will create a seamless pathway for the design of self-assembling
systems based on components called tiles, via a high-level programming language
interface to an abstract tile assembly simulator, all the way through the final
output of the fully specified DNA strands which have been verified via highly
accurate and DNA specific molecular simulations. The second main component of
the proposed work is the integration of theoretical techniques and designs for
algorithmic self-assembling systems into DNA-based motifs, and the performance
of extensive simulation-based experiments to develop molecular designs for
components which yield systems that are more robust to error and varying
environmental conditions than current systems, allowing them to be more scalable
and widely utilized.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Developing robust and scalable
molecular self-assembling systems has the promise to greatly impact many aspects
of science and technology, potentially enabling atomically precise manufacturing
of materials with carefully specified properties, implementation of molecular
"robots", and targeted drug delivery mechanisms which are able to diagnose and
treat diseases in vivo. To realize the great promise of this field, it is
important to recognize that it is fundamentally interdisciplinary and
incorporates fields such as physics, chemistry, mathematics, computer science,
and biochemical engineering, among others, and to foster the development of
researchers experienced in these areas and also skilled at this
interdisciplinary work. This project focuses on interdisciplinary collaboration
and student education, includes the development of an interdisciplinary course
("Introduction to DNA Nanotechnology''), the hosting of interdisciplinary
workshops for high school students and also for experienced researchers,
conducting interdepartmental seminars, and the development of software which can
be easily used by scientists from many disciplines to quickly become proficient
in this area. This will help train extremely valuable researchers capable of
synthesizing knowledge and techniques spanning many
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will create a freely released
software suite capable of automating the design of DNA-based self-assembling
systems. The work will involve extending current simulation software to be
massively parallelizable, allowing simulations to be run across large
supercomputing clusters, and the creation of new software modules able to
perform automated, quantitative analyses of simulation results. Additional
modules will be created to enable the suite to provide an end-to-end solution
from theoretical design to simulation-based validation, along with an easily
used web-based front end and database storage of results. The theoretical
aspects of the project will involve incorporation of various theoretical
construction techniques into molecular designs, and validation of those designs.
Some specific theoretical techniques which will be exploited and evaluated
include the incorporation of geometric hindrance to enforce correct algorithmic
behavior, and hierarchical self-assembly.