* 1553354
* CAREER: From Discrepancy to Optimization and Approximations in Geometric Hypergraphs
* CSE,CCF
* 02/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Esther Ezra, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 08/31/2019
* USD 484,645.00

How does one evenly distribute points on a sphere? Given points, how does one
color them red and blue, so no circular region has too many of one color? The
first question is open-ended until one defines evenly; the second is fully-
specified, but hard -- there are many possible colorings and many regions to
check. In these, and many similar problems, even when one is trying to be fair
to a number of players, some will win a little and some will lose a little; the
mathematical concept of "discrepancy" captures the amount of deviation from
uniformity that must occur. Through what sometimes seem abstract problems, such
as coloring, this mathematics explores the limits of how well can a sample
represent a whole -- an important question for computation, since algorithms are
often made efficient by doing initial computation on a sample of the input data.

In this project, the PI will explore questions of geometric discrepancy and
their connections to algorithms for optimization and approximation. She has
three foci: (1) Relative discrepancy, in which bounds depend on set size -- eg.,
the number of points in a circle. (In two and three dimensions, the PI has
previously nearly optimal bounds in two- and three-dimensions.) Algorithms to
find good colorings will also be sought, especially for geometric objects with
characteristics (like "fatness") that apply to models for manufacturing or
simulation. (2) Extending epsilon-nets, which are samples that approximate a
whole (e.g., a subset S from points P is an epsilon-net if any circle that
contains an epsilon fraction of P must contain a point of S) so that you have
some idea how many points from S lie in a circle that contains a larger fraction
of P. Epsilon-nets not only help approximate a whole, but also indicate where
more computation is needed in divide and conquer algorithms. (3) Leveraging
improved epsilon nets for better approximation algorithms. It has been known for
some time that improved bounds on epsilon nets in various geometric settings
(e.g. axis aligned rectangles, etc) immediately give improved bounds for various
NP-hard packing and covering problems in those same geometric settings. The PI
has some of the strongest bounds (e.g. she proved optimal bounds in the case of
axis-aligned rectangles, and has also found some practical applications of these
to problems in networking), and aims to make progress on a number of still open
questions in this domain, such as the size of weak epsilon-nets for axis aligned
rectangles.

This work pulls together several themes in mathematics and computation,
including when local solutions can be extended to global solutions. Progress in
understanding discrepancy can have broad and unexpected impact: fairness of
resource allocation affects more than just science and engineering simulations.