* 1553281
* CAREER: Knowledge-driven Analytics, Model Uncertainty, and Experiment Design
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2023
* Xiaoning Qian, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Continuing Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 08/31/2023
* USD 495,800.00

The advancement of high-throughput high-content data acquisition techniques has
pushed modern scientific research from traditional reductionism to
constructionism for studying complex systems with a strong data-driven focus.
However, there are still significant issues in big-data analytics, especially,
regarding the reproducibility of data-driven research findings. To enable
analytic methods from traditional reductionist scientific research to
constructionist research with the help of rich data, an integrative Bayesian
framework is proposed for systems prediction and intervention in high-
dimensional network-based systems, which will provide ways to translate the
unprecedented amount of heterogeneous data into reproducible scientific
knowledge in a cumulative manner with novel concepts of objective-based
uncertainty quantification and optimal experiment design based on that.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed knowledge-driven analytics has strong
potential of transforming available diverse large-scale data for reproducible
knowledge to drive life and materials science research. If successful, it can
eventually lead to computational tools for more efficient experiment design to
maximize the use of existing big data and speed up the process for effective
disease therapeutics and new materials discovery. The interdisciplinary nature
of this proposal promises to foster cross-fertilization of ideas between
engineering, life science, and materials science through research and education.
The broader impact of this proposal involves the integration of the proposed
research with an educational plan: (1) to strengthen interactions with the
collaborators in life and materials sciences. In addition to making all the
tools and research outcomes from this project publicly available, the developed
algorithms and tools, including necessary technical help, will be distributed to
the collaborators for more effective collaboration; (2) to develop new courses
interfacing engineering, mathematics, life and materials sciences and
incorporate them into the engineering curriculum for education and research
training of students at all levels, which will help the new generation of
researchers to establish a broad and solid foundation for interdisciplinary
research and prepare them with required skills to address real-world challenges.
The courses will be available across campus to attract female and minority
students who are interested in research in science and engineering; (3) to
involve both undergraduate and graduate students in the research in this
interdisciplinary field with the efforts to increasing the participation of
underrepresented groups in science and engineering through the collaborations
with the REU programs and other scholarship programs developed to increase
diversity at Texas A&amp;M University (TAMU). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
scientific focus of this proposal is solving mathematical and computational
problems that exist in high-dimensional network-based systems prediction and
intervention with uncertain models. The following open problems will be
addressed: (1) to develop a network-based Bayesian framework and methods for
systematic analysis of heterogeneous data sets; (2) to define novel objective-
based uncertainty quantification for assessing model uncertainty and data
significance to enable cumulative analytics to improve systems understanding and
optimize future experiment design; (3) to derive optimal Bayesian experiment
design based on uncertainty quantification for different operational objectives,
which can lead to the maximal use of existing data and effective future
experiment design and systems intervention; and (4) to apply the developed
methodologies for understanding and treating specific diseases, for example,
cancer and type 1 diabetes; as well as designing experiments for new materials
discovery in an efficient way, in collaboration with the collaborators in life
and materials sciences, which will translate the knowledge to practical
applications. This project will lay out the foundation for translating existing
data into systems understanding of life, disease, and man-made systems to gain
deeper insights and direct them to desirable systems behavior to benefit human
society.