* 1553056
* CAREER: iMPACT: Metaphysical and Probabilistic-Based Computing Transformation with Emerging Spin-Transfer Torque Device Technology
* CSE,CCF
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2023
* Mingjie Lin, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Continuing Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 04/30/2023
* USD 541,321.00

Effectively tackling the upcoming "zettabyte" data explosion requires a quantum
leap in computing power and energy efficiency. However, with the Moore's law
dwindling quickly, the physical limits of CMOS technology make it almost
impossible to achieve high energy efficiency if the traditional "deterministic
and precise" computing model still dominates. This CAREER proposal is inspired
by applications in brain-like computing and aims at developing an alternative,
non-Boolean, non-CMOS computing paradigm capable of overcoming the limitations
in computational efficiency of digital CMOS technology posed by quantum-related
device physics. This research, if successful, will offer a solution to tackle
the upcoming "zettabyte" data explosion. In addition, the PI approaches the
challenge of broadening participation from underrepresented minority groups in
both bottom-up (public STEM education) and top-down (PhD students recruiting)
manner. In particular, the PI and his team will use Orlando Science Center as
the main platform to stimulate public interests through innovative exhibits and
mini-lectures as well as engage in STEM education in the context of computing.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER proposal revolves around the Metaphysical and
Probabilistic Computing Transformation, an innovative paradigm that transcends
deterministic computing by natively exploiting randomness-driven physical
phenomenon, either from CMOS devices under extreme conditions or from emerging
spin-torque devices. The ultimate goal is to achieve, for a wide-range of
perception-based computing applications - and thus for applications where the
human Brain performs better than current machines - more than 10 times
improvement in computing performance, more than 100 times in energy efficiency,
and more than 10 times in hardware robustness over the existing state-of-the-
art.