* 1553661
* CAREER: Self-Assembly of Zwitterionic Amphiphilic Copolymers for Membranes with Sharp, Tunable Pore Size
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2022
* Ayse Asatekin, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 08/31/2022
* USD 525,846.00

CAREER 1553661-Asatekin.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Membrane filtration is energy
efficient, simple, scalable, and a key technology for generating clean, safe
water and for preventing water pollution. Most commercially available membranes
are composed of a handful of polymers, and are limited in the types of
separations they can perform. This project aims to build an integrated research
and education plan centered on developing novel membranes with new capabilities
by designing polymers that self-assemble to form nanostructures. Specifically,
this research will focus on controlling the pore size of a novel family of
membranes with high flux, exceptional fouling resistance, and sharp size-based
selectivity, prepared by coating zwitterion-containing amphiphilic copolymers on
porous supports. This research will lead to the development of improved
membranes for separations underserved by existing technologies such as peptide
separations and textile wastewater treatment. It will create a link between
polymer structure and membrane performance that will enable the rational design
of membrane materials for specific applications. The research will be fully
integrated with a system of educational activities through the involvement of
students at multiple stages in developing and performing outreach activities on
polymer science and separations. The team will work closely with Tufts Center
for Engineering Education and Outreach (CEEO) to develop new outreach activities
for K-12 students. The activity ideas will be initiated as term projects in the
PI's courses for undergraduate and graduate students. They will be tested in
summer workshops for girls in Malden, MA and also implemented in local schools
through the Tufts Student Teacher Outreach Mentorship Program (STOMP), and
disseminated through the STOMP Network. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims
to build an integrated research and education plan centered on designing
polymeric materials that self-assemble into functional nanostructures that lead
to the desired membrane functionality (e.g. selectivity, fouling resistance),
and on discovering fundamental relationships that correlate polymer chemistry
and architecture, self-assembled nanostructure, and function in membrane
applications. The specific research objective of this project is to understand
how the chemical structure and molecular architecture of copolymers with
hydrophobic and zwitterionic groups, and their processing methods, affect (1)
their self-assembled nanostructure and (2) their performance as membrane
materials in selective separations. The team aims to control the pore size of
these membranes by varying the polymer architecture and processing, and to
develop fundamental structure-property-function relationships that serve as
design rules for polymeric membrane materials with tunable, precise and
monodispersed pore size. For this purpose, the team will synthesize amphiphilic
copolymers that combine hydrophobic and zwitterionic monomers in random, comb
and star-block architectures. How these materials self-assemble will be studied
by transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and X-ray scattering. Membranes will
be made by coating porous supports with these polymers, and the pore size will
be determined by filtration experiments. The pore size, permeability and fouling
resistance of membranes will be correlated with the self-assembled morphology.
The results will be used to compile design rules or a toolkit for the rational
design of membrane materials targeted at specific separations that derive their
permeability, selectivity and fouling resistance from their self-assembled
structure. The research will be fully integrated with several educational,
outreach and mentorship activities, such as the development of outreach
activities for K-12 students that introduce concepts in polymer science, self-
assembly and separations, incorporation of proposed research into undergraduate
lab courses and classes, and involvement of undergraduate students in research.