* 1553637
* CAREER: Multiscale Modeling of Axonal Cytoskeleton Dynamics and Axonal Transport
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2016,10/31/2020
* Chuan Xue, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Junping Wang
* 10/31/2020
* USD 408,628.00

The cell cytoskeleton is a dynamic intracellular polymer system providing
highways for the active transport of various proteins and organelles inside a
cell. Perturbations of intracellular transport can lead to intracellular traffic
jams, cell death, and various diseases, analogous to the damage to a city when
the transportation system breaks down. The investigator will develop multiscale
models and methods to understand how the cytoskeleton and intracellular
transport are affected in diseases inside an axon, which is a long thin
projection of a neuron. The research results will have profound implications for
understanding neurodegenerative diseases such as amyotrophic lateral sclerosis
(ALS). It is anticipated that the new mathematical models can be readily
generalized to other cellular transport problems. The new mathematical theory on
interacting particle systems will have wide applications in biology and social
sciences. The research plan will be tightly integrated with the educational plan
that will engage graduate students on interdisciplinary research and expose K-12
students to mathematical biology and scientific computing through residential
summer camps. This project will also broaden the participation of
underrepresented groups in STEM fields.

The axonal cytoskeleton is an intracellular polymer system that is responsible
for the active transport of various cargoes along an axon. Disruptions of the
axonal cytoskeleton and axonal transport, including radial segregation of the
cytoskeleton and abnormal accumulations of cargoes, have been observed in many
neurodegenerative diseases, but the underlying mechanisms remain unclear. The
investigator will develop multiscale models to study the axonal cytoskeleton
dynamics and axonal transport in health and disease. There are three aims. The
first is to derive macroscopic models for the organization of the axonal
cytoskeleton in cross-section from microscopic models, and use them to
investigate the striking radial segregation of the axonal cytoskeleton in
disease. The second is to develop new multiscale modes for cargo transport along
an axon that incorporate cargo-cargo interactions, and use them to investigate
potential mechanisms that cause focal accumulations of cargoes, which are early
hallmarks of nerve degeneration. The third is to develop fully three-dimensional
stochastic models for the axonal cytoskeleton dynamics and axonal transport for
investigation of biological questions that concern dynamics near the nodes of
Ranvier, which are naturally occurring narrowing points in large axons. The
multiscale modeling strategy and the close collaboration with experimentalists
will lead to significant insights into the biological problem and help guide new
experiments.