* 1553340
* CAREER: Toward A Machine Learning Framework for the Internet of Things
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2023
* Stacy Patterson, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 12/31/2023
* USD 618,661.00

This project will develop a new paradigm and tools for machine learning that can
cope with the massive-scale, geographically distributed data in the Internet of
Things. The key innovation is to use devices and computing power within the
Internet of Things network itself to perform data analysis in a scalable,
reliable fashion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Internet of Things describes a
network of devices, from RFID tags, to smart thermostats, to light bulbs, that
can sense and communicate information. It is predicted that by 2020, there will
be 25 to 50 billion devices in the Internet of Things. This massive network and
the data it generates will enable new applications in a wide range of critical
domains including environmental management, smart infrastructure, and
healthcare. To achieve this vision, it is crucial to be able to quickly analyze
and learn from the massive amount of generated data. Current approaches for big
data analytics require full data transfer to a platform with large computational
power, such as the cloud. Given the projected explosion in the number of devices
and the resulting data generation rate, this is not feasible.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The proposed research integrates tools and theory from
machine learning, distributed computing, and networked systems in three main
thrusts that include; a computational framework that provides an abstraction for
algorithm design and implementation that is flexible enough to support a wide
collection of machine learning methods, a framework implementation that provides
a stable platform for algorithm developers by masking device heterogeneity,
devices failures, and the network dynamics of the Internet of Things, and
development and implementation of techniques to adapt the network and
computation to support algorithm execution with performance
guarantees.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The framework developed in this project will
facilitate rapid development and deployment of Internet of Things applications.
A significant contribution will be an open source software implementation of the
framework allowing others with limited network expertise to develop their own
applications for the Internet of Things. The project also includes robust
educational and outreach components including graduate and undergraduate
research, curriculum development, and activities to promote and support the
participation of women in computer science.