* 1553411
* CAREER: Mining Reliable Information from Crowdsourced Data
* CSE,IIS
* 05/01/2016,05/31/2022
* Jing Gao, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 05/31/2022
* USD 500,613.00

With the proliferation of mobile devices and social media platforms, any person
can publicize observations about any activity, event or object anywhere and at
any time. The confluence of these enormous crowdsourced data can contribute to
an inexpensive, sustainable and large-scale decision system that has never been
possible before. Such a system could vastly improve the efficiency and cost of
transportation, healthcare, and many other applications. The main obstacle in
building such a system lies in the problem of information veracity, i.e.,
individual users might provide unreliable or even misleading information. This
project identifies important research questions in the task of mining reliable
information from noisy and unreliable crowdsourced data, and pursues an
integrated research and education plan to address these questions. Through
integrating data from various sources, this project addresses information
veracity, which will benefit the many applications where crowdsourced data are
ubiquitous but veracity can be suspect.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In particular, this
project develops novel methods to mine reliable information by taking into
consideration various properties of crowdsourcing: 1) Crowdsourcing platforms
collect users' observations about certain objects. Other valuable information
sources, such as spatial-temporal, user influence, and textual data, are
leveraged to effectively detect reliable information from these observations. 2)
Effective privacy protection and budget allocation mechanisms are designed to
better motivate active crowdsourcing. These investigations are integrated with
the exploration of both theoretical and practical aspects of the proposed
methods. From the theoretical perspective, fundamental questions regarding the
confidence in the estimated reliability and the convergence of the proposed
methods are explored. From the practical perspective, the proposed methods are
adapted to tackle challenging problems in various applications such as
transportation, healthcare and education to enable new insights into these
domains. In addition to the research advances, this project contributes to
educational innovation, as the proposed methods are applied to educational
methodologies such as peer assessment and question answering. Additional
information about this project, including research results, publications,
datasets, and software, can be found at
http://www.cse.buffalo.edu/~jing/crowd.htm