* 1553367
* CAREER:   Illuminating the Tectonic History of North America with Seismic Models of Shear Attenuation and Velocity
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2023
* Colleen Dalton, Brown University
* Continuing Grant
* Margaret Benoit
* 03/31/2023
* USD 521,402.00

Title: CAREER: Illuminating the Tectonic History of North America with Seismic
Models of Shear Attenuation and Velocity

The North American continent contains vastly diverse geology, from the volcanoes
and mountains in the west to the interior plains that anchor the central United
States and the broad Appalachian hills that roll into the Atlantic Ocean. This
topography reflects the many episodes of continental collision, breakup, and
modification that the land mass has experienced over billions of years. The
movements of the tectonic plates at Earth?s surface are inextricably linked to
the movement of rocks in Earth?s mantle (mantle convection). Understanding the
connection between the Earth?s interior and surface is essential to addressing
fundamental questions about how continents are created, how they evolve over
time, and how they are destroyed. This study will use seismic waves generated by
earthquakes to image the properties of the crust and mantle beneath North
America, with particular emphasis on imaging in three dimensions the energy loss
(attenuation) experienced by seismic waves. While it is generally acknowledged
that seismic attenuation has the potential to be a valuable source of
information about the Earth?s interior, it is difficult to isolate attenuation
from other wave-propagation phenomena, which has historically limited its use by
researchers. Integrated research and education activities will utilize data
recorded by the NSF EarthScope USArray seismometers, which have recorded what is
likely the best data set in existence to confront these challenges.

This project will investigate, using new data analysis and seismic-wavefield
simulations, the three-dimensional variations in shear attenuation beneath North
America. This study will also develop a 3-D model of shear velocity in the upper
mantle and, through joint interpretation with the attenuation model and
laboratory measurements of attenuation and wave speed, place constraints on the
variations in temperature, composition, partial melt, and water in the North
American upper mantle. The attenuation model will be derived from measurements
of Rayleigh wave amplitude and body-wave attenuation at USArray stations
throughout the contiguous United States, and the velocity model will be derived
from Rayleigh wave travel-time and local site-amplification observations.
Separating the competing effects of focusing by elastic structure and anelastic
decay on the Rayleigh wave amplitudes is the primary obstacle to imaging small-
scale attenuation variations; spectral-element simulations with high-resolution
elastic models for the U.S. that have been made possible by USArray will be used
to compute focusing effects with greatly improved accuracy. The educational
activities are targeted at high-school and undergraduate students. Educational
seismometers will be installed at two Providence, RI area high schools. Data
recorded by these seismometers and USArray stations will be used to engage the
high-school students in earthquake science, fundamental properties of waves, and
the tectonic history of North America. Teaching modules utilizing these data
that address the Next Generation Science Standards (NGSS) will be developed and
disseminated more widely. At the undergraduate level summer interns will carry
out research projects at Brown during three summers, and a new field course in
Environmental Geophysics will be developed.