* 1553873
* CAREER: A Compositional Approach to Modular Cyber-Physical Control System Design
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/15/2016,09/30/2022
* Necmiye Ozay, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 09/30/2022
* USD 500,000.00

Complex, networked, distributed cyber-physical systems (CPSs) are emerging in
many safety-critical application domains such as aerospace and automotive.
Design of such systems heavily relies on insights and experiences of engineers
as principled design methodologies that can cope with the complexity of these
systems are lacking. As a result, extensive testing and fine-tuning is required
to ensure that the final product satisfies the design objectives. As a
principled alternative, this project proposes to use modularity for managing
complexity during both the design- and the life-cycles of cyber-physical
systems. The objective is to develop the scientific foundation and associated
algorithmic tools for the design of modular cyber-physical control systems. If
successful, in the long-run this research will lead to a "plug and play"
integration framework for CPSs supported by automated design tools, where one
can replace a subsystem with another one or perform upgrades to subsystems while
maintaining operational correctness guarantees. Results from this research will
be relevant to many application domains, including next generation air vehicles,
automotive systems and robotics. Its potential transformative impact will be on
the way CPSs in these domains are designed and operated. Translation to the
economy will proceed by actively seeking and engaging industrial partners. This
research effort will be complemented by an education plan where
interdisciplinary research and thinking in the area of CPS will be fostered
among undergraduate and graduate students to prepare the next generation of CPS
researchers and practitioners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To be specific, the project
will develop theoretical foundations and associated algorithmic tools for
distributed synthesis of provably correct control protocols that give rise to
compositional design principles for cyber-physical control systems. In
particular, algorithms for decompositions of system requirements at the
discrete/logic level and of the system states at the continuous/system level
will be developed. The main idea is a novel separation between external and
internal factors affecting each subsystem that allows internal interactions
required for the successful operation of a subsystem to be computed explicitly.
These internal interactions, namely interface rules, are captured in terms of
assumption and guarantee pairs that are used for solving local synthesis
problems to obtain local controllers in a distributed manner, while maintaining
global correctness guarantees when these controllers are deployed
simultaneously. The modularity-performance trade-off space will be explored by
introducing proper partial orders on these interface rules and by tuning the
complexity of the interface rules according to these order relations. Tools from
control theory (decentralized and robust control, model reduction, discrete
event systems) and formal methods (temporal logics, compositional verification,
distributed reactive synthesis) will be brought to bear to address these
problems.