* 1553275
* CAREER: Revealing a Reduced-Order Model for Chaotic Electroconvection and its Applications
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2016,02/28/2022
* Ali Mani, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 02/28/2022
* USD 515,000.00

PI: Mani, Ali&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1553275&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposal is focused on the computational study of elctroconvection. This term is
used to describe the fluid dynamics phenomena that are precipitated by
electrokinetic forces. Electroconvetion is important for flow close to surfaces
like electrodes or membranes, where the surfaces interact with the ions of the
fluid. The results of this research could have a strong impact on many
engineering and technology applications, starting from water desalination,
molecular separation, battery design, lab on a chip systems,
etc.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Experimental and theoretical investigations have
revealed that electroconvection can lead to highly chaotic flows with remarkable
resemblance to turbulent flows. These effects are shown to drastically impact
mixing, ion transfer rates, and thus energy and throughput efficiency in these
systems. Therefore, it is of crucial importance to develop modeling capabilities
that can quantitatively predict EC effects in such systems. A multiscale
approach is proposed that borrows concepts and tools reserved for turbulent flow
analysis. Preliminary results with 2D direct numerical simulations (DNS) are
available. These will be used to obtain boundary conditions for a spectral, high
resolution 3D DNS. The 3D results will be used to develop a reduced order that
can provide results faster than the DNS. Finally, experiments at collaborating
laboratories will be conducted to validate the models. Plans for the development
of a web based learning tool (based on Brownian dynamics simulations) for high
school students are described.