* 1553273
* CAREER: Safe and Secure Network Control for Smart and Connected Hospitals
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2023
* Shan Lin, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Alhussein Abouzeid
* 08/31/2023
* USD 449,572.00

With the increasing reliability and pervasiveness of wireless networks, more and
more critical systems such as vehicular networks, military systems, and first
responder systems, rely on wireless networks. In modern hospitals, wireless
technology will be used to interconnect medical, sensing, and computing devices,
as well as the electronic health record system to enable smart medical
applications, such as real-time patient monitoring, which can significantly
improve quality of care. Researchers have accumulated abundant knowledge for
designing network solutions for critical systems, however, most of them isolate
the network designs from application context: very limited context of the
application circumstances, e.g. location and user identity, is considered.
Differently, in medical applications for connected hospitals, the network and
security functionalities of medical systems are often tightly coupled with the
medical context, such as patient's physiological state and caregiver's workflow.
As much of those context information becomes available in real-time via
connected medical devices and sensors, this project addresses this urgent
challenge to investigate and integrate context into network control under safety
requirements. If successful, the research results shall reduce hazards and
deployment cost of wired networks in hospitals, and facilitate real-time and
efficient information exchange among patients, doctors, and clinical support
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work establishes fundamental network models
that incorporate context information, and provides networking solutions for
different medical applications under their safety and reliability requirements.
Specifically, the intellectual contributions of this proposed work are: i)
networked medical devices, sensors, electronic health record, and clinical
decision support systems provide real-time and rich contextual information about
the patients and the medical procedures. We investigate the relation between the
medical context and the medical systems network and security functionalities,
and create context based network and security control models. ii) Under the
reliability and safety requirements of medical applications, we design and
develop technologies to coordinate data collection across heterogeneous wireless
networks, control electromagnetic interference, configure and optimize
operations of medical devices. iii) Since trustworthy authentication to medical
devices, networks, and electronic health record is vital to protect patient?s
safety and privacy, we design access control algorithms based on patient
specific medical context. iv) To integrate different control solutions into a
consistent system in various contexts, we design control analysis algorithms and
tools to identify hidden policy conflicts statically and dynamically. v) A
reference wireless medical sensor and device testbed is created and deployed
into real scenarios under a variety of contexts.