* 1553490
* CAREER: A Scalable Multiplane Data Center Network
* CSE,CNS
* 05/15/2016,04/30/2021
* George Porter, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 04/30/2021
* USD 697,261.00

Large Internet data center providers, both public and private, must support
ever-increasing data rates between literally hundreds of thousands of servers to
meet processing and storage demand. Operators have relied on similar scale-out
network fabrics (typically folded-Clos topologies) to construct their networks.
Since their deployment in the mid-2000s, these scale-out designs have leveraged
the steadily increasing performance and decreasing cost of complementary metal-
oxide semiconductor (CMOS)-based switching silicon to keep pace with demand.
Unfortunately, these trends cannot continue: network switches face the same CMOS
process-scaling limitations that currently hamper central processing unit (CPU)
manufacturers. Just as CPUs have moved to multi-core designs to side-step their
scaling limitations, so too will data center operators need to adopt alternative
architectures to scale to next-generation link rates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will demonstrate a hybrid electrical/optical nework topology, called
SelectorNet, which scales to hundreds of thousands of servers at link rates
reaching 1.6 terabits per second. Unlike recent proposals which utilize two
dimensional- or three-dimensional microelectromechanical systems (2D or 3D-MEMS)
optical crossbar switches, SelectorNet relies on a novel optical device that
abandons the crossbar abstraction. Instead, it relies on indirection to deliver
packets between hosts that are not directly connected by our novel "selector"
switches. The result is a network fabric that is not only cost-competitive with
state-of-the-art Clos-based designs in 2020, but continues to scale in terms of
cost, energy, performance, and reliability as link rates surpass 400 gigabits
per second.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: Ensuring that the benefits of
this work have impact beyond the traditional metrics of research is integral to
its design. The results of this research will make it easier to design and build
scalable, efficient, and highly-available cloud and data center services. By
reducing the cost to deploy cloud infrastructure, the researchers hope to lower
costs for the largest operators, while reducing the barrier to entry of the
cloud for smaller organizations. They will further expand the research skills of
graduate and undergraduate students to address necessary datacenter efficiency
and cloud computing research challenges in a hands-on manner. Exposing
undergraduate students to cloud computing technologies in their courses and
through mentored research will enhance their marketability at graduation and has
the potential to inspire their curiosity and encourage the pursuit of graduate
studies. Teaching students how to build state-of-the-art networked systems that
are grounded in rigorous analysis and practical constraints is essential in our
increasingly networked world. An additional component of this research will be
the creation and dissemination of videos that will broaden public awareness and
appreciation of the science and engineering challenges facing large-scale
computing, machine learning, and Internet systems.