* 1553657
* CAREER: Proteostasis to Allostasis: Integration of Cellular- and Organismal-level Stress Responses
* BIO,IOS
* 04/15/2016,03/31/2024
* Haruka Wada, Auburn University
* Continuing Grant
* Theodore Morgan
* 03/31/2024
* USD 1,019,798.00

Stressful events can permanently modify how an organism functions. Those same
conditions in adults can also be traced back to events early in life. Therefore
understanding how organisms respond to environmental stress is crucial. However,
this has been challenging partly because although responses to stress have been
studied at but the cellular and whole organism level, scientists have not yet
made a successful link between stress to the whole animal and the cellular
consequences. The goals of the project are to 1) improve our understanding of
stress responses at both levels and 2) critically evaluate how the stress
response is regulated. This project also aims to improve science literacy and
inquiry-based science education in rural regions of Alabama. First, this project
will contribute to a more holistic view of how organisms respond to stress, and
will teach middle and high-school students how events at molecular and whole-
animal levels are interconnected. Second, models describing stress response
regulation have been applied to evaluate diseases risk factors, e.g., obesity
and socioeconomic status. This project will educate Alabamian public school
students about the consequences of obesity, lifestyle, and diet and how to
overcome stress. Finally, the participation in, and quality of, science fair
projects in southeastern Alabama has been extremely low, although such projects
provide a great opportunity to implement an inquiry-based approach to science
education. In collaboration with biology teachers, the project will provide
training, mentorship, and opportunities to conduct science fair projects to
spark interests in biology, inspire scientific careers, and increase science
literacy in regions historically underserved in STEM
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Conceptualizing and studying stress has been
challenging because stress responses extend across multiple biological scales,
and the consequences of stress are often non-linear. This lack of integration is
a major obstacle in this field, and is well exemplified by glucocorticoid- and
heat shock protein-focused studies of stress responses. Therefore, this project
will characterize an integrative stress response involving both HSPs and
glucocorticoids. Specifically, this project will test the hypothesis that HSPs
and glucocorticoids prime each other's response in preparation for subsequent
stressors by determining whether 1) glucocorticoids elevate HSP and associated
transcription factor and 2) a disruption in proteostasis, as regulated by the
heat shock response pathway, elicits glucocorticoid responses. Elevation of HSPs
and glucocorticoids has both protective and damaging effects. The allostasis
model conceptualizes this non-linear nature of stress, yet this model has not
been explicitly tested. Using zebra finches which adjust their heat tolerance
with prior heat-conditioning, the project will also evaluate the allostasis
model by testing the hypothesis that pre-conditioned birds elicit greater HSP
and glucocorticoid responses than birds with no prior exposure to the stressor,
thereby protecting individuals from stress-related suppression of reproductive
and immune functions. By defining the direct and reciprocal relationship between
HSP and glucocorticoid responses, this project will characterize organismal
orchestration of the HSP response and provide a molecular basis for the switch
from protective to damaging effects of glucocorticoids. Furthermore, this
project will provide an in-depth evaluation of the allostasis model and whether
this model applies to a stressor beyond nutritional stress.