* 1553041
* CAREER: Quadruplet Codon Decoding - Mechanistic Studies and Application in Cellular Genetic Code Expansion
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2022
* Jiantao Guo, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Continuing Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 03/31/2022
* USD 634,205.00

All living organisms transcribe and translate the information encoded by DNA by
well-understood processes known as transcription and translation respectively.
The process converts the information stored in DNA into protein functions that
are essential catalysts for life supporting reactions. In this process, every
three nucleotides in a gene are read as a specific code for the serial
incorporation of the natural building blocks protein synthesis. This study aims
at refactoring the translational machinery to evolve novel transfer-RNA species
that will recognize not a three-, but four-nucleotide code for the specific
translational incorporation of unnatural amino acids. The objective is to create
proteins that feature novel catalytic functions and chemical properties to aid
biochemical and biomedical research. In addition, this research will shed light
on fundamental questions about detailed mechanisms of translation. The project
will attract, train, and transform today's young talents into tomorrow's leaders
in sciences at the interface of chemistry and biology. The scientific insights
and new technologies obtained under the proposed research program will be
valuable to a broad biochemistry and synthetic biology research
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While the triplet codon is the predominant form
of the current genetic code, non-canonical reading of a quadruplet codon is a
natural process and can be achieved under experimental conditions. Transfer RNA
(tRNA) plays important roles in the quadruplet codon decoding process. The work
will use a directed evolution approach to identify tRNA mutants that are able to
efficiently decode quadruplet codons in a genomically recoded bacterium. A
systematic study of quadruplet codon decoding mechanism will be conducted, which
is likely contribute to the understanding on how ribosomes recognize the reading
frame. This research is further strengthen by expanding the cellular genetic
code with multiple and mutually orthogonal quadruplet codons. This would allow
for the incorporation of t unnatural amino acids with different physical and
chemical properties. Applications of this technology could enable unprecedented
in vivo study of proteins in living cells, and could enable novel synthetic
biology applications.