* 1553287
* CAREER: Cyberinfrastructure for Realizing Predictions with Uncertainty using Computational Modeling, Data, and Bayesian Inference
* CSE,OAC
* 05/15/2016,06/30/2019
* Paul Bauman, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Alan Sussman
* 06/30/2019
* USD 271,625.00

The progress of science and engineering in the U.S. is now limited by the lack
of computational infrastructure to incorporate uncertain information from
experimental data into complex predictions made by computer simulation. For
example, uncertainty in chemical models directly impacts the design of efficient
combustion systems at the core of the U.S. energy and transportation
infrastructure. The ability to incorporate uncertainty into computational models
will directly advance understanding of how this uncertainty impacts subsequent
model predictions and, therefore, our ability to make reliable decisions based
on the predictions of these complex models. This work aims to provide such a
computational infrastructure that can easily leverage the large scale computing
resources deployed in the U.S. The framework developed in this work can enable
improvements in the development of computational models by providing
methodologies and tools for ascertaining the large sources of uncertainty.
Additionally, the framework aims to enable better design of physical experiments
by facilitating the identification of experimental scenarios that best inform
the computational model. The cyberinfrastructure developed in this work is also
aimed to provide the foundation for training the next generation of scientists
and engineers to use contemporary computational and data-enabled science tools,
theory, and practice. The project, thus is aligned to NSF's mission to promote
the progress of science and to advance the national health, prosperity and
welfare.

The digital environment that this work aims to develop will support the Bayesian
inference of unknown parameters in mathematical models based on partial
differential equations (PDEs). Specifically, the computational environment will
facilitate the creation, experimentation, and examination of all aspects of
computational predictions with uncertainty: mathematical models, finite element
formulations of PDEs, statistical surrogate models for complex systems, and
algorithms for solving the statistical inverse problem. Significant progress in
the state-of-the-art of both the solution of statistical inverse problems and
the design of physical experiments will be made by easily enabling the presence
and examination of uncertainty within complex simulation models. This platform
will use modern high performance computing algorithms and be portable to
extreme-scale computing infrastructure for the solution of those models.
Finally, all elements will be deployed in portable, efficient, and easy-to-use
software elements for use by the community at large.