* 1553248
* CAREER: An Information Theoretic Perspective of Consistent Distributed Storage Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 02/15/2016,01/31/2023
* Viveck Cadambe, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 01/31/2023
* USD 497,847.00

Broader Significance:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Key-value stores form an integral
infrastructural component of numerous modern web-based applications including
retail stores, multi-player games, reservation systems, news feeds, and social
and professional networks. Cloud computing service providers commonly implement
key-value stores over large scale distributed data storage systems. At the heart
of key-value store implementations in distributed storage systems, there are
carefully crafted algorithms that expose a consistent, current view of the
stored data to a user who reads the data. The main purpose of this project is to
undertake a formal study of the storage costs incurred in distributed storage
systems which aspire to present a consistent, current view of the stored data.
The project has the long-term potential to aid the development of new data
storage techniques that can benefit key-value store implementations by reducing
their storage cost and energy consumption.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Description:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An important requirement of a distributed data
storage system is fault tolerance, that is, the data must be accessible even if
the system components fail. In applications of distributed storage to
distributed computing and implementation of key-value stores, the following
property known as consistency is also critical: when the data is being
constantly updated, a user that reads from the system should obtain the latest
version of the data. Algorithms that ensure consistency and fault tolerance in
storage systems have been extensively studied in distributed systems theory and
practice. The goal of this project is to obtain, for the first time, an
information theoretic understanding of the storage costs incurred in consistent,
fault-tolerant distributed storage systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Building on
preliminary work by the investigator, the project will develop and study several
new information theoretic formulations inspired by distributed systems theory
and practice. The proposed formulations naturally expose trade-offs between the
degrees of redundancy and consistency, and other physical parameters of storage
systems. New coding schemes and information theoretic converses for the proposed
formulations will be developed using tools from algebra, combinatorics and
network information theory. The project will also pursue the development of new
bounds for network coding, which naturally apply to the newly proposed
formulations and to other families of codes including locally repairable codes
and regenerating codes. The project will likewise develop an education plan that
eyes the long term goal of developing interdisciplinary researchers and
engineers who are trained in information theory, coding theory, and the theory
and design of distributed systems.