* 1553212
* CAREER: Role of Symmetry in the Properties of Nanostructures:  A First Principles Approach
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2022
* Phanish Suryanarayana, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* David Fyhrie
* 07/31/2022
* USD 599,999.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) program will develop an
inexpensive high-fidelity computational framework for the accelerated discovery
of nanostructures with unprecedented properties that can be tailored to
technological applications. Nanostructures can be defined as structures which
possess at least one dimension in the nanometer range. The remarkable properties
displayed by such systems have resulted in the revolutionary field of
nanotechnology, whose potential applications include the efficient production
and storage of renewable energy; diagnosis and cure of terminal illnesses;
effective purification processes; and synthesis of new materials with high
strength to weight ratio. The capability to design nanostructures with enhanced
properties that are well suited to such applications is of particular
importance. However, the astronomically large number of nanostructure
configurations and compositions makes a systematic search impractical.
Therefore, current experimental and computational techniques typically rely on
empirical insight, which makes the process lengthy, expensive and susceptible to
failure. The integrated educational objective is to incorporate multi-
disciplinary nanoscience/nanotechnology related curriculum into the K-12,
undergraduate and graduate education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The symmetry of
nanostructures, either intact or broken, plays a key role in determining their
extraordinary properties. Towards the goal of understanding and utilizing this
dependence, a novel real-space, symmetry-adapted formulation and massively
parallel implementation of ab-initio Density Functional Theory will be
developed. The compatibility of this formulation with all the symmetry groups
will result in a tremendous reduction in the computational cost, thereby
enabling the accurate characterization of nanostructures that are three orders
of magnitude larger in size than those currently feasible. Additionally, the
developed formulation will enable the systematic discovery of new nanostructures
with esoteric properties by allowing for an efficient parametrization of the
configurational space of nanostructures using symmetry. The applications to be
studied include nanoscale flexoelectricity, which will provide new understanding
into the nature and strength of the coupling between polarization and strain
gradients; phase transformation of the tail sheath in the bacteriophage T4
virus, which will provide significant insights into the structure and creation
of viruses; and search for new nanostructures that display unique phenomena by
virtue of a linear dispersion relation. Overall, the proposed research
represents a paradigm shift from the conventional view that crystal unit cells
with translational symmetry are the fundamental building blocks.