* 1553465
* CAREER: Interacting Dynamic Bayesian Models for Social Behavior and Reasoning
* CSE,IIS
* 03/01/2016,02/28/2021
* Katherine Heller, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Jie Yang
* 02/28/2021
* USD 516,016.00

This project develops machine learning methods to analyze online data and
illuminate social behavior. People spend a great deal of their lives
socializing, or interacting with other people. Social interactions are
inherently part of most of our activities, and, therefore, understanding social
interactions is a fundamental part of understanding human behavior. As the
amount of time people spend online rapidly grows, social interactions are
increasingly occurring online. This project uses Dynamic Bayesian models to
analyze time series data of social behavior that inherently involves
interactions over time. The project provides tools for understanding social
behavior and better methods for data analysis. The project trains graduate
students and helps high school students learn more about data analysis. The
project principal investigator also maintains a strong commitment to actively
involving in the organization of Women in Machine Learning Workshop to ensuring
the advancement of women in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research focuses on
understanding the underlying structure of the interactions themselves. The
research team elucidates this underlying structure through hierarchically
modeling the interactions between multiple dynamic processes. More specifically,
the project develops: (1) interacting dynamic Bayesian methods that can be used
to model social interactions that jointly capture the temporal dynamics and the
linguistic content of interactions between individuals, and discover latent
attributes of individuals, such as power and influence, or roles such as bullies
and victims; and (2) methods for analyzing epidemiological social network data.