* 1553333
* CAREER: Optimizing Computational Range and Velocity Imaging
* CSE,IIS
* 02/01/2016,01/31/2021
* Gordon Wetzstein, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Jie Yang
* 01/31/2021
* USD 400,000.00

This project focuses on developing optimized hardware and software
implementations for emerging computational range and velocity imaging. Today,
the primary technologies for capturing range and velocity are radar and lidar.
These offer a very high precision, but available systems are expensive, bulky,
and slow, because they sequentially scan scenes in a point-by-point manner.
Time-of-flight (ToF) cameras have emerged as inexpensive and fast alternatives.
ToF cameras use active, temporally-modulated illumination and coded, in-pixel
sensing to estimate the distance between the camera and each scene point in
three dimensions (3D). Recently, simultaneous range and velocity imaging
techniques were demonstrated for the first time with ToF cameras. A major
roadblock for unlocking the full, transformative potential of range and velocity
imaging has been the limited access to low-level sensor and illumination
functionalities of commercially-available ToF cameras. Range (or depth) and
velocity imaging enables computers to sense and understand the world and 3D
scene dynamics. A wide range of applications in medical imaging, defense, human-
computer interaction, and robotics rely on depth and velocity information to
perform domain-specific tasks, such as object detection, tracking, localization,
mapping, and motion analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research makes
computational range and velocity imaging practical by optimizing the speed,
resolution, precision of depth and velocity estimation, 3D imaging capabilities,
and photon sensitivity of emerging computational imaging systems in direct and
non-line-of-sight scenarios. By analyzing the fundamental limitations and
benefits of time-resolved imaging systems, optimized hardware implementations
and reconstruction algorithms are devised that facilitate novel range and
velocity sensing capabilities and make them practical (i.e. robust, inexpensive,
and reproducible). The anticipated insights and contributions advance knowledge
and gain an understanding of the limits of time-resolved computational imaging
and how to practically achieve them. The developed computational imaging systems
and mathematical models are expected to provide fundamentally new building
blocks for a diversity of applications in computer and machine vision, medical
imaging, microscopy, scientific imaging, remote sensing, defense, and robotics.