* 1553279
* CAREER: Data-driven Approaches for Investigating Olfactory System Heterogeneity
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2023
* Jason Castro, Bates College
* Continuing Grant
* Quentin Gaudry
* 04/30/2023
* USD 720,000.00

The broad goal of this project is to develop and apply a suite of computational
tools for studying the molecular and functional organization of the brain. To
address whether circuits in a given brain area are organized as functionally
diverse and heterogeneous modules despite apparent anatomical similarity, the PI
and his associates will investigate the mouse olfactory bulb -- a brain
structure dedicated to processing smell. Image data charting patterns of gene
expression throughout the bulb will be obtained from open, digitally curated
atlases (the Allen Brain Atlas (ABA)), and computationally mined to identify
spatially structured motifs of gene expression. Electrophysiological recordings
will also be made from slices of the bulb to directly test for the presence of
organizational motifs identified in silico. These research activities will
engage undergraduates extensively (the PI is a professor at a small liberal arts
college), and provide them with experiences using computational approaches to
study high-dimensional data sets. Additionally, the PI will promote the virtues
of computational thinking and problem solving in biology through a redesign of
his Introductory Neuroscience course. The new course will enlist students as
practitioners in the analysis of data, and will make extensive use of open data
sets from the ABA. A twin goal of the course redesign is to enhance diversity
and retention in STEM disciplines through an emphasis on active, in-class
learning. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Of the myriad genes whose differential
expression might demarcate distinct brain subregions, one can typically only
test a small and idiosyncratic set in a single experiment, potentially missing
important contributors to regional heterogeneity. Our first aim addresses this
issue by analyzing the densely cataloged, whole-genome expression maps of the
ABA to investigate the "zonal" molecular organization of the olfactory bulb. We
will cluster gene expression profiles obtained from the ABA's in-situ-
hybridization experiments to identify candidate spatial modes (e.g. "patchy",
"periodic", "dorsomedial") of expression in the bulb. Our subsequent aims are
centered around the collection of a densely sampled electrophysiological map of
olfactory bulb principal neurons using in-vitro whole-cell slice physiology.
Each recorded cell will be spatially registered to the same virtual bulb, and
represented as a high-dimensional feature vector of physiological properties;
these data will be clustered as above to test for physiologically distinct
subregions, as well as for correspondences between "gene space" and
"physiological space." We will use this same approach to directly and
comprehensively investigate the degree to which sister and non-sister mitral
cells (i.e. sharing a common glomerulus vs. not) are physiologically different.