* 1553909
* CAREER: Detection and quantification of metal-based engineered nanoparticles in surface waters
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2022
* Mohammed Baalousha, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 07/31/2022
* USD 510,000.00

Proposal: 1553909&lt;br/&gt;PI: Baalousha, Mohammed
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Engineered nanoparticles are currently considered as an
emerging contaminant because their increased production and use in consumer
products leads to release into the environment. Risk assessment of
nanotechnology to humans or the environment, resulting from increased
accumulations of engineered nanoparticles in aquatic systems, is currently
impeded by the difficulty in differentiating engineered nanoparticles from
naturally occurring nanoparticles and quantifying engineered nanoparticle
exposure concentrations and properties. This CAREER award aims to develop
methods to discern engineered and natural nanoparticles and to measure the
concentration and properties of engineered nanoparticles in the natural
environment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award will develop a multi-method
analytical platform capable of discerning engineered nanoparticles from natural
nanoparticles based on differences in their physicochemical properties such as
size, morphology, chemical composition, elemental/isotopic ratios, and/or
combinations of these properties. The hypothesis is that engineered
nanoparticles possess significantly different physicochemical properties,
relative to natural nanoparticles, which will enable detection and
quantification engineered nanoparticles in complex matrices. The multi-method
approach includes field flow fractionation coupled with inductively coupled
plasma-mass spectroscopy, single particle-ICP-MS and transmission electron
microscopy coupled with X-ray energy dispersive spectroscopy techniques and
methodologies. In particular, the research will evaluate the capability of these
methods to identify subtle differences in physicochemical properties of
engineered versus natural nanoparticles to: 1) enable detection and
quantification of engineered nanoparticles, 2) determine applicability and
limitations of these methods for engineered nanoparticle analysis in surface
waters, 3) perform analysis of engineered nanoparticles in surface waters
receiving effluents from waste treatment plants, and 4) apply the multi-method
approach for monitoring of engineered nanoparticles in surface waters in
collaboration with the USGS.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The outcomes of the proposed
research will impact other disciplines such as aquatic toxicology and
environmental nanoscience and engineering. Quantifying concentrations and
properties of engineered nanoparticles in surface waters will affect engineered
nanoparticle hazard and risk characterization by focusing on the form of
engineered nanoparticles after their transformations in the environment. Also,
measuring the concentrations and properties of engineered nanoparticles in
surface waters will enable validation of engineered nanoparticles fate models.
The outcome of the proposed research will also inform federal agencies (e.g.
EPA, NIST, and USGS) and industry on nanoparticle regulation and best safety
practices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To integrate research, education and service,
the PI will: 1) develop undergraduate and graduate lectures and courses in
environmental nanoscience, 2) edit books that can be used as text book material,
3) enhance undergraduate, graduate, and high school laboratory and field
experiences, 4) develop a professional training program for high school
teachers, 5) enhance high school students awareness of nanotechnology and the
opportunities and challenges it may offer, 6) train students on reviewing
proposals, 7) involve students in grants development and writing, and 7)
organize the FFF2018 symposium, and a meeting and discussion of high school
student with international researchers.