* 1553728
* CAREER: Deciphering the human regulome: omics-based analysis of intergenic genotype-to-trait associations, made accessible and powerful
* BIO,DBI
* 04/15/2016,03/31/2021
* Stephen Ramsey, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 03/31/2021
* USD 566,688.00

This project's research activities will advance the field of bioinformatics by
creating a computational method that combines different types of information
from genome-wide association studies. Genetic association studies measure
sequence differences across an entire genome in order to identify what variants
cause the occurrence and variability of traits like height and disease
susceptibility. The goal of this project is to develop methods to precisely
locate gene regulatory variants, that now are only known to be somewhere in a
large region, and use them to understand how traits vary in a population. The
methods developed in this research aim to combine a number of types of
information, like gene expression levels for cells, measurement of traits in
many individuals, and comparisons with traits in other species, in order to
identify causal regulatory variants. The project's curriculum development
activities will contribute to STEM education by creating and sharing a hands-on
workshop on genome bioinformatics in the research area. By integrating research
and educational activities students will (i) gain science literacy in the areas
of genetics and bioinformatics; (ii) show how well hands-on methods work in
genetics education; and (iii) use already performed genetic association studies
to gain new knowledge in biology and in biomedicine.

This research will create and evaluate an integrative machine-learning model for
identifying regulatory variants within human intergenic GWAS regions. The
model's inputs will include the reference genome, the local DNA 3-D shape,
phylogenetic conservation, and transcriptomic and epigenomic measurements. The
model's output will be predicted regulatory variants with significance scores.
The model will be benchmarked against published methods using ground-truth
regulatory variants. The machine-learning model's variant predictions will be
incorporated into an open-source, web-based software tool for integrative post-
analysis of GWAS data. Compatibility with a cloud-computing framework will
position the tool for maximum impact. Through educational activities that are
integrated with the project's research activities, Dr. Ramsey will create,
evaluate, and disseminate a Genome Bioinformatics Workshop unit for high school
educators and students. Participants will learn to use the tool to analyze and
explore human GWAS-identified regions for a model trait (height); through this
they would be expected to gain a better understanding of the potential of the
field of personal genomics. The workshop's materials will be developed within an
interdisciplinary workshop incubator consisting of pairs of STEM-
underrepresented CS and biology undergraduate summer students. We will create,
evaluate, and disseminate the workshop unit in partnership with three outreach
programs for STEM-underrepresented students. Project results will be made
available at the project website: lab.saramsey.org/regulome