* 1553905
* CAREER: Unlocking "forbidden" optical transitions in nanostructures using light with orbital angular momentum
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/2016,02/28/2022
* Mark Siemens, University of Denver
* Continuing Grant
* Tom Oder
* 02/28/2022
* USD 505,300.00

Nontechnical abstract: &lt;br/&gt;Light with orbital angular momentum (also
called "vortex beams" and "twisted light") has generated considerable recent
interest because of applications in high-resolution imaging and high-bandwidth
communications, but little is known about how twisted light interacts with solid
matter. This research explores the use of twisted light to generate new
"twisted" quantum electron excitations in nanostructures. Experiments are
performed by illuminating cylindrical nanostructures such as rings and dots with
light that has tunable orbital angular momentum in order to excite, measure, and
control twisted electronic states. The new quantum states accessed in this
research could be used in future technologies such as high-bandwidth data
storage, computing, and communications. Additionally, this work will be
integrated into a new service learning course at the University of Denver in
which students will bring these research ideas into neighborhood middle and high
schools through hands-on demonstrations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
abstract: &lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to demonstrate and measure
unexplored orbital angular momentum (OAM)-activated optical transitions in
semiconductor nanostructures. Experiments are performed on quantum rings, dots
and wells in order to: 1.) Demonstrate that different orbital states are
accessed with twisted light by studying the OAM dependence of transmission
spectra; 2.) Measure the dephasing of distorted (OAM-excited) electron and hole
wavefunctions with zero spatial overlap, including varying the distribution
between center-of-mass and relative-motion angular momentum that is only
possible with OAM excitation; and 3.) Control the relaxation of orbital states
with OAM-tunable optical pumping. These experiments are enabled by novel
multidimensional spectroscopy in which both OAM and wavelength are
simultaneously resolved.