* 1553168
* CAREER:  Synthesis in a Live Programming Environment
* CSE,CCF
* 01/15/2016,09/30/2021
* Ruzica Piskac, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Pavithra Prabhakar
* 09/30/2021
* USD 463,272.00

A live programming environment allows a programmer to immediately see the
effects of changes to a program on its outputs and effectively eliminates the
edit-run-debug cycle that dominates programming work flows today. Live
programming is an emerging paradigm that is promising a vast change in the
techniques used to develop modern software. This project combines live
programming and software synthesis. By generating representative examples to
illustrate code behavior, the user can more easily understand the code. If the
user notices examples that do not match the intended behavior, the user can
either modify the source code, or change the examples to correctly convey the
behavior. Invoking a programming by example synthesis algorithm on those updated
examples will automatically generate code, which is then merged with the
original source code. We call this concept cooperative
programming.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merits of this project
include: devising novel real-time algorithms to synthesize code, investigating
new fault localization techniques, and developing code repair that is intuitive
and natural for the user. In addition, the project is focused on establishing a
formal theoretical framework for synthesis in a feedback loop. These ideas will
be evaluated in a modern, major programming language, thus making it readily
accessible to programmers. In this way, the broader impact of cooperative
programming is to increase programmer productivity while simultaneously lowering
the barriers to entry for novice programmers, such as secondary school students.