* 1553385
* CAREER: A Theory of Mechanisms with Unstructured Beliefs
* CSE,CCF
* 02/15/2016,01/31/2022
* Jing Chen, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Peter Brass
* 01/31/2022
* USD 481,924.00

This project expands the theory of mechanisms to settings with unstructured
beliefs. More specifically, computer science studies optimization problems when
the data is at hand, and mechanism design studies optimization problems when the
data is in the hands of rational players, who may strategically lie about the
data in their possession if this is in their interest. The need for mechanism
design arises in many contexts in both computer science and economics, such as
distributed computation, auctions, social networks, healthcare, and multiagent
systems at large. A player's belief about other players in a mechanism is the
information he has about them: it's called "belief" rather than "knowledge" to
reflect that the information may not always be correct or consistent. Players'
beliefs form the basis of their reasoning, and largely affect the mechanism's
structure and performance. Beliefs can be null, purely possibilistic, or purely
probabilistic; but, very often, they are unstructured: a player's belief can be
anywhere between a set of possibilities and a fully-fledged probability
distribution. Despite the tremendous progress made in mechanism design, the vast
space where players have unstructured beliefs remains highly unexplored. This
project studies fundamental questions about such settings and aims at developing
a theory of mechanisms for analyzing and leveraging unstructured beliefs. If
successful, it will make profound contributions to both computer science and
economics, and is expected to have a long-lasting impact on logic, multiagent
systems, and game theory.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The technical part of this
project consists of two key components. On the one hand, it will establish the
logical foundation for different information structures and characterize
corresponding notions of rationality. On the other hand, it will develop new
tools and criteria for mechanism design, and provide new mechanisms for
strategic settings such as auctions. This project will establish a solid
scientific foundation for mechanisms with unstructured beliefs, bring mechanism
design closer to logic and epistemic game theory, and further strengthen the
connections between computer science and economics. Results from this project
will be broadly disseminated in computer science, economics, and operations
research. The PI will encourage the participation of women and members of
underrepresented minority groups in this project. Moreover, new graduate and
undergraduate curriculums will be developed based on this project.