* 1553330
* CAREER: Highly stable lipid bilayers on freestanding cytoskeleton-like membrane
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2022
* Xiaolong Luo, Catholic University of America
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie George
* 05/31/2022
* USD 567,346.00

PI: Luo, Xiaolong &lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1553330
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Natural cell membranes are composed of a thin lipid
bilayer (LB) that forms a continuous barrier around the cell, and abundant
membrane proteins that play key functions of the cell and stabilize LB. The cell
membrane sits on a supporting intracellular matrix called cytoskeleton layer
that defines cell shape and further stabilizes LB. Ion channels and molecular
receptors of membrane proteins on LB are the main targets of fundamental
research and pharmaceutical drugs. As such, model LBs have been the crucial
platform to study transport and signaling processes of membrane proteins.
However, current model LBs suffer from notorious limitations including (1) short
LB lifetime, (2) fluidic and/or electrical inaccessibility to both sides of the
membranes, and (3) lack of the rich constituents of natural cell membrane.
Addressing these limitations of model LB systems should significantly expedite
both fundamental biological studies and pharmaceutical drug screenings.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal outlines a five-year program of integrated
research and educational activities focusing on the development of highly stable
lipid bilayers (HSLB) in microfluidic networks. The investigator proposes to
fabricate LB on a freestanding, semi-permeable and mechanically robust
biopolymer membrane, the first time such a configuration being pursued. The work
will assess the hypothesis that the supporting membrane can serve as a model
cytoskeleton layer for the lipid bilayer with high stability that presents in
natural cell membranes. The fabricated HSLB will be characterized and compared
with current model LBs, applied to study ion channel activities and the virus-
cell membrane fusion process, and scaled up for other research and industrial
users. Compared to current suspended and supported LBs, the developed HSLB
system will provide long-term stability, better replication of cell membranes
and ease of scaling-up, as well as enabling simultaneous fluidic, electrical and
optical measurements and manipulations. When fully established, the HSLB
platform can be a game-changer for studying fundamental membrane biology and
identifying membrane-associated novel drug targets, which are greatly limited by
the current model LB systems. Besides bioengineers developing microfluidic and
Lab-on-a-Chip devices, this research will be of interest to scientists studying
biopolymer materials and membrane protein activities, industrial researchers
investigating drug targets and high throughput screening, and educators teaching
biomaterials and biomicrosystems.