* 1553860
* CAREER: Molecular Engineering of Bio-orthogonal Stabilized Alpha Helices
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2016,09/30/2022
* Greg Thurber, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 09/30/2022
* USD 500,000.00

1553860 &lt;br/&gt;Thurber, Greg &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Novel molecular
engineering strategies are rapidly enabling the development of unique bio-
inspired molecules for materials, separations, drug, and medical imaging agent
applications. However, these natural molecules often degrade at the conditions
necessary for their use, such as in acidic or basic pH solutions when purifying
a product or in the body where enzymes degrade the compounds before they can
reach their therapeutic target. By using synthetic organic molecules to
stabilize these biological materials, the agents can be engineered with both
vast complexity and high stability. Furthermore, by choosing an appropriate
chemical technique, high-throughput methods can be developed to rapidly select
useful molecules from libraries of millions of compounds. This work will support
basic research into the fundamental properties of these semi-synthetic materials
and enable applied research to develop novel compounds for diverse applications.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER proposal will combine novel synthetic linkers,
non-natural amino acid (NNAA) incorporation, and bio-orthogonal chemistry with
directed evolution to engineer stabilized helices with unique targeting
properties. Aim 1 of this proposal will characterize a novel series of azide-
alkyne stabilized alpha helices that possess unique chemical, imaging, and
pharmacokinetic properties and are compatible with cell surface directed
evolution. This arrangement only requires one type of NNAA in the peptide
backbone to reduce complexity and increase overall incorporation efficiency. The
longer linker can be engineered with a functional handle for attachment to
beads, fluorescent dyes, radiolabels, or pharmacokinetic modifiers. This modular
design enables these molecules to be used in multiple applications including
separations, intracellular targeting, and imaging. Aim 2 of the proposal will
capitalize on the bio-orthogonal chemistry to select novel helices. A site-
specific linkage is introduced to select for molecules that will retain binding
while attached to the linker. This proposal will alleviate the current
development bottleneck by screening millions of novel stabilized helices for new
therapeutics, imaging agents, and separations components. Engineering
functionally diverse stabilized peptide and protein structures will impact
several fields including the chemical industry, biomedical engineering field,
pharmaceutical industry, and medical community. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To grow
the pipeline of highly qualified and diverse engineering students to fulfill
these jobs, a science-focused outreach program will be created for students from
local under-resourced schools in the Detroit area. Multiple interactions with
students from predominantly under-represented backgrounds facilitate hands-on
activities directly related to molecular engineering research. These students
will visit the University of Michigan for interactive sessions to enhance their
scientific understanding and encourage them to pursue science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics (STEM) fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER
award by the Biotechnology and Biochemical Engineering Program of the CBET
Division is co-funded by the Systems and Synthetic Biology Program of the
Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences.