* 1553764
* CAREER: Investigating the Role of Clonal Cell Competition in Zebrafish Neural Development using in Vivo Multicolor Imaging
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2022
* Tamily Weissman, Lewis and Clark College
* Standard Grant
* Evan Balaban
* 05/31/2022
* USD 841,210.00

The remarkable function of the brain requires proper growth and formation in the
embryo. First, a small cluster of cells increases dramatically in number, then
transforms into an exquisitely organized organ with a complicated pattern of
connections. Most of the time, this process results in brains that are perfectly
normal, with the right number of nerve cells. Surprisingly little is known,
though, about how the growing brain decides how many cells to produce. This
research project will look at the control of cell number in the growing brains
of transparent living zebrafish during the first few days of life. The PI has
developed techniques for watching clusters of dividing cells over time in
special zebrafish embryos whose brain cells glow with unique combinations of
colors (called "Brainbow"). This coloring allows new cells to be followed as
they divide off from their mother cell. So far it appears that families of cells
(mother cell with her set of daughter cells) compete with other families to
survive in the growing brain. This type of competition has not been seen before
in the brain, and may be responsible for controlling growth - not only in the
brain, but in other organs as well. The PI will test which genes are important
for cell families to survive this competition. The work will generate a number
of new research tools that will be shared with the scientific community.
Undergraduate students will perform and analyze the experiments themselves,
providing rich opportunities for research training early in developing
scientists' careers. By also transforming the data they have personally
collected into an interactive, educational website, students will learn various
digital media approaches to making scientific material understandable to
traditional and non-traditional audiences. The colorful images produced by this
research have great appeal to both scientists and non-scientists, making it
easier for students to learn how to engage the public with their
work.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;To study dynamic cellular behavior in the living
brain, the PI has developed an approach using in vivo time-lapse confocal
imaging and multicolor fluorescent protein (Brainbow) expression in zebrafish.
Using this technique, the PI has shown that programmed cell death occurs non-
randomly in the living brain, with specific neural progenitor cells and their
neuronal progeny (entire clones) undergoing cell death in a coordinated manner,
while neighboring clones appear normal. If whole clones of dividing cells are in
fact competing with one another, increases or decreases in cellular fitness
should influence a clone's competitive edge. The planned research will use a
mosaic approach to alter gene expression in individual cells, coupled with
global Brainbow expression to simultaneously follow dynamics within multiple
clones of dividing cells. Cellular fitness will be targeted via both cell-
intrinsic mechanisms (cell cycle, c-myc activity) and cell-extrinsic mechanisms
(access to extracellular BMP signaling). These experiments will test directly
whether cellular fitness influences a clone?s ability to survive in the
developing brain. Overall this may support the hypothesis that competition among
clones of dividing cells helps regulate neuronal production and growth in the
developing nervous system.