* 1553802
* CAREER: Dynamic Hemilability Controlled by Cation-Responsive Pincer-crown Ether Catalysts
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2022
* Alexander Miller, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* John Gilje
* 04/30/2022
* USD 675,000.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Catalysis Program of the Chemistry
Division, Professor Alexander Miller of the Department of Chemistry at the
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill is developing cation-responsive
catalysts for the sustainable synthesis of chemical building blocks. Catalysts
are vital in many industrial and laboratory chemical processes. Many catalysts
involve a metal atom that contains a reactive center that can facilitate
chemical reactions. However, this reactive center, itself, can be prone to
reactions that can deactivate it. This project involves the development of
ligands (groups that are attached to a metal) that contain one portion that is
firmly bonded to the metal and another that can be relatively easily removed
from the metal to open a reactive site. These ligands are called hemilabile
ligands. The hemilabile ligands targeted contain a group that can bind to an
external positive ion that remove that group from the metal. This permits a
balance of activity and stability that advances catalysis relevant to the
pharmaceutical and commodity chemical industries. The educational approach
focuses on communication in chemistry. Graduate students are participating in a
science communication initiative in collaboration with a local science center,
the Morehead Planetarium, creating hands-on activities that illustrate the role
of catalysis in everyday life. The Safety Net is also being established as an
online network of safety resources to encourage communication between academic
and industrial scientists. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research approach utilizes
new "pincer-crown ether" ligands that contain a macrocylic cation receptor site
to modulate reactivity. Mechanistic studies are establishing the parameters that
allow cations to tune individual organometallic reactions steps, supporting the
development of catalysts that exhibit distinct activity and selectivity in the
presence of various cations. The combined education and research program is
training graduate students in catalysis research, safe laboratory practices, and
science communication with the public.