* 1553826
* CAREER:Integrative Analysis for Reverse Engineering Embryonic Pattern Repair Mechanisms
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2016,02/28/2023
* Jeremiah Zartman, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 02/28/2023
* USD 516,817.00

1553826&lt;br/&gt;Zartman, Jeremiah &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Uncovering how
developing tissues are able to repair themselves is of fundamental importance
for devising new strategies for treating birth defects or tissue degenerative
diseases. The goal of this NSF CAREER proposal is to establish an
interdisciplinary research-education-outreach program that rests on three legs:
(i) quantitative, systems-level analysis of the mechanisms governing tissue
growth and homeostasis; (ii) education of chemical engineers and bioengineers
with a strong foundation in developmental biology and tissue engineering; and
(iii) outreach in the local community to recruit students into science and
engineering from underrepresented backgrounds. In particular, this project seeks
to significantly expand our understanding of how embryos are able to correct
early mistakes in specifying the relative spatial distributions of cell types
during tissue formation. A deeper understanding of cell signaling and mechanics
during pattern repair can inform applications in synthetic biology, including
devising ways to manipulate cellular decision-making processes in space and
time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this CAREER proposal is to build
an integrated research-education-outreach program that develops and teaches
systems biology approaches from an engineering perspective. In particular, this
project seeks to significantly expand our understanding of how embryos are able
to correct early mistakes in specifying the relative spatial distributions of
cell types during tissue formation. Embryos exhibit a remarkable ability to
repair patterning defects when subjected to environmental variation or genetic
deficiencies. Identifying the control systems that repair tissues is important
for understanding the underlying causes of birth defects as well as diseases
that occur due to misregulated growth. This project will generate new imaging
methods, open-source data analysis tools for multiplexed image data generated
for a genetic model system of tissue pattern repair, the fruit fly (Drosophila
melanogaster), and simulation resources widely applicable to studies on the
maintenance of tissue microenvironments. The PI's team will test the central
hypothesis that embryonic pattern repair emerges from the coupling of
intercellular biochemical signaling to the passive mechanical interactions
between cells. This hypothesis will be tested by integrating mechanistic
modeling, controlled genetic manipulations, and high-dimensional imaging to
infer, or reverse engineer, the logic of pattern repair for the multiple
epidermal segments that define the fruit fly's body plan along the head-tail
axis. Team-based undergraduate research experiences and high school science fair
projects will facilitate the creation and testing of a unified open-source
application called MAPPER for analyzing multiplexed tissue data. Through
collaboration with the Northern Indiana Research Science and Engineering Fair
(NIRSEF) Committee, the PI will organize annual 'Science Fair Boot Camp'
workshops as a new recruitment avenue for underrepresented high school students
in South Bend, IN and surrounding areas. The Science Fair Boot Camp and science
fair activities will serve as outreach to minority students. A Boot Camp
Handbook will be distributed on the NIRSEF website as a nationally available
resource.