* 1553529
* CAREER: The Origins of Genome Complexity in an Insect-bacteria Endosymbiosis
* BIO,IOS
* 02/15/2016,03/31/2021
* John McCutcheon, University of Montana
* Continuing Grant
* Mamta Rawat
* 03/31/2021
* USD 748,388.00

All plant and animal cells contain mitochondria, the specialized structures that
generate a cell's chemical energy. However, mitochondria are not just any
cellular component; they are the result of an ancient bacterial infection. They
essentially are bacteria that permanently live in our cells; they have become
part of us. Until just a few years ago, it was thought that the mitochondrion
(and its partner structure in plants, the chloroplast) was unique in biology.
Recent work has shown that many mitochondrion-like relationships exist in
biology. Insects in particular have repeatedly developed relationships with
bacteria that have taken up permanent residence in their cells. These bacteria
show many similarities to mitochondria, particularly in reference to genome
structure. The goal of this project is to use recent discoveries about the
bacteria that live inside cicadas as a window into the origin of mitochondria
and chloroplasts and how they integrate with the cells in which they are found.
. The work described in this project will use cutting-edge genomic experiments
to accomplish these goals. This work is computationally intensive, and as such
the educational component of this research will focus on teaching computer
programming and its applications to Montana students at all levels. This work
will have the important outcome of increasing the competitiveness of Montana
students by giving them the computational tools they need to handle diverse,
complex, and large sets of data. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mitochondria originated
only once in the history of life, a very long time ago, and the details of their
evolution remain obscure. Research into the mitochondria of diverse plants,
animals, and single-celled organisms has revealed striking diversity in
mitochondrial genome structure and size. Insects acquired bacterial
endosymbionts much more recently than the origin of mitochondria, and so many of
the features associated with the origin and establishment of the mitochondria
are seen in insect endosymbionts but are less evolved. Recent work has shown
that, like mitochondria, some insect endosymbionts have undergone extensive
genome fragmentation and expansion. This research will use genome sequencing,
transcriptome sequencing, molecular evolution, and field biology to provide
insight into why some endosymbiotic genomes stay stable, while others diversify.
This project includes activities that will teach University of Montana
undergraduates and graduate students the fundamentals of computer programming
using genomic data. The proposal will bring together students of biology that
lack any computational background with students from the graphical arts for whom
data visualization techniques are routine into a single course. These students
will work collaboratively with each other to create new ways of visualizing
massive genome data.