* 1553695
* CAREER:  Asymmetric ER  partitioning as a pathway for cell fate specification
* BIO,MCB
* 12/01/2015,11/30/2022
* Blake Riggs, San Francisco State University
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Cyr
* 11/30/2022
* USD 813,401.00

This proposal addresses an important problem in multicellular organisms; namely
cellular diversity. Cellular diversity is achieved through an asymmetric cell
division, in which two produced daughter cells have different fates. The
mechanism that generates different cell fates, during division, can either be
generated by the mother cells itself (intrinsic) or by factors outside of the
cell (extrinsic). Development of the central nervous system (CNS) in
multicellular organisms relies on both extrinsic and intrinsic factors that
affect asymmetric cell divisions, but the nature of these factors are poorly
understood. The goal of the proposed research is to define an intrinsic factor
that leads to the production of daughter cells with different cellular fates.
This work will be performed in the fruitfly, Drosophila melanogaster, which has
served as an outstanding research model leading to many discoveries.
Importantly, these discoveries in the fruitfly, has informed much of our
knowledge involving the development of other multicellular organisms (including
humans). The PI has preliminary data demonstrating an asymmetric partitioning
during cell division of the Endoplasmic Reticulum (ER), a major and critical
intrinsic component of the cell. The ER is partitioned unequally into one
daughter cell prior to the subsequent division of a subset of cells that will
eventually develop into the CNS of the adult fly. The central hypothesis is that
the ER is partitioned asymmetrically for the establishment of key cues that
dictate cellular fate. Experiments are designed that will provide new insight
into the issue of the generation of cell diversity, a fundamental question in
biology. On the broader scientific level, the proposed research will integrate
research and education by promoting diversity in Science, Technology,
Engineering and Math (STEM) field. This will be accomplished by the creation of
a Biology Undergraduate Mentor Program (BUMP) and will utilize the technique of
near-peer mentoring for the recruitment and retention of students within STEM
majors. Furthermore, BUMP mentors and mentees will provide community service
opportunities at a local elementary school addressing the national need for more
STEM mentoring.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI's long-term research goal is to
investigate the mechanisms of cell asymmetry and identify the signal(s)
responsible for determining cell fate. The goal of the proposed research is to
define the pathway of inheritance involving cell fate determinants and identify
novel targets involved in the their transport and partitioning using the model
organism, Drosophila melanogaster. The central hypothesis is that the ER is
partitioned asymmetrically due to the interaction of the highly conserved
transmembrane protein Jagunal (Jagn) with the cell cortex and is responsible for
the establishment of key cell fate determinants. The PI will be the first to
investigate the role of Jagn in asymmetric cell division and has demonstrated
that the asymmetric partitioning of the ER observed in the neural epithelia is
Jagn dependent. The PI will employ both genetic and in vivo cytological
approaches to investigate the role of Jagn on development and neural cell fate.
In addition, the PI will involve undergraduate researchers to identify targets
that interact with Jagn by performing a dominant modifier-based screen of the
Drosophila genome towards control asymmetric ER partitioning during mitosis. The
experiments set forth in this application will provide new insight into the
larger issue of the generation of cell diversity and has the potential to open
the field to new models of asymmetric divisions.