* 1553063
* CAREER: Massive Uniform Manipulation: Algorithmic and Control Theoretic Foundations for Large Populations of Simple Robots Controlled by Uniform Inputs
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2022
* Aaron Becker, University of Houston
* Continuing Grant
* Juan Wachs
* 05/31/2022
* USD 582,002.00

Robotic manipulation at the micro- and nano-scale can fundamentally transform
disease treatment and the assembly of small objects. The goal of this project is
to precisely deliver materials and assemble structures from the bottom-up. This
precision manipulation must be coupled with a large population of manipulators
to enable rapid progress. The potential impact is broad: large populations of
micro-manipulators could provide targeted therapy, perform minimally invasive
surgery, and engineer tissue. However, the small size of micro- and nano-robots
severely limits their computation, sensing, and communication capabilities. This
project will design new techniques for centralized control under the constraint
that every robot receives exactly the same input commands.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This proposal introduces massive manipulation to solve this problem.
Massive manipulation uses a shared input to drive large populations of robots to
arbitrary goal states. The unifying theme is using obstacles to efficiently
control the shape, arrangement, and position of the swarm. Fortunately, in vivo
environments are rich in obstacles, and artificial workspaces can be engineered
to exploit these techniques. Two broad techniques are applied: 1.) Designing
feedback controllers for controlling swarm configuration, manipulation through
obstacles, and multi-part assembly. These controllers will learn from human-user
data collected from the citizen-science site SwarmControl.net. 2.) Algorithmic
techniques for massively-parallel assembly, efficient aggregation, and reliable
coverage. Control laws and algorithms will be validated with analytical models,
extensive simulations, and scaled hardware experiments using 100 or more kilobot
robots. These scaled hardware experiments enable rapid reconfiguration and
emulating a variety of micro-scale dynamic models provided by collaborators.