* 1553111
* CAREER: A Size-Based Test of Species-Energy Theory in Stream Ecosystems - Linking Individuals, Communities, and Underrepresented Minorities
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2016,08/31/2022
* Daniel McGarvey, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 08/31/2022
* USD 600,679.00

There is a well-established pattern of biodiversity on Earth, with highest
biodiversity found in the tropics and a decrease in biodiversity with increasing
latitude towards the poles. Ecologists have suggested that the reason for this
pattern is that higher levels of food resources for life are found in the
tropics. This project will perform a direct test of that hypothesis by making
measurements of biodiversity and food resource levels in streams across a broad
latitudinal gradient. In each of eight study regions, fishes and invertebrates
will be intensively sampled. The data will be used by the researcher to develop
mathematical models of the relationships between the average size of individuals
and the abundance of those individuals within a community as a means of testing
the idea about biodiversity and resources. This project will also focus on
engaging underrepresented minorities in freshwater research. In each of four
years, a group of three minority undergraduates will be trained to conduct
stream surveys, to analyze original data, and to present results at the annual
meeting of the Society for Freshwater Science, for a total of 12 undergraduates
mentored throughout the project. One Ph.D. student identified as an
underrepresented minority student also will be trained to compete for
leadership-level positions in environmental research or
management.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An empirical test of species-energy theory
within stream ecosystems will be conducted in three steps. In Step-1, size-
spectra (scaling relationships between average individual body mass and
population abundance) will be quantified in each of the eight study regions and
used to model the distribution of abundance among primary, secondary, and
tertiary consumers. Nitrogen stable isotope samples and published feeding
behaviors will also be used to assess whether trophic position is a consistent
function of body size. Systematic, among-site comparisons of size-spectra models
will then test whether the scaling of abundance with individual body mass and
trophic position is constant among tropical and temperate streams. In Step-2,
species-abundance distributions will be compiled for each study stream then
compared among streams to assess whether species richness increases more
rapidly, relative to a constant number of individuals, in tropical streams. In
Step-3, supplementary fish and invertebrate data from National Ecological
Observatory Network streams will be used to test for seasonal or inter-annual
differences in the size-spectra and species-abundance distribution models.