* 1553031
* CAREER: Deciphering Design Principles of Early Embryonic Cell Cycles
* BIO,MCB
* 12/15/2015,11/30/2021
* Qiong Yang, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 11/30/2021
* USD 624,356.00

Biological clocks are genetically controlled processes that allow organisms to
anticipate environmental changes, which are central to developmental biology.
This project will develop a synthetic biology framework to reveal quantitative
information on clock cycles and how this cycle influences cellular architecture.
The project will use this framework to address how the mitotic clock is designed
to achieve robust cell cycles in young embryonic zebrafish cells. Given that
biological clocks exist ubiquitously in organisms from bacteria to humans this
project will provide insights into developmental biology and diseases, including
cancer. This highly interdisciplinary research will serve as a training resource
for K-12, undergraduate and graduate students to gain experience in theoretical
modeling, optical imaging, nanofabrication, developmental biology, data analysis
and scientific communication. Outreach activities will include demonstrations at
museums and lab open days developed in collaboration with local professional
educators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to establish a
synthetic biology approach to decipher the fundamental design principles of a
mitotic circuit that drives early cell cycles in zebrafish embryos. This project
will develop a cell-free system, build artificial cells to reconstitute mitotic
events that resemble the processes of early embryonic cell divisions, and
develop novel single-cell imaging and tracking systems. The results in the cell-
free system will be tested in live embryos to assess their biological relevance.
The objectives of this project are to: 1) establish computational methods and
search for all robust and tunable oscillation topologies, 2) artificially
construct mitotic cells and examine its topology for functions of robustness and
tunability, and 3) combine in vitro and in vivo studies to evaluate the role of
mitotic clocks in live zebrafish embryos. The findings may be generalizable to a
wide spectrum of biological clocks that share similar core architecture with the
mitotic clock.