* 1553421
* CAREER: Algorithms for Domain-Level Analysis of Gene Family Evolution
* CSE,IIS
* 02/01/2016,01/31/2023
* Mukul Bansal, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 01/31/2023
* USD 499,576.00

The genome of an organism helps to determine its biology. Understanding how
different genes evolve and acquire new functions is a fundamental biological
problem with many computational methods developed for studying how gene families
evolve and change over time in different organisms. These existing methods
assume that the gene is the basic unit of evolution and that evolutionary
processes such as gene duplication, gene loss, and horizontal gene transfer act
on entire genes, rather than on parts of genes. It is well known that most genes
consist of one or more "protein domains," well-characterized functional units
that can be independently lost or gained during evolution, and that domain
shuffling is one of the primary mechanisms through which genes evolve and gain
new functions. Proper inference and accounting of domain-level evolutionary
events is therefore crucial to understanding how genes evolve and function. The
proposed research will lay the methodological and algorithmic foundations for a
novel computational framework that addresses this critical problem. The new
computational framework and algorithms will enable more powerful comparative
genomic techniques for understanding gene function and biology, and may also
contribute to improvements in human health and agriculture. The proposed
research will shape future computational advances in the study of domain, gene,
and genome evolution for many years to come, and will also spur the development
of more comprehensive computational models in other areas of molecular
evolution. The algorithms developed as part of this research will be implemented
into a user-friendly software package and made freely available. The project
will directly involve two graduate and up to ten undergraduate students,
introduce several high-school students to computer science, bioinformatics, and
research, and provide training to many high-school science teachers on the role
of computer science in biology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will lead to
the development of the first "three-tree" model of domain evolution that
explicitly captures the interdependence of domain-, gene-, and species-level
evolution. The proposed three-tree computational framework is based on
phylogenetic reconciliation, where the goal is to find a most parsimonious joint
reconciliation of the given gene trees with the species tree and of the given
domain trees with the gene trees. The resulting optimization problems will be
solved using various algorithmic techniques including dynamic programming,
branch and bound, enumeration and sampling, and local search. The framework will
decouple domain-level events from gene-level events and provide a fine-grained
view of gene family and domain family evolution that is both more accurate and
much easier to interpret. Specific aims include: (i) development of the three-
tree computational framework and corresponding algorithms, (ii) enhancing
inference accuracy by accounting for multiple optima and domain tree errors, and
(iii) extension of the three-tree framework to microbial gene families by
allowing for horizontal gene transfer.