* 1553673
* CAREER: FIRE Lab Investigation of Stress-induced Sleep in C. elegans
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2016,08/31/2022
* Cheryl Van Buskirk, The University Corporation, Northridge
* Standard Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 08/31/2022
* USD 575,543.00

Despite the fundamental importance of sleep, the cellular function of sleep
remains controversial. Sleep is recognized to be conserved across species, and
in recent years sleep research has been extended to model organisms that provide
powerful tools for genetic analysis. This project focuses on identification of
genes and signaling pathways that control sleep behavior using the roundworm C.
elegans as model organism. The principal investigator and her undergraduate
students at California State University Northridge, a primarily undergraduate
Hispanic-serving institution, have shown that exposure to environmental stresses
can trigger sleep in C. elegans. Further, they demonstrated that stress-induced
sleep is beneficial, and they have begun to identify several components of a
genetic pathway that mediates this beneficial effect. This project expands on
this work and illuminates the mechanism through which epidermal growth factor
signaling contributes to stress-induced sleep. Additionally, the project uses
cutting-edge molecular techniques to identify other genetic pathways critical in
the regulation of stress-induced sleep. The broader impacts of this CAREER award
include Full Immersion Research Experience (FIRE), a course the principal
investigator redesigned with the goal of giving students an original research
experience, and the integration of this lab course with the investigator's
research program on sleep.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The identification of a sleep
state in C. elegans that is triggered by conditions, such as noxious heat or
tissue damage, suggests that perturbation of cellular homeostasis may contribute
to sleep drive. Stress-induced sleep (SIS) in C. elegans may represent an
ancestral state that evolved to promote recovery following environmental stress
or infection. In more complex organisms, SIS may be coordinated with circadian
regulation, acting to counteract perturbations of homeostasis known to be
associated with prolonged wakefulness. The aim of this proposal is to
characterize the genetic pathways that promote SIS. The principal investigator
has shown that stress-induced sleep is dependent on Epidermal Growth Factor
(EGF) receptor activation within the ALA neuroendocrine cell; however, the
mechanism by which stress initiates EGF signaling is not known. The first aim of
this project is to investigate how and, for the purposes of sleep regulation, in
which tissues cellular stress is monitored. Because EGF family ligands are
produced as transmembrane precursors that must be processed for release of
soluble ligand, it is likely that EGF-dependent sleep is regulated by stress-
induced ectodomain shedding. The second aim of this project is to determine from
which cell(s) EGF is shed in response to stress, and to characterize a candidate
protease that has been identified in an RNAi screen for sleep defects. The third
and final aim of this project is to identify novel components of SIS via an
unbiased forward genetic screen.