* 1553023
* CAREER: The Mechanistic Interplay Between Biofilm Metabolism and Morphogenesis
* BIO,MCB
* 12/15/2015,11/30/2021
* Lars Dietrich, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Bianca Garner
* 11/30/2021
* USD 699,257.00

Bacteria can reside as multicellular communities held together by a sticky
matrix called biofilms. Cells within these structures, like other multicellular
organisms, are challenged by unique conditions but technical limitations have
hindered developing chemical and physiological descriptions of biofilm
microenvironments and cells. This project will elucidate metabolic and signaling
mechanisms in specific regions of Pseudomonas aeruginosa biofilms in response to
self-generated oxygen limitations and morphological changes. An
interdisciplinary approach employing electrochemical and sample processing
techniques will enable direct mapping and measurement of metabolites and gene
expression. This project will capitalize on the varied patterns and intense
coloration of biofilms to pique the interest of local students and the public in
the concepts of multicellularity and metabolism, concepts relevant to medicine
and industry, through exhibits and workshops. The PI will expand his laboratory
course to include design and maintenance of a free website that hosts analytical
software and an interactive database for cataloguing biofilm
patterns.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical description: Although multicellular
life exhibits a seemingly endless array of shapes and patterns, they are
morphologically constrained by the metabolic needs of resident cells. Metabolic
flexibility can enable energy generation in the chemical gradients that form
within such structures; alternatively, cellular communities can change their
morphologies to improve access to resources. To address the interplay between
metabolism and morphogenesis, this project will explore how self-generated
oxygen gradients that form during Pseudomonas aeruginosa biofilm development
alter biofilm morphology. Pseudomonas aeruginosa produces redox-active
phenazines that can support energy generation when oxygen is limiting and in
their absence mutants form intricate wrinkled structures that increase biofilm
surface area, and lack an anoxic subzone. This research will interrogate a model
in which cells in the anoxic zone carry out phenazine-dependent metabolism and
sensor-regulator proteins modulate colony wrinkling in response to redox cues.
This project will: i) test whether respiratory enzymes catalyze phenazine
reduction in the anoxic zone and require specific respiratory enzymes; ii) test
whether biofilm cells couple phenazine reduction to carbon source oxidation or
fermentation using chromatography/mass spectrometry of colony thin sections; and
iii) define the microenvironmental effects of proteins that control wrinkle
formation and identify the matrix protein required to build wrinkled colonies.