* 1553721
* CAREER: Designing Synthetic Anaerobic Consortia for Bioproduction
* BIO,MCB
* 01/15/2016,12/31/2022
* Michelle O'Malley, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Anthony Garza
* 12/31/2022
* USD 853,101.00

Microbes work together in complex, dynamic communities that recycle carbon
throughout the Earth, from animal guts to landfills and compost piles. In order
to better understand rumen (animal stomach) microbial communities which live in
the absence of oxygen, new "synthetic" partnerships between microbes will be
constructed that are inspired by nature, which will enable sustainable chemical
production from plant waste materials. New isolation and culture techniques will
be developed which will likely lead to the isolation of novel microorganisms and
the construction of novel communities with desirable attributes from nature.
Undergraduate and graduate students, a postdoctoral fellow, K-12 students and
the public will be integrated into the studies through coursework, laboratory
research, outreach in collaboration with the Santa Barbara Zoo, and a science
program for economically disadvantaged Hispanic students. This project has far
reaching impacts on plant biomass breakdown, climate change, sustainability, and
carbon capture in the environment.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This research will
build synthetic microbial consortia based on the natural syntrophy between rumen
anaerobes. The rumen microbiome within large herbivores consists of four
interdependent microbial populations (bacteria, protozoans, fungi, and
methanogens) that work together to drive crude biomass into sugars and
fermentation waste products, including carbon dioxide and methane. However, the
interdependency of these microbes and their impact on microbial metabolism are
difficult to characterize due to their recalcitrance to culture. Recently, these
challenges have been overcome through the isolation of fungi with dependent
methanogens from herbivore fecal materials, creating a simplified system to
model their syntrophy. Robust fungal-methanogen syntrophs from herbivores will
be screened to study how pairs are matched by nature, and how co-culture
accelerates biomass breakdown. Stable fungal-methanogen pairs will be used to
generate a metabolism model for gut fungi, and the model will be curated with
experimental data. Finally, interdependent communities containing non-native
microbes (acetotrophic methanogens and facultative anaerobes) will be designed
and optimized using a bottom up approach to compartmentalize biomass-degradation
and bioproduct formation. This research will serve as the focal point to
establish a new educational partnership with the Santa Barbara Zoo that exposes
the broader public to the importance of microbes in our environment.