* 1553820
* CAREER: Carbonylation Methodologies and Strategies for Complex Natural Product Synthesis
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2021
* Mingji Dai, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Jin Cha
* 03/31/2021
* USD 650,000.00

In this CAREER project funded by the Chemical Synthesis Program of the Chemistry
Division, Professor Mingji Dai of the Department of Chemistry at Purdue
University is developing new palladium-catalyzed carbonylation methodologies and
strategies for the syntheses of bioactive natural products. The goal of this
research is to use cheap and abundant carbon monoxide as the starting material
to made more advanced and complicated molecular structures with the aid of a
small amount of palladium catalyst. These newly developed methodologies and
strategies streamline the syntheses of important natural products, which are
either organic insecticides or promising lead compounds for drug discovery. This
work is expected to advance the science of preparing complicated molecular
structures. The project centers on the use of palladium catalysis and extends
known methods to complex natural product syntheses. In addition to training
postdoctoral researchers, graduate students, and undergraduate students, the
educational plan includes outreach to educate Indiana high school science
teachers and students about catalysis and natural products, as well as their
impact of our everyday lives. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Alkyl-palladium species
react readily with carbon monoxide to generate reactive acyl-palladium species.
In this project, novel reaction modes are developed to trap these in situ
generated acyl-palladium species to construct complex and important structures
that are otherwise difficult to access. Specifically, Professor Dai is
developing (i) palladium-catalyzed tandem alkoxycarbonylative macrolactonization
to synthesize tetrahydropyran/tetrahydrofuran-containing bridged macrolides with
anticancer activity, (ii) palladium-catalyzed carbonylative Heck
macrolactonization to synthesize fused macrolides with insecticidal activity,
and (iii) palladium-catalyzed C-C bond cleavage carbonylative lactonizations to
synthesize oxaspirolactones with potent activity against drug resistant
bacteria. The synthetic applications have the potential impact to combat human
diseases and improve agricultural food production. The research is well suited
to the education and training of a diverse group of students and scholars.