* 1553344
* CAREER: Imaging Cellular Dynamics with Nanometer Resolution
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/2016,05/31/2018
* Alexa Mattheyses, Emory University
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Cyr
* 05/31/2018
* USD 351,482.00

The major goal of this research is to contribute to our mechanistic
understanding of how cells communicate with each other and the outside
environment. Communication among cells is critical for most, if not all, living
systems and regulates processes including cell migration, cell division, growth,
and death. One way this occurs is though a process called endocytosis whereby
molecules are transported into the cell. Endocytosis requires an intricate
coordination of proteins inside the cell as well as physical changes to the
surface of the cell. The deformation of the cell's surface is central to
endocytosis, yet there are few tools that can dissect these physical changes
that are necessary for endocytosis. One reason this is difficult to study is
that this processes is dynamic and occurs on the nanoscale, beyond the
resolution of traditional microscopy. This project will advance the study of
nanometer scale cell surface dynamics by developing and applying new methods to
measure and manipulate the process of endocytosis in living cells. Many
biological processes occur on this scale, and the methods developed in this
research will be widely applicable across a range of biological systems
including virus entry and budding, cell migration, and neurobiology. In addition
to contributing to understanding cellular processes, the effort will include
training students from K-12 through graduate school on microscopy and the value
of multi-disciplinary approaches in understanding cellular processes.
&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research is to understand the dynamics of endocytic
vesicle assembly and the interconnected roles played by the proteins involved,
as well as the physical changes to plasma membrane shape. A recently developed
fluorescence microscopy technique is uniquely suited to imaging nanometer
dynamics of vesicle formation in real-time in living cells. In Aim 1 the novel
microscopy technique is used to measure endocytic pit formation dynamics upon
stimulation with EGF. This experimental platform will then be used to dissect
the protein dynamics during pit formation, mapping the correlation between
protein dynamics and plasma membrane morphology (Aim 2). Finally, a strategy
will be developed to physically stall endocytosis utilizing a tethered ligand.
This platform will be used to explore curvature sensing and curvature inducing
proteins (Aim 3). This research will yield a quantitative description of ligand
internalization dynamics and the interplay between protein recruitment and
membrane morphology on a millisecond time scale. Completion of this research
will shed light on previously undiscovered mechanisms of plasma membrane
dynamics and signaling that may revolutionize the way cellular communication is
understood. Further, it will provide new tools to broadly improve the
understanding of plasma membrane dynamics in cell signaling and homeostasis. In
addition to providing K-12 though graduate students with a rich educational
experience, the PI will make available to the community any software that is
produced and which is useful to others in achieving high resolution
data.&lt;br/&gt;This award is supported jointly by the Division of Molecular and
Cellular Biosciences and the Physics of Living Systems program in the Division
of Physics