* 1553291
* CAREER: The origins of codon translation rates and their consequences for nascent protein behavior
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2023
* Edward O'Brien, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Engin Serpersu
* 05/31/2023
* USD 910,925.00

Proteins are made up of amino acid building blocks and are responsible for
performing most of the jobs in the cells of all biological organisms. An
emerging paradigm in the field of protein biophysics is that the rate that the
protein is synthesized or translated on the ribosome controls the ultimate fate
of the protein, such as whether the protein correctly folds, misfolds,
aggregates or dimerizes, is moved to a specific cellular location, or is
processed in such a way as to modify its function. The goal of this project is
to use computer simulations and theory to understand the influence of rates of
protein synthesis on nascent protein behavior including protein folding and
dimerization during translation. Through this project, grade-school and high-
school women and minority students will be encouraged to pursue STEM educations
by exposing them to cutting-edge scientific research in computational
biophysics. This project will also expose graduate students to an international
collaboration, which will help them develop an international-network of
scientific colleagues. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Pulling forces on the nascent
protein chain, generated by the co-translational folding of a domain, have
recently been shown to influence codon translation rates to overcome stalling
sequences. The hypothesis to be tested is that the magnitude of the tensile
force experienced by a nascent chain during protein synthesis is influenced by a
number of factors, including the stability of the folded domain and its size. In
the first objective, this hypothesis will be tested by using molecular
simulations at different resolutions to determine the molecular mechanism by
which tension modulates codon translation rates. In the second objective, the
role of codon translation rates in coordinating co-translational folding will be
investigated to evaluate the predominant paradigm in the co-translational
protein folding field that only slow-translating codons can maximize co-
translational folding. This goal will be accomplished by creating a new coarse-
grained protein folding model that allows for misfolding and then test the
'Fast-translating Codon' hypothesis that posits that fast-translating codons can
maximize co-translational folding by speeding through the synthesis of
misfolding-prone segments thereby increasing the flux into the native state. In
the final objective, the investigator will explore the observation that changes
in codon translation rates can alter a protein's function but not necessarily
its solubility, suggesting that structural changes in the nascent protein must
be modest because otherwise aggregation would likely occur. How extensive these
structural rearrangements may be will be investigated by simulating the
synthesis of proteins that heterodimerize and by calculating how their binding
affinity changes as codon translation rates are altered. This work will provide
significant insights into folding and behavior of nascent proteins while
challenging the current paradigm.