* 1553878
* CAREER: Characterizing the Physical/Chemical Evidence of Volcanic Lightning
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2016,02/28/2023
* Kimberly Genareau, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 02/28/2023
* USD 465,928.00

Volcanic eruptions and lightning strikes are two of the most impressive and
destructive natural phenomena, but much is still unknown about the fundamental
processes that allow these events to occur. An emerging new line of research is
seeking to determine the complex relationship between explosive volcanism and
lightning, specifically: The effect of lightning discharge on the textural and
chemical properties of volcanic ash and the resulting signature of volcanic
lightning occurrence in the geologic record. In addition to the formation of
fulgurites as a result of cloud-to-ground lightning strikes, lightning-induced
volcanic spherules (LIVS) form in the atmosphere from the physical
transformation of volcanic ash particles into spheres of glass due to the high
heat generated during lightning discharge. This project will characterize the
physiochemical evidence of volcanic lightning by: 1) identifying LIVS in natural
ash fall deposits and analyzing their textural/chemical properties using
established methods; 2) performing a series of triggered lightning experiments
on manufactured ash samples of known composition and grain size to characterize
the physical/chemical effects of volcanic lightning on the samples using various
analytical methods; 3) establishing a research team of graduate, undergraduate,
and high school students to perform the experiments and analyze the samples; and
4) developing grade school curricula for teaching natural hazards in local
schools in order to engage students in the Earth sciences. Fundamental questions
addressed by this project, and the integral educational component that involves
learners of all ages, may result in potentially transformative concepts the
geosciences, atmospheric sciences, and hazard assessment. Textural and
geochemical data acquired on the samples will provide evidence for volcanic
lightning in the geologic record, allowing researchers to identify these events
during eruptions that preceded or eluded human documentation. Results will also
reveal the role that lightning plays in altering the chemical characteristics of
the local environment. Additionally, the triggered lightning experiments,
conducted on manufactured ash samples of known composition, will allow video
documentation of fulgurite formation. Through scientific and community
presentations, this project will build further interest in volcanology,
atmospheric dynamics, and the complex interplay between these natural phenomena,
not only in the scientific community, but also in schools and amongst the
general public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary goal of this project is to
characterize the physical/chemical evidence of volcanic lightning occurrence in
tephra deposits, which will aid in understanding the frequency of volcanic
lightning in the geologic record, contributing to advancing scientific knowledge
of volcano-atmosphere interactions, which is an emerging new line of scientific
research. Ash fall deposits from numerous volcanic eruptions in Alaska will be
analyzed, as volcanic lightning was documented during these explosive events and
samples were provided by the Alaska Volcano Observatory. Triggered lightning
experiments will be conducted at the International Center for Lightning Research
and Testing (ICLRT) on manufactured ash samples (pseudo-ash samples) of known
composition and grain size. The established analytical methods that will be
utilized for this project include: 1) Scanning electron microscope (SEM),
transmission electron microscope (TEM), and electron spin resonance (ESR)
examination of lightning-induced volcanic spherules (LIVS) present in natural
ash samples to determine their textural and chemical characteristics; 2) ESR,
Mossbauer, and titration analyses of both natural, unmodified ash and pre-
experimental pseudo-ash; and 3) SEM, TEM, ESR, Mossbauer, and titration analyses
of LIVS and fulgurites produced in the triggered lightning experiments. A
research team of graduate, undergraduate, and high school students will perform
the experiments and analyze the samples. The various analyses, when conducted on
the pseudo-ash samples prior to and following the triggered lightning
experiments, will allow a direct means to determine the effect of lightning
discharge on the morphological transformation, general chemistry, and
oxidation/Fe valence state of exposed materials. The natural ash samples will
allow a chemical comparison between normal (i.e., unmodified) ash and any LIVS
present in the deposits. Following publication of results, the videos of
triggered lightning experiments will be displayed on the University of Alabama?s
Tephra Lab website, on YouTube, and showcased in the Alabama Museum of Natural
History, along with samples of both natural fulgurites and fulgurites created in
the triggered lightning experiments. Fundamental questions addressed by this
project, and the integral educational component that involves learners of all
ages, may result in potentially transformative concepts the geosciences,
atmospheric sciences, and hazard assessment. Textural and geochemical data
acquired on the samples will provide evidence for volcanic lightning in the
geologic record, allowing researchers to identify these events during eruptions
that preceded or eluded human documentation. Results will also reveal the role
that lightning plays in altering the chemical characteristics of the local
environment. Additionally, the triggered lightning experiments, conducted on
manufactured ash samples of known composition, will allow video documentation of
fulgurite formation. Through scientific and community presentations, this
project will build further interest in volcanology, atmospheric dynamics, and
the complex interplay between these natural phenomena, not only in the
scientific community, but also in schools and amongst the general public.