* 1553098
* CAREER: A Study of Factors that Affect Middle School Levels of Readiness for Implementing STEM Programs
* EDU,DRL
* 02/15/2016,08/31/2016
* Alfred Hall, University of Memphis
* Continuing Grant
* Celestine Pea
* 08/31/2016
* USD 32,870.00

This is a Faculty Early Career Development Program (CAREER) proposal responsive
to Program Solicitation NSF 15-555. The CAREER program is a National Science
Foundation-wide activity that offers the most prestigious awards in support of
junior faculty who exemplify the role of teacher-scholars through outstanding
research, excellent education and the integration of education and research.
This project will investigate whether six urban middle schools are implementing
highly effective science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM)
programs based on factors identified through relevant research and national
reports on what constitutes exemplary practices in 21st century-focused schools.
The project will make this determination through the use of a STEM level of
readiness rubric developed through a previous award that will be further revised
through this study. The rubric will document the participating schools' level of
readiness at the principal, teacher, and student levels using 15 criteria that
include a combination of essential supports, core elements, attributes, and
characteristics about STEM through: (1) school leadership as the driver of
change in education; (2) professional capacity among teachers and staff in all
academic areas; (3) student-centered learning climate reflective of high-quality
teaching and learning practices; and (4) investment of resources (e.g. staffing,
time, space, materials and supplies, partnerships) that support exemplary
school-based programs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will use surveys, focus
groups, and face-to-face interviews to collect data from 18 principals;
classroom observations and a survey to collect data from 380 teachers, and a
survey to collect data from 3700 students. These data collections, augmented by
other intermittent research activities, will provide insights about extant
programs in participating schools regarding effective school leadership, state-
of-the art teaching and learning practices, and the impact on students'
interest, motivation, and self-efficacy about STEM education. The primary
outcome from this project will be a field-tested jointly refined STEM level of
readiness rubric based on input from principals, teachers, and students with
guidance from the project's advisory board and the Center for Research in
Educational Policy at the University of Memphis. The rubric will be instrumental
in informing district-level education stakeholders and university-partner
decision-makers' choices about where and when to invest resources to further
support the development of higher quality STEM programs and schools. It will
also be useful in identifying ways to improve students' overall perceptions
about future courses of study and careers and the development of professional
development modules for teacher training. Beyond these key school district-level
outcomes, results will be used to enhance teacher preparation efforts through
further refinement of methods courses and the STEM Teacher Leadership
Certificate Program at the University.