* 1553049
* CAREER: Forest-atmosphere interactions in an era of fire and drought
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2016,12/31/2021
* Tara Hudiburg, Regents of the University of Idaho
* Continuing Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 12/31/2021
* USD 667,129.00

Forests store the most carbon of any terrestrial ecosystem and capture ~20% of
U.S. fossil fuel emissions annually through uptake of carbon dioxide. Drought
and wildfire caused by changing precipitation patterns, increased temperatures,
increased fuel loads, and decades of fire suppression are reducing forest carbon
uptake from local to continental scales. This trend is especially widespread in
Idaho and the intermountain west and has important implications for climate
change and forest management options. Given the key role of forests in climate
regulation, understanding forest responses to disturbance and the feedbacks to
the atmosphere is a key research and policy-relevant priority in the U.S. and
elsewhere. As temperature, fire, and precipitation regimes continue to change
and influence forest mortality, there is a growing potential role for drought
and fire mitigation efforts such as forest thinning. This research will evaluate
the climate impacts of restoration thinning, a forest management activity aimed
at reducing drought- and fire-related mortality, by combining new experimental
plot data and earth system modeling. This project has three main goals: 1)
quantify the spatial and temporal impacts of thinning on net regional greenhouse
gas emissions and climate, 2) evaluate the impact of thinning on forest
resilience to drought and disturbance, and 3) contribute to education of
students and teachers about the role of forests in climate
regulation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By integrating novel, field-based technology,
existing datasets, and state-of-the-art earth system modeling, this research
will yield scientific insights into both climatic and management controls on
tree growth as well as forest-atmosphere gas exchange in the mixed conifer
forests of the Rocky Mountains in Idaho. The project objectives will advance the
current understanding of how disturbance impacts forest carbon, water, and
energy balance at time steps from minutes to years, which is crucial for earth
system model development and evaluation. Improved earth system modeling and
existing long-term ecological research data will be used to make predictions of
forest-atmosphere interactions for the intermountain west over the 21st century.
This will improve policy-relevant understanding of forest management practices
and forest climate regulation. Additionally, this project will contribute to
science education. Students and educators will be actively engaged in climate
and forest science research through collection and sharing of data and will
learn how forests capture and release carbon dioxide, and how these processes
influence climate.