* 1553288
* CAREER:  Structure and Analysis of Low Degree Polynomials
* CSE,CCF
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2024
* Daniel Kane, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 03/31/2024
* USD 500,000.00

The primary goal of complexity theory is to design fast algorithms for solving
various computational problems and to understand when such algorithms will not
exist. In order to do this, a number of sophisticated mathematical tools are
often required. One of the more prominent tools used in this way are
polynomials. Polynomials are both varied enough to express or approximate a
number of objects of interest, and yet are also simple enough that properties of
them can be easily understood. Thus, relating properties of the objects in
question to properties of polynomials is a well-known technique that shows up in
many areas of computer science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Unfortunately, our
understanding of these fundamental objects is far from complete. In fact, there
are a number of problems for which our lack of understanding can be seen as a
bottleneck for proving further results about problems of interest. This project
will focus on attempts to remedy this gap. In particular, the PI plans to follow
up on several recent advances in understanding of this area and to attempt to
leverage any new results to gain insight into other important questions within
computer science. In addition to leading to new algorithms of practical import,
the research promises to have potential impacts in other fields such as
probability theory and&lt;br/&gt;algebraic geometry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More
specifically, the PI intends to improve upon existing tools for understanding
low degree polynomials in many variables. Of particular interest would be work
relating to results on the distribution of the values of such a polynomial on
random inputs, with particular focus on recent structural results that allow one
to decompose arbitrary polynomials in terms of better behaved ones. Having
attained such results, the project will continue by making use of these
improvements in order to make progress on other important problems in
theoretical computer science. In particular, there are a number of specific
problems in the areas of explicit pseudorandom generators, machine learning, and
circuit complexity for which such technical improvements show promise for
providing substantial new results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to the
research component of this project, the PI intends to help provide new
educational opportunities particularly with regard to learning mathematical
problem solving skills which are a key component of mathematics and computer
science research.