* 1553475
* CAREER: Toward Sustainable Urban Water Management through a Twofold Approach: Enhanced Landscape Modeling and Strategic Spatial Placement of Stormwater Control Measures
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2016,02/28/2022
* Jon Hathaway, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 02/28/2022
* USD 514,534.00

1553475&lt;br/&gt;Hathaway&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Global population in urban areas
is burgeoning, and sustainable development and water management are critical to
ensuring ecological and human health. This CAREER research proposes an
innovative, twofold approach to urban watershed management. The approach is
predicated on improved landscape modeling at both the site and watershed scales,
and the use of geospatial techniques to target and treat those areas that
contribute most to surface water degradation. The nature of the proposed
approach integrates sensor technology, geospatial tools, and modeling to inform
the design and optimization of the placement of green infrastructure in urban
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As healthy waterways are increasingly valued, and
the degradation of these waterways by urban stormwater runoff is better
understood. Major efforts are underway to restore watershed function across the
United States. With these efforts largely relying on coarse runoff models and
empirical approaches for green infrastructure implementation, there is a dire
need for improved approaches to watershed restoration. Watershed restoration
efforts are often undertaken without an understanding of potential impacts. The
central hypothesis in this CAREER proposal is that impervious areas within urban
watersheds differ in their contribution to stormwater generation and transport
based on their spatial configuration. Thus, restoration approaches that target
the most impactful impervious areas will result in optimized environmental
outcomes. The research topic will address deficiencies that seriously limiti the
effectiveness of stormwater control measure strategies that can manage
stormwater and mitigate the impact on watersheds. Specific objectives are to:
(1) use sensor technology to characterize bioretention cell function and inform
improvement and parameterization of a site scale model, (2) couple site scale
and watershed scale models to better understand cumulative green infrastructure
effects, (3) use a globally unique experimental watershed to test the coupled
model, (4) compare opportunistic green infrastructure site selection to
geospatially informed approaches using the same experimental watershed, and, (5)
integrate outcomes into a long lasting educational plan spanning multiple target
groups. Through an integrated research and teaching program, the principle
investigator (PI) will become a leading contributor to sustainable urban water
management in the United States and globally. The improved landscape modeling
and placement methodology are transformative because they establish a scientific
understanding of the factors controlling the efficacy of stormwater control
measures at different geospatial scales. These will form the basis for elevating
their implementation to a rational engineering approach in optimized locations.
The coupled model will allow scenario development and testing prior to
implementation, facilitating optimization of approaches and realistic
expectations. As green infrastructure increasingly becomes a core component of
watershed restoration approaches, optimizing its placement to achieve maximum
outcomes is critical. For example, estimates of implementing stormwater
improvements to reduce nutrients in the Chesapeake Bay alone are in the
billions. These efforts can be maximized by allowing scenario development and
testing prior to implementation. The research program presented herein will
integrate with the PI's long-term educational objective of increasing the
understanding of watershed hydrologic and water quality processes at multiple
levels of targeted groups, from K-12 to the general public, specifically
targeting underrepresented individuals. The PI proposes creating a bioretention
facility at a local high school through the USFS grant for educational purposes
to track tree growth as a function of design configurations. This will be a good
learning environment for the University of Tennessee undergrad and grad
students. Outreach to 4-5 high schools that have or will have bioretention
facilities is impressive. These will be equipped with pressure transducers, soil
moisture sensors, rain gages, and climate sensor arrays. Teachers will be
educated on the use of the sensors and aided in the development of lessons plans
that integrate the sensors into lessons on developing graphics, statistics, and
other learning goals.