* 1553004
* CAREER: Composition, mechanical properties, and synthesis of the Caulobacter crescentus stalk
* BIO,MCB
* 01/15/2016,09/30/2023
* Eric Klein, Rutgers University Camden
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Cyr
* 09/30/2023
* USD 1,237,982.00

Why cells develop and maintain a particular shape represents a fundamental
question in cell biology. Understanding the maintenance of bacterial cell shape
have primarily focused on rod-shaped cells. Yet we know of myriad cell shapes
present in nature that are maintained by strong selective pressures. Determining
the roles and underlying mechanisms of these unusual morphologies can provide
great insight into a wide range of bacterial physiological properties. In
particular, some bacteria synthesize unique "appendage" structures, or localized
cellular extensions. For example, the stalked bacterium Verrucomicrobium
spinosum produces a large number of spikes across its entire surface and
Mycoplasma pneumoniae adherence requires a membrane-bound cell extension termed
the tip-structure. In order to study the regulation and synthesis of such
bacterial appendages, this project focuses on the model stalked bacterium
Caulobacter crescentus. Preliminary data suggest that the stalk cell wall is
chemically distinct from that of the cell body; this finding is striking because
it would be the first demonstration of a bacterium with differentially regulated
domains containing unique chemical structures. A detailed understanding of the
chemical and mechanical properties of the stalk cell wall and characterization
of proteins involved in stalk elongation will provide important insight into the
fundamental question of the evolution and function of bacterial shape and
compartmentalization. In addition to the research goals of this project, there
are several educational objectives targeting high school, undergraduate, and
graduate students. New courses will be developed for students at each level to
train the next generation of scientists in quantitative methods in biology
including bioinformatics, quantitative image analysis, and biophysics. In
particular, the high school component will involve students at the LEAP Academy
in Camden, whose enrollment is 90% underrepresented minorities. Each of these
programs is designed to interface with and contribute to the two research
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to determine the
mechanisms underlying localized bacterial envelope synthesis and appendage
formation using the polar-stalk of Caulobacter crescentus as a model system. The
central hypothesis is that Caulobacter produces a polar stalk whose
peptidoglycan (PG) has distinct chemical and mechanical properties from the cell
body PG. Previous studies of stalk synthesis have either focused on known PG
regulating enzymes or on the localization of stalk associated proteins. In
contrast, this approach is innovative because the starting point is the
observation that the stalk envelope is compositionally different than that of
the cell body. From this perspective, the central&lt;br/&gt;hypothesis will be
tested by the following specific aims: 1) Define the composition and mechanical
properties of stalk peptidoglycan; 2) Targeted analysis of the stalk
biosynthesis regulatory proteins; and 3) Identify novel stalk-elongation genes
by genotyping stalk-phenotype mutants. Under the first aim, experimental
approaches will be used to determine the chemical makeup and quantify the
elastic modulus of stalk PG. The link between PG composition and mechanical
properties will be further explored via computational modeling. Under the second
aim, the role of MreB will be investigated using a novel MreB fluorescent fusion
construct that is defective for stalk biogenesis while retaining wild type
function for cell growth. Studies of the putative transpeptidase CC2105 will
focus on a C-terminal domain which is uniquely conserved among the stalked
bacteria of the Caulobacteraceae family. In the third aim, high school students
at the LEAP Academy will use a combination of traditional genetics methods and
next generation sequencing to characterize a set of recently isolated stalk-
elongation mutants. The proposed research is anticipated to contribute in-depth
knowledge of how stalk-specific envelope synthesis results in compartmentalized
regulation of cell shape. This vertical advance in the field of bacterial cell
biology suggests that the dynamic regulation of localized morphology may be a
general strategy employed by bacteria to maintain physiological control over
cell shape or create subcellular compartments/appendages.