* 1553528
* CAREER: Fast and Scalable Combinatorial Algorithms for Data Analytics
* CSE,IIS
* 04/01/2016,12/31/2022
* Assefaw Gebremedhin, Washington State University
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 12/31/2022
* USD 517,268.00

We are in an age when massive digital data continues to be collected at an
extraordinarily rapid rate and with high and growing complexity (and concomitant
uncertainty), when the data and the actors behind it are increasingly
interconnected, and when architectures of computing platforms continue to
rapidly change. Fast, robust and scalable algorithms that are simultaneously
cognizant of all three dimensions (data, interconnection, and computing
platform) are acutely needed for the purpose of analyzing massive datasets and
extracting knowledge and insight from the data. This project (named FASCADA,
Fast and Scalable Combinatorial Algorithms for Data Analysis) will explore the
interplay between graph and matrix algorithms in order to develop methods for
data analytics that perform at scale on contemporary platforms, with a primary
focus on data that are expressed in terms of networks. Algorithmic research
progress to be made in the project will be realized in software implementations,
will be integrated with existing software tools when applicable, and will be
made available to the wider community as open-source software. As part of the
project's integrated education and outreach component, two new innovative
courses, an undergraduate course on Data Science and a graduate course on
Network Science, will be developed and taught. The educational effort will
contribute to meeting the rapidly expanding need for a trained workforce in data
science in the US economy and will contribute to US competitiveness in the
global market. Underrepresented minority groups in computing sciences and
engineering will be recruited and mentored through an existing, effective
program in the Pacific Northwest (LSAMP), and undergraduate students from
Heritage University will be mentored through summer internships at Washington
State University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific research aims of FASCADA are
organized under four intertwined areas. (1) Enabling Scalable Data Analytics:
devise novel "problem-partitioning" methods that are useful for solving, at
scale, optimization problems underlying a large class of machine learning
algorithms. (2) Network Analysis: develop fast algorithms for discovering and
analyzing dense subgraphs in real-world networks arising from diverse domains.
(3) High Performance Computing: develop effective paradigms for the
parallelization of inherently sequential graph algorithms targeting many-core
architectures. (4) Algorithmic Differentiation (AD): advance AD as a technology
by designing better graph-based algorithms for Hessian computation, and use AD
in emerging applications, including quantifying uncertainty. A common thread
that runs through all four of the areas is a focus on graph problems and their
solution. The novelty of the proposed approach lies in the exploration of the
bidirectional interaction between graph and matrix algorithms. Results from this
effort will advance fundamental knowledge at the intersection of a range of
areas, including data science, computational science and engineering,
computational mathematics, and high performance computing. For further
information, visit the project webpage http://www.eecs.wsu.edu/~assefaw/fascada.