* 1553718
* CAREER: Spatial network structure and food web stability across a productivity gradient.
* BIO,DEB
* 06/15/2016,09/30/2022
* Kurt Anderson, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 09/30/2022
* USD 907,300.00

Many environments that are important for wildlife and human well-being are
spread unevenly across the landscape. Examples of these "patchy" environments
include natural habitats like wetlands and human-managed habitats like
agricultural fields. This project will test the idea that the number of
different species (biodiversity) that can live in patches of habitat depends on
the animals' ability to move between patches, the places where those patches
occur, and the amount of food available in each patch. Understanding what
determines biodiversity is important because it allows one to predict and manage
especially diverse, often vulnerable, patches of habitat. Because it is
practically impossible to rigorously test the determinants of biodiversity in
natural areas, this project will take place in the laboratory. Researchers will
create miniature, patchy worlds of very small animals that live in water to
study what happens on much larger scales to animals in the real world.
Experiments will focus on the relationship between the number of species, their
dispersal abilities, and the amount of food available to them in small
containers of water. A complicated model will be built to help analyze the data
and extend the results to different animals and different types of habitat
patches. The laboratory experiments will also be used in teaching and outreach
activities to provide opportunities for grade-school students and teachers to
learn scientific methods and ecological concepts through hands-on experiences.
Both students and teachers will help design and carry out experiments,
contributing directly to the scientific process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
investigator will experimentally test whether a common feature of ecological
systems -- dispersal among irregularly distributed habitats -- affects the
stability of a fundamental ecological unit, the food web. Research will include
experimental and theoretical components. Experiments conducted using protist
microcosms will test hypotheses arising from network theory that: (1) food webs
connected through randomly structured dispersal networks will show greater
spatial asynchrony and network-wide stability than those connected in regular
networks and (2) effects of dispersal will vary across a gradient in resource
productivity, as this factor is known to alter food web stability. Experiments
will be integrated with mechanistic models, extending the generality of project
findings to broader contexts and advancing general food web theory. The research
will also leverage the tractability of protist microcosms to provide inquiry-
based curriculum content and student research projects in an undergraduate
ecology course. Students from groups currently underrepresented in science will
be recruited and mentored in experimental design, data collection, analysis and
presentation. Outreach activities will bring public school teachers into the
investigator's laboratory and translate ecological research experiences into
lesson plans aligned to Next Generation Science Standards.