* 1553831
* CAREER: Engineering multilamellar vaccine platforms for vaccination against HIV
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2021
* James Moon, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie George
* 06/30/2021
* USD 504,991.00

PI: Moon, James &lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1553831&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mucosal
tissues are the major portal of entry and initial sites of infection for many
pathogens, including human immunodeficiency virus (HIV). However, there is no
methodology currently available that can elicit protective immunity in mucosal
tissues in a safe and effective manner. The investigator?s long-term goal is to
develop novel biomaterial-based approaches for vaccination against infectious
pathogens. In this CAREER application, the investigator proposes to address this
global challenge by investigating the impact of material properties of vaccine
delivery systems on immune activation in mucosal lymphoid tissues. The new
knowledge gained through this interdisciplinary effort will advance the
understanding of immune responses to biomaterials and address current technical
challenges facing vaccine development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of
the project is to test the hypothesis that ?pathogen-mimicking? nanomaterials
engineered for optimized delivery of vaccine components to mucosal lymphoid
tissues will induce robust, concerted T and B cell immune responses in mucosal
tissues. To achieve this, the investigator will develop a series of
multilamellar vaccine platforms (MVPs), employ HIV candidate antigens, and
define structure-function relationships that govern the interaction between
biomaterials and the immune system in cellular, tissue, and organism levels in
murine models of mucosal vaccination. The proposed studies will (1) generate new
information on how material properties of vaccine delivery systems dictate
antigen delivery and presentation, (2) shed new light on new nanomaterial-based
approaches to modulate mucosal immunity, (3) dissect the role of nanocarriers on
innate and adaptive immunity, and (4) delineate pathways to safely elicit
protective immunity against HIV. Furthermore, the MVP technology established in
this project could be easily adopted to other infectious pathogens, thus
broadening the scope of the work beyond HIV vaccine design and impacting a wide
range of disciplines, including biomaterials, drug delivery, and immunology. The
investigator also seeks to integrate research with educational activities
designed to raise excitement and interest in the emerging field of nanoscience.
This will be achieved by (a) engaging underrepresented minorities and women to
pursue careers in science and engineering; (b) training undergraduate and
graduate students in the investigator?s laboratory; and (c) communicating
research to the general public. The broader public, particularly
underrepresented high school students in a low-income area of Detroit, will be
reached by developing a series of new Saturday morning workshops, entitled ?MVPs
in Michigan, which will feature science demonstrations on nanotechnology,
nanomedicine, and vaccine design.