* 1553477
* CAREER: Interactions with Untrusted Quantum Devices
* CSE,CCF
* 02/01/2016,01/31/2022
* Thomas Vidick, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Pinaki Mazumder
* 01/31/2022
* USD 541,417.00

Fundamental research in quantum information performed since the 1980s shows that
the principles of quantum mechanics can lead to dramatic computational and
cryptographic consequences, from exponentially faster algorithms to unbreakable
cryptosystems. The first practical quantum devices, from single-photon receptors
used in quantum cryptography to large-scale quantum optimizers, are now being
actively developed. These stunning experimental advances raise a very practical
challenge: how can classical users establish and maintain a trusted interaction
with a priori unknown and untrusted quantum devices?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project aims to address the many aspects of this question, from the development
of novel secure cryptographic protocols to the study of the fundamental
consequences of quantum mechanical devices for the theory of computation.
Research in this direction is essential for the establishment of a secure
quantum network of trusted interactions. Making progress will require a
combination of insights from computer science, physics, and mathematics. By
nature the project is highly interdisciplinary, and the PI will put substantial
effort into disseminating the ideas that support, and arise from, the research.
This includes making best use of the possibilities for communication through the
internet (including online seminars and courses) and encouraging, via outreach
and teaching, the emergence of a generation of researchers equipped to address
the upcoming challenges posed by the interaction of physics and information
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research by the PI on this project will build
upon recent striking developments in cryptography and complexity theory,
including the framework of device-independence and the theory of quantum multi-
prover interactive proof systems. Recent works in these areas have identified a
key property of quantum entanglement, the monogamy of entanglement, which places
very strong constraints on quantum mechanical systems. The PI will develop
techniques that leverage entanglement and its monogamy in order to enable
testing and secure interactions between classical users and quantum devices. The
insights gained in the process will find applications beyond the framework of
the project to the many areas of physics in which entanglement plays a role,
from the theory of superconductors to that of black holes.