* 1553028
* CAREER: Investigating the Roles of Spatial Heterogeneity and Collateral Sensitivity in Evolved Bacterial Resistance to Environmental Stressors
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2016,02/28/2022
* Kevin Wood, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 02/28/2022
* USD 503,007.00

1553028 &lt;br/&gt;Wood, Kevin B. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Microbes such as
bacteria and fungi have developed a wide range of molecular tools for surviving
in toxic environments, and they evolve resistance to new stressors with
remarkable speed. The rise of antibiotic-resistant microbes poses an urgent
threat to public health, while bacteria resistant to disinfectants and other
biocides present engineering challenges in numerous venues, ranging from
wastewater treatment to biotechnology. Bacterial resistance has garnered
significant scientific interest over the past several decades, leading to a
relatively mature understanding of the molecular events underlying resistance in
individual cells. However, relatively little is known about how these molecular
events contribute to the large-scale behavior of bacteria communities, which are
often comprised of heterogeneous mixtures of billions of cohabitating cells. Is
the behavior of a collection of cells simply a sum of its molecular and cellular
parts, or is it instead dominated by new phenomena that arise from the way those
parts fit together? This project attempts to answer this question by combining
quantitative experiments on bacterial populations with mathematical and
computational models of bacterial communities. The goal is to understand the way
cellular communities respond to toxic stimuli ranging from antiseptics to
disinfectants and harsh chemicals in realistic environments that may change over
time. The work will offer fundamental insights into the community-level behavior
of microbial populations and complement the current molecular-level
understanding of resistance and its evolution. On a practical level, it will
contribute to new engineering strategies for controlling and optimizing
microbial growth while enhancing secondary student engagement with science and
engineering practices (SEP) in underrepresented rural
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER proposal includes integrated
research and education plans focused on the evolution of resistance in bacterial
populations. The goal of the research is to combine quantitative experiments on
microbial populations with stochastic models of bacterial evolution to
understand systems-level mechanisms by which cellular communities develop
resistance to environmental stresses. The work will leverage customized,
computer-automated microbial culture devices and high-throughput DNA sequencing
to investigate the evolution of resistance to a wide range of deleterious
stimuli, ranging from biocides to osmotic stress, in realistic environments
characterized by spatial heterogeneity and temporal fluctuations. More
specifically, the project will explore the roles of population density and
collateral sensitivity, which encompasses the trade-offs inherent in optimizing
resistance for one environment, in modulating the rate of resistance evolution.
The work will offer a quantitative, systems-level perspective to complement the
current molecular-level understanding of resistance and its evolution. It will
also lay the groundwork for new engineering strategies for controlling and
optimizing microbial growth, with applications for biotechnology and public
health, including the fight against antibiotic resistance.&lt;br/&gt;The
educational component includes a multi-faceted approach to enhance secondary
student engagement with science and engineering practices (SEP) in rural regions
of Kentucky. The educational outreach is directly related to the proposed
research on bacterial resistance and involves collaboration with a leading
education expert at the University of Kentucky and partnerships with local
educators through the Kentucky Valley Educational Cooperative (KVEC), a
collection of educational groups serving schools in rural regions of eastern
Kentucky. The project uses a combination of annual site visits to participating
high schools, regular distance learning meetings with teachers, students and
practicing scientists, and electronic and online tools inspired by the proposed
research on antimicrobial resistance. The goal of the proposal is to engage
students in SEP for systems-level analysis of biological systems, increase
student awareness of careers at the interface of traditional disciplines, and
improve specific skills and intuition for mathematical and computational
modeling of complex systems.&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award by the Biotechnology
and Biochemical Engineering Program of the CBET Division is co-funded by the
Systems and Synthetic Biology Program of the Division of Molecular and Cellular
Biosciences and by the Integrative Ecological Physiology Program of the Division
of Integrative Organismal Systems.