* 1553067
* CAREER: Biological Timing and Brain Circuits: Circadian influences on Prefrontal Cortex function
* BIO,IOS
* 04/15/2016,10/31/2020
* Ilia Karatsoreos, Washington State University
* Continuing Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 10/31/2020
* USD 832,572.00

The rotation of the Earth provides one of the most salient environmental
signals: the circadian (daily) alternation of night and day. Nearly all
terrestrial organisms, from single-celled to multi-cellular species, possess
internal biological clocks allowing for synchronization of internal processes
with the environment. In mammals (including humans), a master circadian clock in
the brain synchronizes other clocks throughout the brain and body, maintaining
temporal organization in the whole organism. The importance of these clocks
becomes apparent during times of temporal disruption, with the degradation of
circadian rhythms associated with numerous negative health effects. However, to
fully understand how "broken" clocks cause negative effects, understanding how
they promote optimal function under normal circumstances is necessary. The goal
of this research is to understand how circadian clocks promote normal
functioning of brain circuits important in complex behaviors like decision
making, attention, and cognitive flexibility. A mouse model is used to
investigate how normal or disrupted circadian rhythms regulate the size, shape,
and function of neurons in the brain, and how these changes affect cognition.
Advanced techniques in the measurement of brain chemistry, imaging,
3-dimensional reconstruction of neurons, and pharmacology is used to help
understand how circadian clocks maintain normal function, and how disrupted
clocks lead to negative outcomes. An integral component of this award engages
rural and urban undergraduate students in outreach involving the Mobius Science
Center and Children's Museum in Spokane, helping increase awareness of how
biological clocks affect physiological function, from the simplest organisms, to
our own brain.

Significant inroads have been made in understanding the cellular and molecular
function of the suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN) circadian clock. However, the
fundamental role of circadian rhythms in brain areas underlying complex
behaviors, such as the prefrontal cortex (PFC), remains illusive. Using
environmental circadian disruption as a tool, this research determines how
circadian rhythms modulate normal PFC function at the behavioral, physiological,
structural, and biochemical levels. This research builds upon our findings that
circadian disruption impairs cognitive flexibility and causes atrophy of PFC
neurons. The overarching hypothesis of this project is that circadian rhythms
promote normal PFC function primarily through modulation of glutamatergic
signaling, since glutamate is crucial for optimal PFC function. Circadian
disruption effects on the PFC is determined by examining PFC mediated behaviors,
and through the use of implantable biosensors to determine effects on extra-
cellular PFC glutamate in real time. To establish a causal role for glutamate,
pharmacological manipulation of PFC AMPA and NMDA signaling is undertaken.
Confocal microscopy and 3-D reconstruction of PFC neurons is used to investigate
circadian changes in neural morphology and dendritic spines, primary sites of
excitatory signaling. Biochemical studies determine how normal and abnormal
circadian rhythms drive membrane trafficking of glutamate receptors, providing
another substrate on which circadian rhythms may act to modulate PFC function.
The third and final experimental aim is to determine whether changes in a
rhythmic hormone (corticosterone) mediates these effects, which would provide a
mechanism by which normal and disrupted timing cues are relayed to extra-SCN
brain regions.