* 1553304
* CAREER: A Pathway towards Channel Camouflage and Manipulation Techniques  for Wireless Security
* CSE,CNS
* 03/01/2016,12/31/2022
* Yao Liu, University of South Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 12/31/2022
* USD 499,950.00

Wireless channel exhibits the spatial uncorrelation property, i.e., the
characteristic of a wireless channel becomes uncorrelated every half carrier
wavelength over distance. This property fertilizes an emerging research area
that utilizes wireless channel characteristics to authenticate a wireless
transmitter. In addition to transmitter authentication, the spatial
uncorrelation property of wireless channel has long served as the security
foundation of location distinction techniques, which use changes in wireless
channel characteristics to identify location changes of a wireless transmitter.
Despite the prevalence of authentication and location distinction schemes based
on the spatial uncorrelation property, this research identified an important
attack against these schemes. Specifically, an attacker can easily bypass
authentication or camouflage location changes by creating an artificial wireless
channel similar to the real one. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Based on the unrevealed
attack, this project will focus on two important directions of research: (i) it
will investigate methods that can enable a receiver to effectively detect the
existence of this attack; and (ii) it will also explore how the creation of
artificial wireless channels, on the other hand, paves the way for significant
advancement in wireless security techniques, such as key establishment and
anonymous communication. The project has the potential to substantially improve
the security of existing channel based authentication and location distinction
approaches, and accordingly impacts wireless security research due to the wide
adoption of these approaches in the design of wireless systems. The project also
creates a new research direction on creating artificial wireless channels to
solve practical wireless security problems. All research results will be freely
distributed. This research will be coupled with education and training for
introducing students to wireless security research, as well as broadening
security education to non-specialists.