* 1553593
* CAREER: Evolution of Ocean Mesoscale Turbulence in a Changing Climate
* GEO,OCE
* 02/15/2016,01/31/2022
* Ryan Abernathey, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Baris Uz
* 01/31/2022
* USD 762,946.00

Once the large-scale ocean circulation was viewed as a sluggish continuous flow.
Thanks to new satellite and in situ observations, powerful numerical models, and
advances in theory, it is now understood that ocean mesoscale turbulence, the
highly energetic, nonlinear jumble of waves, eddies, and jets which
characterizes ocean currents on scales of 20-500 km, is an essential component
of ocean circulation, transport, and marine ecosystems. Because this turbulence
draws its energy from instabilities of the large-scale flow, its properties are
themselves sensitive to changes in climate. This project seeks to answer the
question: how, and on what timescales, do large-scale changes in global climate
affect the properties of ocean mesoscale turbulence? As such, the proposed work
has the potential to transform how the climate community views mesoscale
turbulence. Because most ocean climate models are too coarse to resolve the
mesoscale, the effects of mesoscale turbulence are parameterized. As a result,
mesoscale turbulence is reduced to a "parameter" to be tuned, rather than an
emergent, dynamic part of the Earth system. The project is aimed at deepening
basic physical understanding of the processes that regulate the properties of
mesoscale turbulence and the timescales on which these properties respond to
changes in climate. Consideration of this two-way interaction will lead to a
richer understanding of the role of the ocean in the climate system, opening the
door to new mechanisms for climate feedbacks. The project will also lead to
methodological advances in Big Data computational tools for oceanography. The
curriculum development will address the need for students to develop strong
computational skills and, in particular, the capability to handle Big Data, to
meet the emerging challenges of 21st century science. It will also promote
active learning and the use of data in the oceanography classroom. The open-
source nature of the teaching materials will encourage wide adoption. Strong
interaction between research and education is guaranteed, because the same tools
used in the research will be incorporated into the curriculum, both evolving
together throughout the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research component of
this CAREER award will examine the link between climate change, baroclinic
instability, mesoscale eddy properties (kinetic energy and length scales), and
mesoscale mixing, using a hierarchy of models and observations. Idealized
process models will build a theoretical foundation of understanding of how
changes in surface wind and buoyancy forcing lead to changes in mesoscale
turbulence. Decadal variability in mesoscale statistics and baroclinic
instability will also be examined in satellite and hydrographic observations.
Finally, the theoretical framework and statistical analysis will be applied to
global, eddy-resolving climate model simulations of greenhouse warming. To
facilitate this work, Python-based computational tools for rapid data processing
will be developed. These tools will be integrated into education through
development of an open-source curriculum in "Big Data Oceanography," in which
the computational skills necessary to study global, high-resolution datasets are
taught side-by-side with core ocean science concepts. These modules will be
deployed and assessed in an undergraduate course and disseminated widely online
and at education conferences.