* 1553747
* CAREER: A Runtime Framework for Network Function Virtualization
* CSE,CNS
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2022
* Sylvia Ratnasamy, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 03/31/2022
* USD 528,514.00

The Internet has transformed everyday life across the globe. However, while
there has been constant evolution in the applications that use the Internet, the
same is not true of the underlying Internet itself. Instead, the Internet's core
service offering has proven tremendously difficult to change and, in fact, has
remained largely unchanged since the 1980s. This is problematic because of its
impact on the network 'carrier' companies that own and operate the network
infrastructure: any upgrade or change in their networks is a tremendously
difficult and expensive process, leading to partial and ad-hoc fixes and
escalating management costs. The difficulty of effecting change also means that
network carriers have been stifled in their ability to explore new services and
business models. In short: the long term health of the Internet depends on the
health of the carriers that operate its underlying infrastructure, but these
carriers are increasingly squeezed between mounting costs and flat revenues.
This trajectory is now widely recognized as
unsustainable.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research being undertaken in this
project offers a way out of this bind by making efficient software traffic
processing a fundamental component of the network infrastructure. Traditionally,
network infrastructure has been built from specialized fixed-function hardware
which is slow and expensive to evolve. Augmenting this infrastructure with
software functions that run on commodity general-purpose hardware, will allow
carriers to more easily and cheaply evolve their existing services, as well as
to explore innovative new service models. In other words, this project's
research will allow network functionality to evolve on (faster) software rather
than (slower) hardware development timescales.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Today, the
de-facto approach to incorporating advanced traffic-processing functionality
into a network is through the deployment of specialized 'middleboxes'. These
middleboxes have grown to be a vital part of modern networks but are also widely
recognized as bringing with them significant problems including high cost,
inflexibility, and complex management. Recently, advances in software packet
processing and virtualization technologies has led industry and research to
explore an alternate approach: moving middle- box functionality out of dedicated
boxes into software applications that run multiplexed on commodity x86
processors. This approach - termed Network Function Virtualization (NFV) -
stands to reshape network infrastructure and bring the benefits of cloud
computing to networks. However, the evolution of cloud computing (particularly
for data analytics) has greatly benefited from the existence of frameworks that
implement application-independent methods for elastic scaling, placement and
failover, achieving high efficiency while relieving programmers of these
burdens. NFV has no such general management solutions. The central premise of
the research agenda being undertaken in this project is that NFV needs a
framework, by which we mean a software environment for packet-processing
applications that implements general techniques for common
functions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project addresses fundamental questions that
arise when processing network traffic in software. It provides general and
effective solutions to the common problems of scaling, performance management,
and fault-tolerance for software-based network functions. Moreover, by showing
how these solutions can be embedded in a common framework, the research enables
faster innovation: third-party vendors can more easily develop new application-
relevant functions since they no longer have to deal with the common but thorny
issues of availability/scalability/efficiency which are now handled by the
framework.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The project contributes to the
broader goal of ensuring that the Internet continues to serve as the vehicle
bringing transformative communication services to the global population. The
project's educational component addresses the growing divide between coursework
and practice in networked systems through a new undergraduate course that uses
the above NFV framework to expose students to modern network software and
provide in-depth experience in building and deploying innovative network
services. The project is also exploring lab methodologies to scale such project-
centric classes to 100+ students. Outreach activities include the creation of an
open-source effort in collaboration with network vendors and carriers, and
mentoring undergraduates and under-represented students. For this, the PI builds
on a strong record of working with industry to impact practice and an
exceptional record of building a diverse research group.