* 1553317
* CAREER: Engineering Bacterial two Component Sensors to Study the Dynamics of Anaerobic Gut Terminal Electron Acceptors and Microbial Dysbiosis
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2022
* Jeffrey Tabor, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 03/31/2022
* USD 523,171.00

The human intestine (gut) nurtures the growth of approximately 100 trillion
bacteria. In return, most of these bacteria harvest extra energy from the diet
and protect against infection. However, a range of factors can trigger the gut
immune system to activate an inflammation response and produce anti-microbial
molecules that harm beneficial bacteria while leading the a bloom of non-
beneficial bacterial. It has become widely accepted the that gut microbiome is
important, nevertheless, the understanding how the fluctuations in diet and
bacterial composition affect the immune system and how the 'good' bacteria
maintain a healthy state remains largely unknown. A major limitation is a lack
of technologies for non-invasively measuring the molecules produced by the gut
immune system. The investigator seeks to overcome this limitation by engineering
harmless, orally ingestible 'sensor bacteria' that specifically detect these
molecules and respond by expression of a reporter (that might give rise to a
color change of the bacteria, for example) that can be evaluated after passage
through the gut. The investigator will use a combination of computational and
experimental techniques to evaluate the ability of these sensor bacteria to
probe molecular interactions that impact the gut microbiome. This work supports
NSFs mission to understand a fundamental complex and poorly understood
biological processes at a molecular level. It may also offer down-stream
opportunities to reduce or eliminate some of the prevalent bowel diseases. The
planned broader impact activities emphasize student education and public
outreach to demonstrate how basic research can have profound beneficial impacts
on society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The mammalian gut maintains a large and diverse
community of bacteria that performs numerous beneficial functions. The so-called
gut microbiota is largely comprised of anaerobic fermenters that digest host-
and diet-derived oligosaccharides. However, metabolites produced by minority
members can induce a host inflammatory response, which enriches the local
environment with reactive oxygen species, leading to the accumulation of
oxidized metabolites. These metabolites can be respired by facultative anaerobes
leading to blooms of otherwise rare gut members, under certain conditions. The
consequence can be long-term microbial imbalance, or dysbiosis. The precise
connection between the temporal dynamics of oxidized metabolite production and
consumption leading to undesirable microbial blooms remains poorly understood.
This project uses a systems and synthetic biology approach to engineer bacteria
to sense physiologically-relevant signals in the gut. The sensor bacteria would
report on the state of the gut microbiome during its transient passage through
the gut, providing a molecular-level understanding of gut physiology and
dynamics.