* 1553683
* CAREER: Practical Control Engineering Principles to Improve the Security and Privacy of Cyber-Physical Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2019
* Alvaro Cardenas, University of Texas at Dallas
* Continuing Grant
* Nina Amla
* 06/30/2019
* USD 344,602.00

This project focuses on tackling the security and privacy of Cyber-Physical
Systems (CPS) by integrating the theory and best practices from the information
security community as well as practical approaches from the control theory
community. The first part of the project focuses on security and protection of
cyber-physical critical infrastructures such as the power grid, water
distribution networks, and transportation networks against computer attacks in
order to prevent disruptions that may cause loss of service, infrastructure
damage or even loss of life. The second part of the project focuses on privacy
of CPS and proposes new algorithms to deal with the unprecedented levels of data
collection granularity of physical human activity. The work in these two parts
focuses on the integration of practical control theory concepts into computer
security solutions. In particular, in the last decade, the control theory
community has proposed fundamental advances in CPS security; in parallel, the
computer security community has also achieved significant advances in practical
implementation aspects for CPS security and privacy. While both of these fields
have made significant progress independently, there is still a large language
and conceptual barrier between the two fields, and as a result, computer
security experts have developed a parallel and independent research agenda from
control theory researchers. In order to design future CPS security and privacy
mechanisms, the two communities need to come closer together and leverage the
insights that each has developed. This project attempts to facilitate the
integration of these two communities by leveraging the physical properties of
the system under control in two research problems: (1) Physics-based CPS
security; and (2) Physics-based CPS privacy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Physics-based
CPS security leverages the time series from sensor and control signals to detect
deviations from expected operation. This is a growing area of research in both
security and control theory venues, although there are several open problems in
this space. This proposal tackles some of these open problems including the
definition of new evaluation metrics that capture the unique operational
properties of control systems, the consistent evaluation of different proposals
for models and anomaly detection tests, and the development of new industrial
control protocol parsers. Physics-based CPS privacy focuses on how to guide the
implementation of general privacy recommendations like the Fair Information
Practice principles into cyber-physical systems, leveraging the fact that these
physical systems often have an objective to achieve, and this objective depends
on the data-handling policies of the operator. The project focuses on
investigating the trade-off between privacy and control performance and
developing tools to guide how data minimization, data delays, and data retention
should be implemented.