* 1553356
* CAREER: Deciphering temporal events in mammalian cells using synthetic biology
* ENG,CBET
* 03/15/2016,02/28/2022
* Wilson Wong, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 02/28/2022
* USD 502,214.00

1553356&lt;br/&gt;Wong, Wilson &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A fundamental goal in
biology is to understand how cells make decisions when faced with external
signal. The proposed work will seek to understand how a cell, through genetic
programs found in its genome, can distinguish signals that are varying in time
(dynamics) and generate different outcomes. A 'learning by building' approach
will be used to engineer genetic systems that can decode dynamic signals.
Specifically, the PI will engineer novel genetic programs in living mammalian
cells to enable it to interpret signal duration and sequence. This approach will
also provide a unique opportunity to bridge basic and applied science, where the
novel genetic systems may be used in commercial applications. A broader goal of
this proposed work is to inspire students to design living cells, and train the
next generation of workforce skilled in genetic engineering to address
challenges in health, food, energy, and environment. The education and outreach
plans of this proposed work will accomplish these objectives by providing direct
and stimulating research experience for undergraduates and underprivileged high
school students, and developing classroom and laboratory based courses for
students, high school teachers, and researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
CAREER proposal aims to understand how genetic networks process information.
Such understanding will provide insight into a wide range of cellular processes.
The proposed work will seek to delineate the governing rules of genetic circuits
that decipher dynamic signals and produce divergent output states with limited
inputs. In particular, two dynamical features, cumulative signal duration and
temporal-order will be studied. A forward engineering approach will be used to
explore genetic circuits that can decode dynamics. Specifically, the PI will (i)
develop DNA recombinase-based cascade circuits to decode signal duration, and
(ii) engineer and characterize two-input recombinase-based temporal-order
sensing circuits. A broader goal of this proposed work is to inspire students to
design living cells, and train the next generation of workforce skilled in
synthetic biology to address challenges in health, food, energy, and
environment. The education and outreach plans will accomplish these objectives
by providing mentored laboratory-based research experience for undergraduates
and underprivileged high school students, and by developing classroom and
laboratory based courses for students, high school teachers, and
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award by the Biotechnology and Biochemical
Engineering Program of the CBET Division is co-funded by the Systems and
Synthetic Biology Program of the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences.