* 1553510
* CAREER: A Unified Framework for Designing Efficient  Resource-Oblivious Parallel Algorithms
* CSE,CNS
* 02/15/2016,01/31/2022
* Rezaul Chowdhury, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 01/31/2022
* USD 535,739.00

This project will develop fundamental theory and efficient tools to facilitate
the design of parallel algorithms that make no mention of any hardware
parameters in the code, but still run efficiently across a wide spectrum of
parallel computing platforms ranging from small laptop computers to gigantic
supercomputers. These algorithms will be called resource-oblivious algorithms.
These algorithms will enable efficient parallel code regardless of the ever-
changing underlying hardware platforms allowing more focus on the correctness of
implementations without the need of optimizing for a particular hardware.
Porting code from one machine to another will be reduced or eliminated. In
short, algorithms will be implemented once and continue to run
efficiently.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One way of designing efficient resource-
oblivious parallel algorithms for the multilevel cache-hierarchy of a multicore
machine is to reverse the direction of information flow between the program and
the hardware &amp;#8213; instead of making choices based on hardware parameters,
such as cache sizes and number of cores, the program now simply assists
scheduling by telling the scheduler about the properties of the algorithm being
run. This project will extend the notion of resource-obliviousness to networks
of hybrid compute nodes containing both multicore processors and manycore
coprocessors. A unified framework will be built bottom-up starting with programs
that run solely on processors (stage 1) or mainly on coprocessors (stage 2) of a
single node, followed by hybrid programs utilizing both processors and
coprocessors of the same node (stage 3), and ending with programs for networks
of hybrid nodes (stage 4). Each stage will have four outcomes.&lt;br/&gt; -
Algorithmic models of resources separately for evaluation and for execution of
algorithms.&lt;br/&gt; - Efficient resource-oblivious algorithms for a suite of
representative problems with theoretical bounds on the evaluation
model.&lt;br/&gt; - Schedulers that guarantee practical program performance
predicted by the evaluation model.&lt;br/&gt; - Implementation and experimental
evaluation of the schedulers and the algorithms on real
machines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will make a wide variety of
computational science applications easier to develop and maintain.The research
results will be disseminated through new and existing courses on analysis of
algorithms, parallel programming and supercomputing using resources made
available through the NSF-funded XSEDE program, as well as workshops targeting
both computer science and computational science audiences.