* 1553021
* CAREER: Developing hybrid IMS/OMS-MS/MS techniques for protein complex structure characterization
* MPS,CHE
* 04/15/2016,03/31/2022
* Stephen Valentine, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 03/31/2022
* USD 400,000.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division
of Chemistry and the Instrument Development for Biological Research (IDBR)
Program in the Division of Biological Infrastructure, Professor Valentine at
West Virginia University and his group are developing scientific instrumentation
and techniques for studying the three-dimensional shapes of complex, biological
molecules. This developmental work is aimed at the study of protein complexes.
Proteins play a crucial role in life processes. When such molecules do not form
the correct three dimensional shapes, disease often ensues and therefore it
becomes important to be able to determine the structures of these biological
molecules and how their components come to form critical shapes. However,
because of their relatively large sizes and other factors, it is difficult to
determine accurate structures for many molecules. The new instrumentation and
techniques developed by Professor Valentine are important ways for determining
the structures of such proteins. Professor Valentine is also engaged in
educational outreach efforts to improve the training of Middle- and High-School
teachers in the science, technology, engineering and mathematical fields thereby
benefitting many students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The characterization of protein
complex structures as well as the structures of coexisting protein species
presents one challenge to modern analytical techniques. Professor Valentine is
developing novel gas-phase separation instrumentation and techniques to study
these problems. This work has three major tasks. First, a hybrid drift tube that
combines traditional ion mobility spectrometry (IMS) separations with overtone
mobility spectrometry (OMS) analysis is constructed and coupled with an existing
linear ion trap mass spectrometer. The approach may allow the probing of minor
conformational changes (~4%) occurring on very short timescales (microsecond and
lower), enhancing current methods for structural assessments. Second, the novel
technique is used to characterize a protein system associated with Huntington's
Disease. Multimeric peptide ions formed by portions of the huntingtin (Htt)
protein are subjected to OMS-hydrogen deuterium exchange (HDX) analysis with
tandem mass spectrometry (MS). The results are compared with those obtained from
IMS-OMS-MS analysis to provide a means for testing the new instrumentation and
techniques on a real-world sample as well as provide new information in the form
of species that are undergoing structural transformations during the course of
the measurement. The final task is characterizing these same protein systems
using solution-phase HDX combined with OMS-MS/MS studies to unravel linking of
solution- and gas-phase structures as well as to provide information regarding
conformation establishment in the gas-phase. This research may provide important
clues about Huntington's Disease progression. The educational component
establishes strategies for improving the efficacy of middle- and high-school
science instruction, develops undergraduate curricula, introduces undergraduate
students to research, and provides unique research and instructional
opportunities for graduate students.