* 1553987
* CAREER: Understanding the Roles of Strain and Mass Disorder on Fundamental Thermal Transport Processes in Two-Dimensional Materials
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2016,02/28/2019
* Michael Pettes, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 02/28/2019
* USD 550,000.00

Technologies based on two-dimensional (2D) materials offer size, weight, power,
and cost advantages not currently achievable using traditional materials. These
attributes combined with the ability to tune the properties of these materials
at the atomic scale makes them ideal for envisioned flexible nanoelectronic and
ultra-high frequency applications. This project will generate fundamental
knowledge of energy transport in 2D materials critical for advanced
nanoelectronic device technologies. These beyond next-generation technologies
have the potential to foster a revolution in computing comparable to the
transition from the vacuum tube to the transistor. The outcomes of this project
are likely to have a catalytic effect on the thermal engineering community as
very little is known regarding the fundamental nature of a material's thermal
response to elastic stimulus and mass disorder, effects which have been
predicted to offer unprecedented control over intrinsic physico-chemical
properties. Large changes have been predicted for thermal transport in the
presence of elastic strain, and whether this should be exploited (strain
enhanced devices) or prevented (strain robust devices) is a key remaining
scientific question. Since no accepted technique exists in which to probe
strain-effects on heat transfer mechanisms in nanomaterials, resolving this
issue is a limiting challenge for the progress of nanoelectronic technologies.
Furthermore, isotopic mass disorder is beginning to be understood as a tool that
can be used to beneficially alter thermal transport mechanisms, thereby enabling
higher power output in nanoelectronic devices. Yet understanding of the effect
in low-dimensional materials is controversial, especially in light of recent
phonon transport models invoking coherency effects. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research objective of this proposal is to determine the fundamental nature of
elastic strain and mass disorder on thermal transport in low-dimensional
materials using technologically-critical 2D materials in order to enable their
widespread adoption in flexible electronic technologies. Investigating the
nature of elastic strain and mass disorder on thermal transport in low-
dimensional materials using technologically-critical 2D materials in heavy,
semiconducting quasi-2D layered transition metal dichalcogenides (LTMDs) MoS2
and WS2, as well as in light, metallic truly-2D graphene, will yield insight
into controversial phenomena such as divergently increasing thermal conductivity
and coherent phonon transport. An innovative approach here is to develop a
metrology technique using a micro-thermometry device and in situ transmission
electron microscopy (TEM) to probe heat dissipation mechanisms in the presence
of mechanical stimulus. This work will provide a conceptual advance in knowledge
concerning the effect of mechanical stimulus and isotopic disorder on heat
transfer in technologically-critical 2D materials. The outcome of this work will
enable the development of new and widely applicable strain and isotopic
engineering strategies to alter thermal transport processes in low-dimensional
systems, in addition to solving critical questions needed for the design of
flexible electronic technologies. Through this project, a new TEM-based
metrology tool to quantify the elastic strain effect on the thermal conductivity
of low-dimensional materials will be developed, and a Raman spectroscopic
technique to probe both long-wavelength and dispersive phonons will be further
developed. These new techniques will allow the effects of strain and isotopic
disorder on thermal transport and phonon dispersions in 2D systems with
different structural characteristics to be identified. Especially promising, the
methods and outcome of this study will be generally applicable to a wide class
of low-dimensional materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Furthermore, through the
development of a mentor/teacher/student nucleus in nanoscale thermal transport,
state-of-the-art active experimental research and educational experiences for a
unique group of student researchers and pre-college educators will be
implemented and evaluated. Several Ph.D. students and numerous undergraduate and
pre-college students will be mentored through this project. Hands-on educational
modules created through integration of this project with the NSF RET program
will extend its impact into K-12 science curriculum. The proposed activities
will broaden opportunities and increase accessibility of experimental
nanotechnology research to underrepresented populations and the disabled in
Connecticut.