* 1553939
* CAREER: Decoherence, Non-Equilibrium Properties and Stark Control of Electrons at the Nanoscale
* MPS,CHE
* 02/15/2016,01/31/2021
* Ignacio Franco, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 01/31/2021
* USD 704,952.00

Ignacio Franco of the University of Rochester is supported by a CAREER award
from the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program in the
Chemistry Division to investigate the fundamental limits in the laser control of
electrons and electronic properties in matter by exploiting quantum mechanical
effects, an area of research known as quantum control. The focus is on lasers
rather than more conventional means (e.g., an applied voltage, or changes in
thermodynamic control variables) because lasers offer the possibility of change
on an ultrafast timescale (on the order of a millionth of one billionth of a
second). The Franco group investigates, for instance, the microscopic origin of
the fastest existing method for the generation of currents, and the ability of
lasers to turn insulating materials into transient metals. In addition to
interest at a fundamental level, pushing the time limit in which electronic
properties can be controlled has the potential to catalyze transformative
progress in chemistry, spectroscopy, optoelectronic device design, communication
through electrical signals, and any other science or technology based on
electronic properties and their control. Professor Franco is impacting graduate
education by redesigning the teaching of graduate level Quantum Mechanics in
Chemistry through active learning pedagogies. With this project, he contributes
to the development of a diverse, globally-engaged, U.S. science and engineering
workforce by creating summer research opportunities for top international
undergraduate students in Chemistry at the University of
Rochester.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the Franco group advances the
capabilities of using high and intermediate intensity ultrafast laser pulses to
manipulate electronic properties and dynamics in nanoscale matter. The vision of
the group is to establish structure-function relations that apply to matter
driven far from equilibrium by laser fields, and to push the limit in which
control of electrons is exerted. A fundamental limit that has historically
hindered progress in the quantum control of electrons is the deleterious effects
on the control introduced by ultrafast electronic decoherence processes arising
from electron-nuclear interactions. To overcome this limit, Professor Franco and
his research group: (i) Identify, model, and quantify basic mechanisms for
electronic coherence loss, as a necessary step in the design of laser control
scenarios that either avoid or take advantage of the decoherence. (ii) Develop
novel routes for laser control of electrons based on the Dynamic Stark Effect
induced by non-resonant laser fields of intermediate intensity (non-perturbative
but non-ionizing) that are robust to decoherence. Together, these developments
catalyze the design of novel control experiments, ultrafast opto-electronic
technologies, and a new class of dynamic electronic materials with effective
laser-induced properties tunable on a femtosecond timescale. This project
incorporates an integrated research and educational plan that provides students
with a unique opportunity for interdisciplinary training and collaborative work
at the interface between Chemistry, Physics, Nanoscience and Optics. The work
impacts graduate education, through a proposed redesign of the teaching of
graduate level Quantum Mechanics in Chemistry by incorporating active learning
pedagogies, such as flipped classrooms and peer learning problem solving
sessions.