* 1553365
* CAREER: Accurate Electrochemical Barriers Accelerated by Machine-learning
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2016,09/30/2021
* Andrew Peterson, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 09/30/2021
* USD 573,860.00

Abstract (Peterson;1553365)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study will promote advances
in theoretical understanding of electrocatalysis as accelerated by machine-
learning tools. The resulting understanding will aid the development of related
technologies such as solar-fuel devices, batteries, fuel cells and electrolyzers
- all of relevance to renewable energy and the commercialization of sustainable
technologies. The research will also provide educational opportunities to
students at various levels in both the U.S. and in rural Kenya, and will
facilitate introduction of high-fidelity, accelerated atomistic calculations
across a broad research community via the principal investigator's publicly
available code, "Amp".&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Electronic structure theory has
revolutionized heterogeneous catalyst design in recent years, however it has had
greater challenges in electrocatalysis due to the difficulty of calculating
transition state energy barriers (which often dictate catalytic performance).
This study will provide the first systematic study of such potential-dependent
electrocatalytic barriers across a range of catalytic materials and adsorbed
reactants, thus facilitating the discovery of new materials and electrocatalytic
processes. The transition-state calculations will be enabled by the development
of unique, atom-centered, machine-learning tools that dramatically accelerate
atomistic calculations while matching the accuracy of computationally-intensive
(and often exceedingly time-consuming) "ab initio" calculations. The PI's Amp
software modularizes atom-centered machine learning, and will be used to
accelerate the search of potential energy surfaces for local minima, transition
states, and global minima. Moreover, the acceleration provided by machine
learning will also facilitate the introduction of complicated phenomena
associated with the electrochemical environment such as solvent effects and
large unit cells of typical materials. More broadly, the project will provide
information that will be used by the PI as teaching tools to convey reaction
visualization to students ranging from local high school and Brown undergraduate
and graduate students to students at a new science and technology university
(JOOUST) in rural Kenya. Moreover, continued development of Amp, with new shared
applications, will accelerate materials discovery across a broad range of
applications related to energy and the environment.