* 1553687
* CAREER: Large Scale Learning for Complex Image-Omics Data Analytics
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2023
* Junzhou Huang, University of Texas at Arlington
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 07/31/2023
* USD 535,763.00

This proposal aims to develop computational tools for analyzing complex
pathology and radiology image data as well genomics data. Recent technological
innovations are enabling scientists to capture complex imaging and genomic data
from different views. However, the major computational challenges are due to the
unprecedented scale and complexity of heterogeneous data analytics. To solve the
key and challenging problems in mining such comprehensive heterogeneous image
and genomic data, the PI proposes to develop novel large scale learning tools
and explore ways to integrate features from multiple data sources for clinical
outcome prediction. It will greatly support the Precision Medicine Initiative,
which has become a national goal and was unveiled by the U.S. government as a
research effort designed to enable physicians to select individualized
treatments. This project will facilitate the development of novel educational
tools to enhance several current courses. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI proposes
an integrated research and education plan based on the following three
components: (1) big image analytics and feature extraction, in which novel
sparse convolution kernels, sparse deformable models and quantitative topology
measurements are proposed to extract local and global features to fully
characterize whole images; (2) large scale feature learning, in which domain
knowledge guided sparse feature learning models and non-convex sparse feature
learning models are proposed for large scale image marker discovery; and (3)
multi-source image-omics data integration, in which sparse multi-view learning
and large scale learning with bipartite graph are developed for big image-omics
data integration, where the image-omics refers to both image data (pathology
images or radiology images) and omics data (genomics, proteomics or
metabolomics) captured from the same patient. This project will advance research
in efficient feature learning from giga-pixel images, and in integrating
heterogeneous image-omics data for outcome prediction and knowledge discovery.
The success of this project will create a new paradigm for medical image
informatics and big data.