* 1553329
* CAREER: Generating Hierarchical Vector-Valued Data Summaries for Scalable Flow Data Processing, Analysis and Visualization
* CSE,IIS
* 02/01/2016,01/31/2023
* Guoning Chen, University of Houston
* Continuing Grant
* Hector Munoz-Avila
* 01/31/2023
* USD 553,854.00

Vector fields are a ubiquitous tool to describe the behaviors of various
dynamical systems that dominate many important physical phenomena, especially
fluids. Their analysis is indispensable for many applications ranging from
medical data analysis such as blood circulation to tsunami simulations and many
other problems in science and engineering. However, processing and interpreting
very large scale vector field data defined in a high dimensional space has
become the bottleneck of many critical scientific research tasks. More
specifically, the analysis of vector field data, that is inherently complex and
formidable in size, is particularly challenging especially when visualization is
limited by the finite resolution and dimensions of modern displays, and the
amount of information conveyed via the visualization is constrained by the
limited bandwidth of the human visual perception channel. This problem cannot be
solved without a comprehensive, summary representation of vector field flow
data, which has not been well studied in the flow visualization community. The
proposed research will fill this gap. Theoretical contributions of this research
will impact methods in computational topology, fluid mechanics, and mathematics,
while its applications will benefit a wide variety of disciplines including
climate study, physics, chemistry, mechanical and civil engineering, and
cardiovascular disease diagnosis. The results of this work will be incorporated
into new courses in the area of vector field data processing and visualization
at both the undergraduate and graduate levels that will benefit students of a
broad range of disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A vector field is a function
that assigns any spatial point a vector value describing the displacement of
objects. To develop an effective summary representation for vector fields, the
proposed project will first study the relations between different flow
characteristics and descriptors, aiming to reduce the redundancy in the
extraction of the summary. Second, a novel link-graph hybrid representation will
be developed with the goal of seamlessly integrating various flow information,
characterized from different perspectives and in various scales, into a
dimension-independent representation. Third, based on this intermediate
representation, a new and scalable vector field analysis framework will be
developed, from which a hierarchical summary for vector field data can be
defined. The information theoretical framework will be adapted to evaluate the
information loss in the summary representation. This summary will enable a
number of applications for scientific discovery and education including the
scalable and knowledge-assisted exploration of flow data, vector field
comparison, and vector field synthesis gaming. The knowledge obtained during
this project will be adapted to study the summary representation of more complex
data, such as tensor field data. More importantly, this research represents one
step towards a unified framework of knowledge discovery and integrity from
heterogeneous data sources. The developed theory and algorithms will be
published in peer-reviewed journal and conferences. The project webpage
(http://www2.cs.uh.edu/~chengu/Hier_VVDSummary/Hier_VVDSummary.html) will
provide brief description of the key outcome and links or pointers to the
corresponding publications and generated datasets. The developed software,
libraries, plug-ins, and open source code will be released on the on the project
webpage and Github.