* 1553447
* CAREER: A Millimeter-Wave Multi-Layer WLAN Architecture for Multi-Gigabit, Always-On Connectivity
* CSE,CNS
* 02/15/2016,07/31/2021
* Dimitrios Koutsonikolas, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing Grant
* Murat Torlak
* 07/31/2021
* USD 563,385.00

We are experiencing today an explosion in wireless network traffic driven by the
rapidly growing number of mobile devices and bandwidth-hungry applications.
Industry research predicts a 1000-fold increase in aggregate bandwidth demands
by 2020. In spite of decades of research on improving spectrum efficiency in
WiFi and cellular networks, existing techniques can only offer short-term
solutions. Millimeter-wave (mmWave) technology in the unlicensed 60 GHz band,
supported by the IEEE 802.11ad standard, has recently emerged as an alternative
to legacy WiFi, promising multi-Gigabit per second throughput. The caveat,
however, is the high attenuation and vulnerability to blockage of mmWave
signals, due to the small wavelength. For example, the presence of a human body
in the Line-of-Sight (LOS) between the transmitter and the receiver can result
in a complete link outage. This project aims to implement an integrated research
and education plan towards an ambitious vision of general purpose multi-Gigabit
WLANs in the mmWave frequency bands that will offer always-on connectivity in
home and enterprise environments but an order of magnitude higher throughput
than current WiFi networks in 2.4/5 GHz bands.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To realize
this vision, the project will develop a mmWave multi-layer WLAN architecture in
a systematic, bottom-up fashion, starting with an understanding of the mmWave
channel and its impact on higher layer performance and gradually moving up the
layers of the network stack. Specifically, the project includes the following
tasks: (i) measurement and modeling of the mmWave wireless channel, the
interactions among different layers of the protocol stack, and the power
consumption of mmWave network interfaces, (ii) model-driven MAC protocol design
(rate and beam adaptation, adaptive frame aggregation, loss diagnosis) targeting
both performance and power savings, (iii) a mmWave relay architecture for
improving connectivity (in the case of human blockage), extending network
coverage, and increasing wireless capacity, along with an online link
measurement framework, and a set of metrics for optimal relay selection. The
proposed architecture will be prototyped and evaluated on a 60 GHz testbed,
consisting of a combination of off-the-shelf and proprietary hardware platforms,
which will be developed as part of this project. Additionally, the project will
develop a new multi-level realistic 60 GHz simulator for large scale evaluation
and will make it available to the wireless networking community.