* 1553861
* CAREER: Investigation of Spin Evolution in Magnetic Ultracold Neutron Bottles Used to Measure the Free Neutron Lifetime
* MPS,PHY
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2023
* Adam Holley, Tennessee Technological University
* Continuing Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 05/31/2023
* USD 520,000.00

An isolated neutron lives for about fifteen minutes before disintegrating into
three lighter particles. This fundamental process plays a significant role in
cosmology, and its study complements current efforts to discover new physics.
Two laboratory techniques exist to determine the lifetime of a neutron with high
precision, but they disagree significantly in their reported values. This
discrepancy must be addressed in order to realize the potential of these
techniques to help probe new physics. The research conducted with this award
directly supports that effort by examining the behavior of very low energy (or
"ultracold") neutrons which are magnetically confined in order to determine the
neutron lifetime. The research involves a broad set of ideas and skills
appropriate for undergraduate involvement and will be used to form the kernel
for an interdisciplinary undergraduate research training, mentoring, and
outreach program at Tennessee Technological University.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research activities will be carried out in conjunction
with the UCNtau collaboration, which has constructed a magneto-gravitational
ultracold neutron trap with a long intrinsic neutron storage time and
demonstrated a detection strategy capable of making multiple high-precision
measurements in a single accelerator cycle at the Los Alamos National Laboratory
ultracold neutron source. Losses due to spin evolution in this trap will be
empirically characterized by developing a high-fidelity spin-tracking Monte
Carlo simulation of the experiment which, when combined with measurements of the
mean trap lifetime as a function of the polarization-preserving ambient magnetic
field magnitude, will be used to characterize indirectly the loss rate
associated with spin evolution in the trap, sufficient for completing
measurement of the neutron lifetime to an accuracy of one second. Measurements
in a dedicated test cell will provide information necessary to assess directly
the effect of spin evolution in a very high-precision (well below 0.1%) magnetic
trap measurement of the free neutron lifetime.