* 1553815
* CAREER: Surface Texturing of Bulk Metallic Glasses for Fabrication of Complex Micro Optics
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2018
* Xiaoliang Jin, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Steve Schmid
* 03/31/2018
* USD 169,273.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) grant will provide fundamental
understanding of a novel technique to fabricate complex micro optics through
generating surface textures on bulk metallic glasses. Micro optics with surface
textures play a significant role in broad applications, such as automotive
illumination systems, high-resolution display panels, diffraction gratings for
laser systems, and reflective mirrors for traffic safety. Bulk metallic glasses
have been increasingly used in fabricating micro optics due to high hardness,
high corrosion resistance and no surface defects. However, micro optics produced
with existing techniques using bulk metallic glasses usually have high
fabrication cost, limited geometric accuracy and surface quality due to thermal
deformations of the material. This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER)
award supports fundamental research of a novel technique to fabricate complex
micro optics through generating surface textures on bulk metallic glasses by
diamond machining with applied vibrations. The new technique will significantly
reduce production cost, and improve component quality (both geometric accuracy
and surface roughness). The award also supports activities to integrate research
results into education, expose the public to precision manufacturing and optics
engineering, and prepare next-generation engineers in advanced manufacturing
areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the new technique, the planar vibration of the
workpiece causes intermittent tool-workpiece contact, resulting in high-
frequency variations of temperature and stress in material removal region. The
first research objective is to uncover the relationship between amorphous-
crystalline transition of bulk metallic glasses and temperature variation. It
will be achieved by finite element modeling of the texturing process to predict
temperature and amorphous-crystalline transition. The simulation results will be
verified by measuring spatial-temporal temperature using a novel system
combining a pyrometer and an infrared camera, and characterizing crystallization
of the original amorphous microstructure through X-ray diffraction. The second
objective is to determine the influences of stress variation in texturing
process on deformation mode (inhomogeneous and homogeneous) of bulk metallic
glasses. To achieve this objective, stress variation will be simulated through
finite element method, and material deformation mode will be measured in-situ
using acoustic emission signals. The third objective is to determine the effects
of process parameters (tool geometry, texturing conditions, and vibration
assistance parameters) on geometric accuracy of surface textures. The process
dynamics including forced vibrations of tool and assisted vibrations of
workpiece will be analytically modeled, and the simulated texture geometry will
be experimentally verified using surface profilometer. Modeling and experiments
for the three objectives will be conducted under various process parameters.