* 1553506
* CAREER: Defining Critical Transport Mechanisms for Chloroplast Osmoregulation and Salt Stress Response
* BIO,IOS
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2020
* Hans-Henning Kunz, Washington State University
* Continuing Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 12/31/2020
* USD 759,799.00

Plants are a prerequisite for life on earth. By performing photosynthesis in the
chloroplast, a specialized cell compartment, plants transform light into
chemical energy and fix CO2 from the atmosphere. Furthermore, they provide the
air we breathe by releasing oxygen, and they represent the main part of our
diet. As sessile life forms, plants have to cope with constantly changing, often
times harsh, environments. As average temperatures rise, drought and
interrelated soil salinity become increasingly problematic for plant performance
and agricultural production in the US and globally. Salt stress affects
photosynthesis by destroying the fine-tuned ion balance in the chloroplast. This
process involves transporter proteins but most genes encoding chloroplast ion
transporters are unknown. Dr. Kunz and his group investigate a new set of plant
genes and mutants to determine their role in chloroplast ion transport.
Moreover, his group is building a genetic tool that allows for testing the
relevance of all chloroplast proteins and entire protein families in plant
function and photosynthesis. The tool will be applied to precisely determine the
genes crucial for plant performance under salt stress. This research will
provide critical knowledge and new strategies to increase crop yields even under
adverse climatic conditions. Dr. Kunz engages high school students in his
research to raise awareness for plant research and its significance for a
sustainable future and to excite the future generation of scientist for the
world's most fundamental biochemical process,
photosynthesis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Plant photosynthesis is affected by soil
salinity but little is known about the genes involved and their potential to
improve plant resistance. Salt stress triggers changes in transcription of
nuclear encoded chloroplast genes and the chloroplast proteome. Physiologically,
salt stress leads to toxic Na+ accumulation in plastids and outcompeting of K+
which disturbs chloroplast ion homeostasis, osmoregulation, and eventually
diminishes photosynthetic efficiency. Recently, the first plastid K+ efflux
carriers were discovered. Corresponding loss-of-function mutant plants reveal
poor photosynthesis under control conditions but, surprisingly, photosynthesis
is rescued by salt stress. This emphasizes the potential of manipulating plastid
ion flux to increase photosynthetic efficiency during salt stress. However, this
approach is hindered by the limited number of characterized plastid ion
transporters, most strikingly a chloroplast K+ importer. One hurdle is the high
number of gene family members in chloroplasts which often results in functional
redundancy and a lack of phenotypes. This project will: 1. Determine the role of
plastid K+ channel homologs for K+ import, 2. Define the genes responsible for
the unexpected salt stress rescue of plastid K+ efflux carrier mutants. 3. Build
and apply a full-coverage artificial library tool to downregulate all nuclear
encoded chloroplast genes and gene family transcripts in Arabidopsis thaliana
and determine the genes responsible for plastid Na+ influx and low
photosynthesis during salt stress. 4. Engage and excite high school students in
plant science and photosynthesis by providing hands-on molecular biology
training in the classroom and the laboratory.