* 1553653
* CAREER: Advances in Comparing Complexity
* MPS,DMS
* 03/01/2016,02/28/2022
* Maryanthe Malliaris, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 02/28/2022
* USD 450,000.00

Suppose we are given a collection of diverse mathematical objects. How might we
compare their complexity in a productive way? The foundations of the present
approach to this question were built in the 1960s with the development of the
ultrapower construction. Roughly speaking, ultrapowers give a way of amplifying
the original object in accordance with a coherent set of conditions, called an
ultrafilter. Different ultrafilters produce different amplifications, but
nonetheless by observing the range and characteristics of such amplifications it
is in a few fundamental cases possible, and in more complex cases conjecturally
possible, to detect and classify the basic drivers of structure. One can make
this description precise via a pre-order known as "Keisler's order. Some
important and striking special cases of the structure of Keisler's order were
worked out in the seventies within the mathematical field of model theory and
were very productive for its development. The difficulty in going further had
long been double: a mathematical theory sufficient to detect and explain the
details of the amplification by ultrafilters had not been developed, and little
was known about the construction of ultrafilters - perhaps they may vary much
more than the known examples suggest. The PI's 2009 PhD thesis and early papers
re-opened this area, developing our understanding of the interaction of
ultrafilters and theories. Among these developments were connections to some
phenomena in extremal combinatorics, such as Szemeredi's celebrated regularity
lemma. Recently, joint work of the PI and Shelah has leveraged this developing
approach to the comparison of complexity to solve problems in diverse areas of
mathematics, such as a sixty-year-old question about cardinal invariants of the
continuum and a characterization of the existence of irregular pairs in the
regularity lemma. A broad aim of the present project is therefore to develop our
understanding of the nature of the complexity which ultrafilters detect and
classify, in light of its possible applications, while addressing related
problems from model theoretic classification theory and working to settle
certain basic questions about the structure of Keisler's order. By means of
assistantships, courses, summer programs, and visits, the project aims to
include both undergraduates and graduate students from within the PI's
institution and to support visitors with a range of relevant expertise. A
component of the associated education project will involve training
mathematically talented high school students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
more detail, the proposed research concerns a large-scale classification program
in model theory, which builds a framework for comparing the complexity of
theories, and its emerging connections to the study of complexity in finite
combinatorics, set theory, and general topology. A longstanding open problem in
this context is the problem of determining the structure of Keisler's 1967 order
on theories. Recall that if D is a regular ultrafilter on I, and M, N are
elementarily equivalent models in a countable language, we have that the
D-ultrapower of M realizes all types over sets of size no more than |I| iff the
D-ultrapower of N does. If so, let T be the associated theory, and let us say
that D saturates T. Keisler's (pre-)order on countable theories, often
considered as a partial order on the equivalence classes, sets T less than or
equal to T' if every regular ultrafilter which saturates T' also saturates T.
Three main research aims of the present project are the following. The first is
to investigate the model theory of simple unstable theories via the framework of
Keisler's order. The second is to build the beginnings of a structure theory for
the class of theories which are not simple but do not have the strong tree
property SOP2, those conjecturally not maximal in Keisler's order, and to
address related questions of ultrafilter construction. The third is to develop
further the interactions with Szemeredi regularity and Ramsey theory and to
investigate the effectiveness of earlier results with a view towards
applications.