* 1554299
* CAREER: SusChEM: Development of Tandem and Multi-Component Couplings with Base Metals and Organic Electron Donors
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2016,02/29/2020
* Ramesh Giri, University of New Mexico
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 02/29/2020
* USD 675,000.00

With this CAREER Award, the Chemical Catalysis program of the Division of
Chemistry is supporting the research of Professor Ramesh Giri of the University
of New Mexico (UNM). The goal of this research is the development of catalytic
chemical reactions using the earth-abundant and inexpensive copper (Cu) as the
catalyst. The target reactions provide powerful tools for the syntheses of
complex and diversified molecules, such as drugs and organic materials, by
limiting the required number of reaction steps and thus minimizing the time for
process development. The outcomes of this investigation have a positive impact
on society by developing novel protocols for organic chemical transformations
based on earth-abundant, sustainable catalysts. Professor Giri has established a
partnership with the UNM College Enrichment and Outreach Program to involve
undergraduates from traditionally underrepresented groups. He has established an
outreach program with the South Valley Academy, a public charter school in
Benalillo County, New Mexico.

Integration of cross-coupling into the tandem and multi-component (MC) reaction
manifolds has the potential to create new synthetic methodologies. The research
focuses on developing Cu compounds as sustainable catalysts for the proposed
transformations. As part of the education component, the investigator has
developed a course for senior undergraduates and graduate students focused on
organometallic chemistry that emphasizes the use of sustainable transition
metals in the development of new chemical transformations. In this project,
various organometallic reagents, amines, alcohols, and carbonyl compounds are
employed as sources of nucleophiles to add across carbon-carbon multiple bonds
(olefins, alkynes, and allenes) and subsequently cross-couple with organohalides
in a tandem fashion. The ability of copper to avoid beta-hydride eliminations is
expected to facilitate the tandem and MC cross-couplings of electrophiles and
nucleophiles that contain beta-hydrogens. Hybrid bidentate ligands containing
both pi-acceptor and sigma-donor groups are employed to generate stable and
active Cu in the +1 oxidation state required to conduct the proposed
transformations. The ligands are tuned sterically and electronically to render
Cu reactive towards the less reactive aryl halides. Alternatively, organic
electron donor-based organic catalysts, which react with organohalides via a
single electron transfer process, provide an alternative strategy for coupling
reactions with less reactive aryl halides. A long-term goal of the project is to
perform the reactions enantioselectively using chiral, non-racemic ligands to
prepare complex molecules with multiple chiral centers.The research is performed
at the interface of organic, inorganic and organometallic chemistry, which
provides an opportunity for training future scientists from high school to
graduate school. This award also supports the outreach efforts of the Giri group
to train high school and undergraduate students from traditionally
underrepresented groups in the sciences.