* 1554491
* CAREER: Empowering students to be adaptive decision-makers
* ENG,EEC
* 03/15/2016,08/31/2017
* NONE NONE, NONE
* Standard Grant
* Elliot Douglas
* 08/31/2017
* USD 518,155.00

Empowering Students to be Adaptive Decision-Makers &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
objective of this project is to help students learn to make academic decisions
that lead to success. It contains components that are both practical
(identifying pathways that students actually take in a particular curriculum)
and theoretical (understanding how self-regulated learning and decision making
affect real-life choices). The research will broadly impact the way that policy
decisions are made in engineering programs across the US. This project is unique
in that it packages the research findings not only for other researchers, but
for direct student use. An online Academic Dashboard will be developed to help
students leverage the research results and put them in the driver's seat of
their education. It is expected that these skills will be especially beneficial
for students from low-performing high schools who have never been challenged
academically before. The end result will be students who self-regulate their
decision making process to choose paths that are most likely to lead to success
and make adaptive daily choices that help them achieve their goals. Ultimately
the work will lead to a more diverse group of engineering graduates by expanding
the opportunities for students who have difficulty navigating the engineering
curriculum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to advance understanding of
academic pathways, achievement, and self-regulation in engineering. Students who
persist in a major but never progress to graduation are of particular interest.
Preliminary work has shown that the students who remain in college the longest
without graduating are also the least likely to change majors. The project
employs a multi-faceted approach to both study and assist these students who
persist but do not progress through the lens of self-regulation, with particular
focus on the self-regulation model of decision making and self-regulated
learning. The research goals are to: 1) identify curriculum-specific patterns of
achievement that eventually lead to dropout as well as corresponding alternative
paths that could lead to success and 2) advance knowledge of self-regulation
patterns and outcomes in engineering students. The education goals are to
develop curricula and advising materials that help students learn how to
effectively self-regulate their decision processes through contextual activities
and story prompting.