* 1554144
* CAREER: Multi-Objective Optimization via Simulation: Theory, Methods, and Parallel Computation
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2022
* Susan Hunter, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 06/30/2022
* USD 500,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) grant is developing theory,
methods, and algorithms for decision-making under uncertainty in complex systems
that are modeled using computer-based simulations. The speci&amp;#64257;c focus
will be on developing implementable algorithms that identify optimal decisions
with respect to multiple performance measures. Such problems arise frequently in
a variety of applications including &amp;#64257;nance, energy, transportation,
facility location, supply chain management, telecommunication, and healthcare
management. Though widespread, these problems are under-studied, and current
solution methods may be slow, imprecise, or inaccurate. Developing methods to
solve such problems with provable guarantees on speed, precision, and accuracy
will enable decision-makers to make better, timely decisions across a variety of
disciplines. Society will bene&amp;#64257;t from improved systems, characterized
by increased ef&amp;#64257;ciency and reduced cost. This project also supports
the PI's educational goal of disseminating clear and engaging educational
materials at the interface of probability and optimization that recruit, train,
and retain the next generation of professionals who make decisions under
uncertainty.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will develop theory, methods,
and parallel algorithms for solving multi-objective optimization via simulation
problems. Multi-objective optimization via simulation problems are nonlinear
multi-objective optimization problems in which each objective can only be
observed with error as output from a Monte Carlo simulation; a solution to this
problem is a non-dominated (Pareto) set. Despite its prevalence and mature
development in the analogous deterministic context, multi-objective optimization
via simulation problems have seen relatively little theoretical and algorithmic
development in the optimization via simulation literature. These problems are
dif&amp;#64257;cult to solve because of their complexity: the objective
functions can only be estimated with error through potentially expensive Monte
Carlo simulation, and the Pareto set often grows in the number of objectives.
The proposed research will develop the theoretical underpinnings of estimating
Pareto sets in the stochastic context. Speci&amp;#64257;cally, the proposed
theory and methods include scaling for dimension reduction, asymptotic
approximation, optimization frameworks that retrieve fast convergence rates, and
parallel implementation. Such understanding will lead to new algorithmic methods
that evolve optimally in a provable sense and to implementable,
ef&amp;#64257;cient parallel algorithms for solving these difficult problems.