* 1554166
* CAREER: Single molecule characterization and controlled transport using lysenin channels inserted into lipid membranes
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2016,12/31/2022
* Daniel Fologea, Boise State University
* Continuing Grant
* Nitsa Rosenzweig
* 12/31/2022
* USD 505,149.00

Non-Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award from the Biomaterials Program
in the Division of Materials Research to Boise State University is to study
biophysical properties of a specific pore-forming protein isolated from
earthworms. These pore forming proteins will be studied for their unique control
over the transport of relevant molecules. The scientific broader impact of this
project is the development of efficient methodologies for molecular
identification, single-molecule analysis, design of nano-containers for
controlled delivery of chemicals and drugs, and cell loading through temporary
membrane permeabilization. The research activities will be incorporated into
interdisciplinary teaching and mentoring practices for high-school,
undergraduate and graduate students. Specific student recruitment approaches are
in place to ensure participation of women, underrepresented, and economically
disadvantaged students in research and education. The investigator will be
actively engaged in outreach activities at local schools and educational
centers, will develop the students' ability to effectively share their interest
in science, and to energize young students to pursue STEM careers and to
cultivate a greater understanding and appreciation of the merits of scientific
research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;The research
objective of this CAREER award is to investigate the ability of the pore-forming
protein lysenin isolated from earthworms to function as either a nano-sensing
device or as nano-valve actuated by physical or chemical stimuli. The large size
of the lysenin pore opening will enable use of the resistive pulse technique for
stochastic sensing, and single-molecule detection and characterization.
Reversible ligand-gating induced by multivalent cations is exploited to achieve
exquisite control over the transport of molecules across artificial lipid
membranes that are being prepared. Specific aims of the project are; 1) to
investigate the transport of macromolecules through lysenin channels inserted
into artificial membranes; 2) to initiate and control the transport through
artificial lipid membranes with lysenin channels; and 3) to exploit lysenin
voltage regulation for reversible control over cell membrane permeability and to
develop an understanding of the conducting state of lysenin channels with
external electric fields. These studies would advance and significantly
transform the current techniques and methodologies employed for fast and
reliable molecular sizing, single-molecule analysis and sequencing, design of
nano-containers for controlled delivery of chemicals and drugs, and cell loading
through temporary membrane permeabilization. The project includes a detailed and
carefully tailored plan for recruiting, mentoring and teaching of students, and
outreach activities. Undergraduate, graduate, and high-school students will
actively participate in this cutting-edge interdisciplinary research utilizing
electrophysiology, fluorescence spectroscopy, and molecular biology techniques.
The outreach activities developed with the participant students are expected to
cultivate a greater understanding of the merits of scientific research to the
public and mobilize young students to pursue careers in STEM areas.