* 1554565
* CAREER: Developing Antenna-Coupled Kinetic Inductance Detectors to Enable Next Generation CMB Experiments
* MPS,AST
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2020
* Erik Shirokoff, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Sarah Higdon
* 12/31/2020
* USD 871,674.00

The team will design, build and demonstrate arrays of Kinetic Inductance
Detectors (KIDs). A KID contains a very cold, resistance-free device. That
device changes its properties when it "sees" the Cosmic Microwave Background
(CMB), the faint signal from the young Universe. Vast arrays of KIDs are needed
for the next generation of CMB experiments. The team will also provide
laboratory experience for undergraduates from underrepresented minorities and
for high school students in the Chicago area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The team's
goals are: (1) Fabricate single-layer resonators to characterize film
properties, measure the intrinsic noise level, and verify sensitivity scaling
laws. (2) Couple the resonators to a simple antenna, to measure the response and
dielectric&amp;#8232; losses at millimeter wavelengths and to verify full
coverage of the CMB atmospheric windows. (3) Test single-pixel multi-channel
detectors coupled to wide-band log-periodic antennas, to verify background-
limited operation under realistic conditions. (4) Conduct end-to-end laboratory
tests of a demonstration KID array of about 2000 pixels. Future CMB experiments
using KID arrays with millions of pixels will (a) precisely measure the number
of neutrino species and the neutrino mass summed over those species, missing -
but vital - information for testing theories of particle physics; and (b)
dramatically improve searches for the primordial gravitational B-mode
polarization that would prove that the Universe underwent the cosmic inflation
posited by theorists.