* 1554851
* CAREER: Molecular Packing of Pi-Conjugated Polymers through Fused Hydrogen Bond-mediated Self-assembly
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2024
* Yu Zhu, University of Akron
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 07/31/2024
* USD 538,679.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding and controlling
molecular packing in electrically conducting polymers could lead to the design
of high-performance polymers, which is important for applications requiring
flexible, light, and economical electronic materials. This CAREER research
involves the study of new types of polymers that have fused sites along their
molecules enabling hydrogen bonding. Studying the transition from latent to
actual hydrogen bonding states will provide the added benefit of direct
patterning of conducting polymers, leading potentially to more efficient
fabrication of integrated circuits in organic electronics. Results of this
research will help to build an understanding of the structural control in
organic materials and contribute to the elucidation of structure-property
relationships for electrically conductive polymers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
educational and outreach component of this project is to motivate and inspire
students about science and technology and encourage their consideration of
careers in STEM fields, especially targeting underrepresented groups in the STEM
fields, including women and minorities. The basic concepts of this research will
be disseminated to broader lay audiences through the partnership with the
University of Akron (UA) public relations and the Akron Global Polymer Academy
who provide research news to the general public and materials to K-12 teachers
nationwide, respectively. The educational efforts will be offered to students at
all levels from middle school to graduate school through several programs. The
PI will design lectures for local science Olympiad targeting middle school
students. Through partnership with local high schools and professional
societies, summer internships in the lab will be provided to high school
students. The PI will continue engaging in outreach targeting local community
colleges. In addition, this award will allow the PI to develop a new special
topic lecture for conjugated polymers for the students at U. Akron.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Control
of charge transfer in organic materials essentially requires the control of
intermolecular interactions to achieve the desired molecular packing, crystal
structure, and alignment/interconnection of the crystalline grains. This CAREER
research seeks to study pi-conjugated polymers with fused hydrogen bonding on
the polymer main chain. Such an analysis will provide a fundamental framework to
control the pi-pi stacking by strong and directional intermolecular hydrogen
bonds. Results of this research will help to build an understanding of the
structural control in organic materials and contribute to the elucidation of
structure-electronic property relationships for conjugated polymers. In this
research, a complete list of hydrogen bonded pi-conjugated pigment molecules and
oligomers based on graph-set theory will be investigated firstly. Next, their
single-crystal structures will be explicitly determined to understand how
hydrogen bonding will affect the pi-pi stacking of the molecules. Finally,
polymers with latent hydrogen bodning will be synthesized and converted to
polymers with fused hydrogen bonding. Their thin-film structure, morphology, and
electronic properties will be investigated. The technical objectives of the
research include: 1) Establish a knowledge base regarding conjugated pigments
and conjugated oligomers with fused hydrogen bonds; 2) Create a basis for the
rational design of fused hydrogen bonding in conjugated molecules; 3)
Investigate the conjugated polymers with fused hydrogen bonding and quantify and
elucidate the role of hydrogen bonding in thin-film structure and electronic
properties.