* 1554273
* CAREER: Engineering electrode-electrolyte interfaces through electrolyte selection for improved performance in lithium-air batteries and fuel cell electrocatalysis
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2016,01/31/2022
* Venkatasubraman Viswanathan, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 01/31/2022
* USD 500,000.00

Abstract - Viswanathan, 1554273&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For the mass-market
adoption of environmentally benign electric vehicles a breakthrough in battery
technology in terms of specific energy and cost is needed. Specific energy, also
known as energy density, is the stored heat or other thermodynamic property of a
substance, which for these purposes should be its useful or extractable energy.
Among the candidate chemistries being considered, non-aqueous Li-air batteries
are attractive due to their high specific energy and relatively low cost.
However, the limited discharge capacity and rechargeability are two key issues
that limit their practicality. The proposed research of using electrolyte
additives could increase the limited discharge capacity of current non-aqueous
Li-air batteries without sacrificing battery rechargeability. The methods and
findings will also be broadly applicable to other metal-air battery technologies
currently being pursued, such as sodium-air, magnesium-air and potassium-air.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Robust electrode/electrolyte interfaces are a crucial
requirement for the long-term reliability of fuel cells and batteries. This
proposal addresses the mesoscale electrode/electrolyte problem in the context of
electrochemical systems using two model problems: (i) tune the
electrode/electrolyte interface through electrolyte modification to tailor the
activity and selectivity of Pt group metals for aqueous oxygen reduction
reaction and (ii) design compatible electrode and electrolyte combinations that
possess interfacial stability in lithium-air batteries while solubilizing the
discharge product.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, these batteries could
advance the adoption of electric vehicles for reduced emissions, greater
efficiency, and increased domestic energy security. The PI ran a successful
massive open online course (MOOC) from Carnegie Mellon University on Statistical
Thermodynamics and intends to continue offering this annually. He will
supplement the MOOC by developing learning kits, which can be remotely 3D
printed. He will also develop a new course on electrochemical energy systems and
develop the course notes into an interactive and animation-rich in-progress
electronic-textbook and will conduct workshops on "How batteries work?" at
underrepresented Pittsburgh public schools with the aim of illustrating basic
principles of thermodynamics.