* 1554609
* CAREER: Backscattering, Confinement and Superconductivity in a Two-Dimensional Topological Insulator
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2022
* Vlad Pribiag, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 06/30/2022
* USD 642,893.00

Non-Technical: The smaller and smaller scales of conventional computer circuits
are rapidly approaching dimensions at which quantum mechanical phenomena become
unavoidable. At these scales it will be paramount to understand how to harness
these quantum effects in order to build more powerful computers. Recently, a new
class of materials with unique properties has been discovered, which could play
an important role for future information processing technologies. These
"topological insulators" are electrically insulating in the bulk, but can
conduct charge along their boundaries. This CAREER project studies the
electronic properties of InAs/GaSb, a two-dimensional topological insulator (2D
TI), a material in which electrons flow through edge channels. This project will
first shed light on the effects of impurities on the electrical resistance of
these edge channels and determine the role of magnetic interactions on charge
flow. Furthermore, recent theoretical work has predicted that a 2D TI placed in
contact with a superconductor (a metal which conducts charge without energy
losses) can host Majorana states. These novel quantum mechanical states could
have a transformative impact on fault-tolerant quantum computing. A second
objective of this project is therefore to realize and detect Majorana states in
a 2D TI-superconductor device. Beyond training graduate and undergraduate
students for future careers in science and the high-technology industry, the
principal investigator (PI) will promote broader interest in quantum physics,
nanoscience and their applications through activities at local science museums
and social media. A central educational goal is to increase the Native-American
student participation in physics and STEM by launching an internship in the PI's
lab and helping to organize a series of annual week-long summer camps for
Native-American high-school students and their teachers at the University of
Minnesota. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical: This project studies backscattering,
confinement, topological superconductivity, and Majorana states in InAs/GaSb
double quantum wells, a two-dimensional topological insulator (2D TI).
Understanding backscattering and confinement of 2D TI helical edge modes is a
significant open problem in condensed matter physics, and is important for
applications that would harness spin-polarized ballistic transport. The research
team uses induced quantum dots to simulate charge and spin impurities, which
have been theorized to affect backscattering. Nanoscale magnetic insulator
barriers are investigated as a means of confining the edge modes using magnetic
exchange coupling. 2D TIs are also ideal systems for realizing topological
superconductivity and for observing and manipulating Majorana zero-energy modes.
Majorana modes have been predicted to exhibit non-Abelian, anyonic exchange
statistics, and could play a key role for the development of decoherence-
protected topological quantum bits. One of the main objectives of this project
is therefore to realize and detect topological superconductivity and Majorana
modes. To this end, the research team will investigate hybrid devices made by
contacting InAs/GaSb with conventional superconductors. The research project is
closely integrated with an extensive educational plan to train graduate and
undergraduate students for successful careers in science and the high-technology
industry and help educate the broader public about nanoscience. A central goal
is to increase Native-American student participation in physics and STEM
disciplines.