* 1554500
* CAREER:   Bio-Enabled Actuating Materials (BEAM) to Power Autonomous Mobility
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Vasile Nistor, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 08/31/2021
* USD 0.00

Non-Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Autonomous mobility is a hallmark of many
living organisms. When feeding, they harvest energy from their natural
environment and convert it into mechanical work for movement. In contrast, most
man-made systems must carry their own energy sources such as fuel or batteries,
and then refuel or recharge in predetermined locations. Because of this
limitation, it is not possible to fully assess when, where and why surface
waters become contaminated with pathogenic microbes, making thousands of people
sick every year. Solving this challenge requires development of an entirely new
type of autonomous, mobile devices that can power themselves by feeding from the
environment where they are deployed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To support autonomous
mobility in aquatic environments, a new class of Bio-Enabled Actuating Materials
(BEAM) will be developed, characterized and tested. BEAM consist of stimuli-
sensitive soft hydrogels populated with electricity producing bacteria called
Geobacter. Geobacter feed on organics abundant in fresh waters, and produce
electric charge. The discharge of electricity forces the hydrogel to change its
shape. The process then repeats, creating an oscillatory change in shape that
propels the hydrogel. BEAM will become a platform for many applications in
robotics, biomedicine, biosensing, wearable textiles, materials science, and
micro- and nano-engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This problem can only be
tackled through an interdisciplinary approach. While the need for
interdisciplinary training and involvement in complex research projects both at
graduate and undergraduate levels has been widely acknowledged, such practices
are far from being systemic in academia. In this project, a cohort of graduate,
undergraduate and 7-12 teachers and students, many from underrepresented groups,
will be trained in principles of design and synthesis of BEAM, and in skills
needed for interdisciplinary research and collaboration. These students will
become proficient in tackling multi-faceted and societally important engineering
challenges. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Unlike living
organisms, most engineered systems must either carry their own fuel/batteries
and refuel/recharge in predetermined locations, or be powered remotely. This
limits their deployment in environments that are difficult to access, cost-
prohibitive for powering remotely or refueling. Development of mobile, fully
autonomous systems that mimic living organisms will transform exploration of
remote locations, lakes, streams, deep ocean, or human body cavities. To make a
qualitative leap in development of such systems, there is urgent need for novel
materials capable of harvesting energy from the environment and converting it to
support motility. These materials will impact multiple fields from robotics,
biomedicine, biosensing, materials science, to micro- and nano-
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, a novel class of Bio-Enabled
Actuating Materials (BEAM) will be developed. BEAM contain Geobacter
Sulfurreducens biofilm integrated within the network structure of
thermosensitive poly-N-isopropylacrylamide (PNIPAAM) hydrogel. Geobacter feed on
organics abundant in fresh waters, and produce electric charge. The discharge of
electricity forces the hydrogel to change its shape. The process then repeats,
creating an oscillatory change in shape that propels the hydrogel. BEAM will be
synthesized, and their electrochemical characteristics will be studied to better
understand its potential to harvest energy from the environment. Separate
studies will focus on mechanical properties for actuation and propulsion.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Solving this problem requires amalgamation of knowledge
and skills from several fields, and can only be tackled through an
interdisciplinary approach. While the need for interdisciplinary training and
involvement in complex research projects has been widely acknowledged, such
practices are far from being systemic in academia. In this project, a cohort of
graduate, undergraduate and 7-12 teachers and students, many from
underrepresented groups, will be trained in principles of design and synthesis
of BEAM, and in skills needed for interdisciplinary research and collaboration.
Research findings will be incorporated in existing courses to continue
interdisciplinary training of current and future students.