* 1554092
* CAREER: Probabilistic Foundations, Statistical Inference, and Invariance Principles for Evolving Combinatorial Structures
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2024
* Harry Crane, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 07/31/2024
* USD 400,000.00

Most scientific conclusions rely on statistical analysis of data collected from
some physical process. The statistical analysis, in turn, relies on assumptions
which, if violated, can lead to incorrect or misleading outcomes. In many modern
applications, the statistical modeling is further complicated by inherent
structural inhomogeneities in the population. Specific examples include the
spread of information in social networks, genetic variation among mitochondrial
DNA sequences from different species, collisions of particles suspended in a
non-uniform medium, and identification of suspicious activity in a criminal or
terrorist network. With these applications in mind, the project initiates a
systematic study of probabilistic models and inferential principles for data
taken from heterogeneous or specially structured populations. Attainment of
these goals requires techniques from several mathematical and scientific areas
and should lead to progress at the intersection of applied science, statistics,
probability, and mathematics. Project outcomes will lead to a better
understanding of how fundamental statistical assumptions affect the validity of
scientific conclusions. The mathematical theory and statistical methods
developed should have a broad societal impact, as combinatorial stochastic
processes are used throughout modern applications in physical, biological, and
social sciences, national security, and beyond. The PI has extensive plans for
training graduate and undergraduate students in the methods to be used, via
courses on the foundations of statistics at both levels, the supervision of
Ph.D. theses, and conferences and workshops on these topics for these and other
early-career researchers. The plans are innovative and the PI will devote
significant time and resources to them. In particular, a strong emphasis will be
placed on attracting and hiring students from underprivileged backgrounds who
are first-generation college students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific
technical objective is a rigorous mathematical theory for understanding random
structures that exhibit relative exchangeability and other invariance
principles. A hallmark of the project is the in-depth study and rigorous
development of theory and applications for edge exchangeable network models,
which were first introduced by the PI as a novel invariance principle for
network analysis. Desired outcomes include relative invariance principles,
structural properties, and characterization theorems for evolving combinatorial
structures. The project will also exploit deep connections between
combinatorics, algebra, logic, and probability theory to refine prior work by de
Finetti, Kingman, Aldous, Hoover, and Kallenberg, on graph limits and Levy-Ito-
type representations of Feller processes on combinatorial state spaces.
Theoretical developments should guide methodological advances in specific
applications, including climate science, network science, and phylogenetics.