* 1554502
* CAREER:COMBINING LABORATORY EXPERIMENTS, FIELD DATA, AND REACTIVE TRANSPORT MODELING TO QUANTIFY INFLUENCE OF FLUID TRANSPORT ON MINERAL DISSOLUTION RATES ACROSS SCALE
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2022
* Alexis Navarre-Sitchler, Colorado School of Mines
* Continuing Grant
* Douglas Kowalewski
* 06/30/2022
* USD 456,691.00

Understanding how fast rocks chemically react with water in natural environments
can unlock clues to past climate change and land surface evolution and advance
the ability to predict how Earth systems will respond to future anthropogenic
perturbations. Currently, chemical reactions between rock and water measured in
laboratory conditions are much faster than water-rock reactions measured in
natural systems, making it difficult to truly understand the fundamental
geologic process of breaking rock down in sediment. This project will help
develop a better understanding of the linkages between the way water moves
through rock and how fast rock dissolves. This will enhance knowledge of
important societal issues such as land surface response to climate change,
sequestration of carbon dioxide (CO2) in geologic formations, movement and
persistence of contaminants in the environment, and unconventional hydrocarbon
reservoirs. Graduate students, high school teachers, and high school students
will come together to advance fundamental understanding of geochemical processes
in natural systems through research. They take this research to classrooms to
broaden the scope of STEM education and provide experiential learning
opportunities for high school students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ability to
numerically simulate geochemical processes in heterogeneous field systems is
limited by a two to six order of magnitude difference between laboratory
measured and field-scale measured mineral dissolution rates. Mineral dissolution
rates measured under well-mixed conditions in the laboratory do not capture the
influence of heterogeneous, evolving fluid transport that influences mineral
reactions in field systems. Heterogeneity in hydrologic properties and fluid
transport is one of the many factors that influence mineral dissolution rates.
Increased complexity and scaling of fluid flow related to increasing physical
heterogeneity with length scale is well established. However, the influence of
increased flow complexity on scaling of mineral dissolution rates is largely
unexplored. To test the hypothesis that transport control on mineral dissolution
rates increases with scale due to increased fluid mixing and residence time
variation induced by physical heterogeneity, the investigator will
experimentally quantify mineral dissolution rates at pore and column scale and
calculate weathering rates at field scales to systematically quantify the
influence of fluid transport on apparent reaction rates. Sophisticated reactive
transport models will be employed at all scales to integrate data and advance
our ability to apply laboratory derived reaction rates to field scale systems.
The proposed work integrates data and observations across scales with advanced
numerical methods to address an important unresolved question in low-temperature
geochemistry: how does one scale reaction rates from pore to field scales?
Completion of the proposed project will 1) provide experimental data and direct
observation of coupled reactive transport to validate numerical simulation of
reactive transport processes, 2) clearly define conditions where hydrologic
heterogeneity impacts apparent mineral reaction rates from pore to watershed
scale, and 3) advance application of laboratory-measured mineral dissolution
rates to field-scale processes using reactive transport simulation in
heterogeneous porous material. The ability to numerically model geochemical
processes in large-scale systems is required for the evaluation of important
societal issues such as climate change, CO2 sequestration, contaminant fate and
transport, and development and preservation of unconventional hydrocarbon
reservoirs.