* 1554417
* CAREER: Targeting Virulence Factor Delivery for the Development of Antibacterial Agents
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2022
* Angela Brown, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 05/31/2022
* USD 536,000.00

1554417&lt;br/&gt;Brown, Angela C. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The rise of antibiotic
resistance threatens our ability to treat even minor bacterial infections. With
few new drugs in development and rates of resistance increasing, we urgently
need new, nontraditional approaches to fight pathogenic bacteria. The goal of
this project is to target the delivery of molecules that facilitate the
virulence of pathogenic bacteria as a novel approach to the treatment of
bacterial infections. Rather than targeting some essential life process to kill
the bacteria directly as traditional antibiotics due, the PI intends to target
those processes that allow the pathogen to settle in the host. This CAREER
proposal addresses two goals outlined by the United States CDC: to develop new
approaches to the treatment of bacterial infections and to improve antibiotic
stewardship. In addition to identifying unique targets for the development of
novel antibiotics, the PI plans extensive outreach activities to demonstrate in
a fun, hands-on manner, the danger of misusing antibiotics. The PI intends to
further integrate the research with her educational goals by developing new
courses at Lehigh University, providing undergraduate and graduate research
opportunities, and developing a program for local Girl Scout troops to learn
about STEM fields. The PI?s overall goals in these educational activities is to
develop well-trained, interdisciplinary scientists and to encourage young women
to&lt;br/&gt;choose STEM majors and pursue related technical
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Pathogenic bacteria produce certain molecules,
called virulence factors that allow them to thrive within the host. One
mechanism used by Gram negative bacteria to transfer these factors to target
cells is the production of outer membrane vesicles (OMVs), which bleb off from
the outer membrane of the bacterium and encapsulate multiple virulence factors.
The goal of this project is to characterize the&lt;br/&gt;trafficking of these
OMVs for the identification of shared mechanisms that can be blocked to inhibit
virulence factor delivery. The overall hypothesis of the project is that toxins
present on the surface of the OMV facilitate binding of the OMV to the target
cells, and inhibition of this binding can be used to disrupt delivery of
virulence factors. To investigate this hypothesis, the PI will study three
representative organisms, enterotoxigenic Escherichia coli, Vibrio cholerae, and
Bordetella pertussis. With these three organisms, she will first characterize
the mechanisms by which bacterial toxins bind to the lipid components of the OMV
and determine role of membrane properties in this interaction. This aim will be
accomplished by studying the affinity of each toxin for specific lipids, using
isothermal titration calorimetry. Next, she will study the interaction between
OMVs and specific components of host cells, using calorimetric and microscopy
techniques. Finally, with this information, she will design methods to prevent
OMV delivery by blocking specific factors found to facilitate OMV delivery; this
will allow the PI to inhibit the virulence of these organisms. Targeting
virulence in this way represents a novel approach to treating bacterial
infections, which is desperately needed due to our current lack of effective
antibiotic strategies.