* 1554704
* CAREER: Optical Vortices and Rotation
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/01/2016,01/31/2023
* Juliet Gopinath, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Leon Shterengas
* 01/31/2023
* USD 508,000.00

Title: Optical Vortices and Rotation&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nontechnical
description Light with a spiral phase, or orbital angular momentum, has recently
garnered a lot of interest, as a seminal piece of the 2014 Nobel prize-winning
super-resolution microscopy technique. It can also be used to rotate objects and
measure the rotation speed of objects, with sizes ranging from the macroscale
(kilometers) to the nanoscale (nanometers). The research objective of this
proposal is to study the relationship between orbital angular momentum and
rotating objects. Orbital angular momentum can be used to measure rotation and
the rotating objects themselves can be used to measure spiral phase content of
laser beams. The results from the research will be far-reaching, with
information about orbital angular momentum modal content essential for free-
space communications and endoscopic super-resolution imaging (STED) for protein-
level imaging in the human body. Additionally, rotation and the measurement of
nanoparticles are important for microfluidics and biology, in particular for the
treatment of disease. This fresh perspective on the interaction of rotating
objects and orbital angular momentum will spawn new directions in imaging,
spectroscopy, lithography, quantum optics, and medicine. Research results will
disseminated to K-12, college and graduate students through outreach activities
and research opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical description Light
with orbital angular momentum, or "twisted" light, was discovered in 1992, and
subsequently has been applied to super-resolution imaging and high bandwidth
communications. The proposed research takes an innovative approach to study the
interaction of orbital angular momentum and rotating objects. Orbital angular
momentum can be used to rotate objects, measure their speed and infer position,
and the objects themselves can be used to measure the orbital angular momentum
content of a light beam, potentially with much greater resolution than current
methods. It is especially interesting to consider not only macroscopic objects
but microscopic ones as well, such as nanoparticles and micromachines. The
concepts in the research can be used for a number of high-impact areas including
gyroscopes, remote sensing, nanoparticles for cancer treatment, communications
links, and super-resolution microscopy and lithography. Fields ranging from
physics to engineering to materials science will benefit from the research
outcomes.