* 1554961
* EAGER: Reflection and Diffraction Sound Signals for Non-Field-of-View Target Estimation
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2017
* Tomonari Furukawa, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Jie Yang
* 08/31/2017
* USD 165,252.00

This project studies the diffraction and reflection signals in sound source
localization. The study could enable the capability of tracking and localizing
human partners outside of the robots' Field-Of-View (FOV) to the co-robots for
human-robot interaction. The project estimates an object outside of FOV using
auditory sensors and enhances perception capabilities of robots. The project
integrates research and education by training graduate and undergraduate
students and outreach local K-12 students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
proves the early-stage concept of the project that estimates the location of a
Non-FOV (NFOV) target by learning from humans and utilizing the physics of sound
wave propagation associated with the NFOV target. The research is to introduce
the capability of localizing human partners outside of the robots' FOV to the
co-robots for Human-Robot Interaction. The research team approaches the problem
by deterministically formulating first-arrival diffraction and reflection
signals and identifying signal directions. The project develops an approach that
auditorily estimates the location of an NFOV target by learning from humans and
utilizing the physics of sound wave propagation associated with the NFOV target.
The project further evaluates the approach in unknown indoor environments by
using both visual and auditory sensors.