* 1554967
* CAREER: Molecular Recognition of Bacterial Cell Wall Fragments by Yeast and Humans
* MPS,CHE
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2022
* Catherine Grimes, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* Pablo Sobrado
* 12/31/2022
* USD 789,503.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division is funding Dr. Catherine Leimkuhler Grimes from the University of
Delaware to investigate the interactions between bacteria, humans and yeast.
Bacteria surround themselves with "jackets" called bacterial cell wall to
protect themselves from environmental insults. The ultimate goal of this
research is to determine how different organisms bind to and are activated by
bacterial cell wall fragments leading to an immune response. This information is
critical in understanding how a variety of species have solved the problem of
binding bacterial cell wall ligands as an initial step in a stimulated response.
Using synthetic chemistry, biochemistry, molecular biology and microbiology, the
principal investigator is developing a framework of understanding of how
bacterial cell wall ligands are recognized across nature. This work ultimately
results in a deeper understanding of how three systems; bacterial, human and
fungal, function in a common environment. As part of this CAREER award, the
principal investigator is developing creative mechanisms for educating students,
particularly those from historically underrepresented groups, on how chemists
begin to understand the problem of molecular recognition. There are three
educational objectives that are integrated with each other, draw inspiration
from the problem of sensing bacterial cell walls and are directed at teaching
students what it means to be a scientist. The activities involve: (a) partnering
with an expert in Early Childhood Education to develop and implement a new
curriculum for grades K to 2 focused on how a chemist "senses" phenomena such as
light and sound, (b) developing a program to enhance the chemistry background of
K to 2 educators, allowing them to more readily approach science concepts when
they start their own careers and (c) developing and implementing an introductory
biochemistry lab in which undergraduate biochemistry majors use problem-based
learning (PBL) to understand how concepts in molecular recognition are used in
antibiotics that target the destruction of bacterial cell
wall.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Organisms from plants to humans take advantage of the
strong polymer unique to the bacterial cell wall to recognize the presence of a
bacterial cell. However, the molecular details of recognition are not well
understood. This project involves the preparation of synthetic analogues of
bacterial cell wall to investigate the binding events used by mammalian and
fungal systems. The use of these systems allows a comparison of the solutions
devised by nature to bind the highly conserved polymer that comprises the cell
wall. In two objectives, this research determines the binding events that drive
the recognition of bacterial cell wall fragments by innate immune human and
fungus receptors. The principal investigator is using chemical synthesis to
build modified, tagged versions of bacterial cell wall fragments that are used
for the identification and characterization of the binding sites for these
molecules and their respective receptors. Bacterial cell wall fragment binding
proteins Cyr1p, Nod1 and Nod2, from yeast and humans are being used in the
investigation. These proteins are structurally diverse and each has been shown
to be stimulated by bacterial cell wall fragments. The principal investigator
makes use of a dynamic approach in refining the rules for binding to bacterial
cell wall fragments. Student and teachers in K-2 are involved in a new
curriculum on chemical sensing and recognition.