* 1554963
* CAREER SusChEM: Recyclable transfer hydrogenation catalysts by tuning non-innocent catalytic supports
* MPS,CHE
* 02/01/2016,01/31/2022
* Adelina Voutchkova-Kostal, George Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 01/31/2022
* USD 518,487.00

CAREER SusChEM: Recyclable transfer hydrogenation catalysts by tuning of non-
innocent catalytic supports &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The development of sustainable
catalytic processes requires minimizing the use of rare, expensive, and toxic
metals in catalysis, thus increasing reliance on earth-abundant and benign
catalytic materials that are applicable to industrial processes. Concurrently,
there is a need for finding new ways of constructively using industrial waste
products, such as carbon dioxide generated in combustion processes and glycerol
generated in biodiesel production. With funding from the Chemical Catalysis
program, Dr. Voutchkova-Kostal is addressing these challenges by developing
recyclable catalysts based on earth-abundant metals that are useful for
converting carbon dioxide and glycerol into formic acid and dihydroxyacetone,
thus turning two waste streams into useful industrial chemicals. She is
extending the broader impacts of her work to the University and greater DC
communities via an interdisciplinary Green Chemistry, Environmental Health and
Science Policy Forum and new research-based organic chemistry laboratory modules
that emphasize inquiry-based learning. These activities bridge the fields of
green chemistry, policy and public health by engaging graduate and undergraduate
students across these disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
development of supported single-site heterogeneous catalysts (SSHCs) that can
match the activity and selectivity of homogeneous analogs requires fundamental
understanding of the interactions and potential synergies between supports and
immobilized metal complexes. With funding from the Chemical Catalysis program,
Dr. Voutchkova-Kostal is probing the structure-property-activity relationships
that are needed to predictably design active, selective and long-lived SSHCs for
challenging transfer hydrogenation reactions. Specifically, iridium and rhodium
organometallic complexes are immobilized onto electronically-tunable layered
double-hydroxide supports via sulfonate linkers. A complement of surface-
sensitive and bulk spectroscopic techniques is used to probe the electronic
effects that impact catalytic activity and stability. The insights developed are
applied to optimizing the activity, selectivity and stability of a recyclable
heterogeneous catalyst for transfer hydrogenation CO2 from glycerol, as well as
recyclable catalysts for asymmetric transfer hydrogenation. To translate the
broader impacts of this work and other developments in green chemistry to the
university and greater DC communities, Dr. Voutchkova-Kostal is co-organizing an
interdisciplinary Green Chemistry, Environmental Health and Science Policy Forum
that facilitates dialogue on topical scientific issues across scientists and the
public. To engage students in research she is also implementing new research-
based organic chemistry laboratory modules that emphasize inquiry-based
learning.