* 1554055
* CAREER:   BREEZE:  Boundary-layer REsearch and Education ZonE
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2023
* Julie Lundquist, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 06/30/2023
* USD 549,439.00

The turbulent movement of air is important for the transport of heat, momentum
and moisture throughout the atmosphere. Turbulence is generally thought of as a
small-scale phenomenon, and the generation and dissipation of turbulence has
been assumed to be within one grid cell of a numerical weather model. However,
with computer models running at finer resolution, it is not clear that this
assumption is valid. This award will make use of a catalog of observations of
wind and turbulence from lidar (Light Detection and Ranging) systems to study
turbulence dissipation. The study will have an impact on weather forecasting,
with specific applications to wind power production, air quality forecasting,
fog, and forest fires. As a CAREER award, there is also a very large educational
and outreach component. The focus of this aspect of the award is on creating
teaching materials that are visually appealing and can be used from the middle
school ages on up. The research team will help to create a lesson plan and to
work with teachers to ensure use of the materials. A specific focus will be on
the implementation of the materials in rural, under-served Colorado
classrooms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Turbulence production and dissipation is
assumed to be locally balanced in numerical models. However, as the models are
run at finer resolution, this assumption no longer holds. The goal of this
research project is to determine at what spatio-temporal scale the local
imbalance between turbulence production and dissipation becomes important. Four
research activities are planned to address this goal: (1) Quantify uncertainty
in lidar estimates of dissipation, (2) Quantify the variability of dissipation
through the construction of a data archive consisting of measurements classified
by different meteorological and physical conditions, (3) Compare simulated
dissipation variability to observations using WRF and WRF-LES modeling systems,
(4) Test new parameterizations that do not assume locally balanced turbulence
production and dissipation.