* 1554315
* CAREER: SusChEM: Structure-property relationships in bi-functional battery materials
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2023
* Wei Lai, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Nazanin Bassiri-Gharb
* 05/31/2023
* USD 513,180.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: While lithium-ion batteries have been the dominant
power sources for portable electronics, their large-scale applications in the
transportation and stationary markets are likely to be hindered by the limited
lithium abundance. On the other hand, the element sodium is more than 1000 times
more abundant than lithium and sodium resources are considered adequate
nationally and internationally. Development of sodium-based battery chemistry is
essential in ensuring a sustainable energy future for human kind. This CAREER
project studies the structure-property relationships of a unique family of bi-
functional (as either cathode or anode) sodium electrode materials, in order to
shed light on the fundamental mechanisms that could lead to enhanced materials
performance and rational design and discovery of new materials. This project
also enables a museum exhibition named "Batteries: Powering the Past, Present,
and Future" to raise awareness and inspire interests of the public in the
science and engineering principles of ubiquitous battery devices in our daily
lives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: Sodium nickel titanates are a
unique family of materials that can function either as anode or cathode due to
coexistence of both high and low redox-potential transition metals. However, the
structure-property relationship of these materials remains elusive. This project
seeks to develop a fundamental understanding of the atomic and electronic
structures and their effects on the ionic and electronic conductivity of model
materials in the sodium nickel titanate family. Through an integrated
experimental and computational approach combining neutron/X-ray scattering
probes, atomistic simulation, and electrical property measurement, the project
studies the local distribution, migration pathways, and ionic conductivity of
sodium atoms, as well as the local electron distribution and its effect on the
electronic conductivity. Knowledge garnered from this work has an immediate
impact on this family of technologically important and scientifically intriguing
materials, and also helps to shed light on the structure-property relationships
in general mixed ionic-electronic conductors, thus leading to rational design
and discovery of new materials with superior performance.