* 1554659
* CAREER: Going Global - The Influence of Southern Ocean Albedo on Large-scale Climate Dynamics
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2022
* Jennifer Kay, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Varavut Limpasuvan
* 08/31/2022
* USD 843,867.00

This project will use observations and a state-of-the-art community earth system
model(CESM) to advance understanding of the coupling between Southern Ocean
clouds, atmospheric and oceanic circulation patterns, and climate. Though
climate models inform our understanding of this coupling, they have large biases
when compared to observations, calling into question their use. Recently a
version of the CESM with large reductions in long-standing ubiquitous Southern
Ocean cloud and radiation model biases. has been developed by this researcher.
By comparing the improved and the default versions of CESM, the proposed
research will quantify and establish the influence of Southern Ocean clouds on
global circulation patterns in both constant and warming climate scenarios. The
educational component of the project will investigate the influence of a polar
hook on a student's interest in and capacity to learn about the globally
connected climate system. The PI will develop, implement, and evaluate
curriculum with and without a polar hook at the undergraduate non-science major
level, and then work with educational partners to develop, implement, and
evaluate parallel curriculum for high school students in Colorado with a focus
on under-represented communities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Coupling cloud
processes with the large-scale circulations of the atmosphere and ocean and
climate is a new research frontier, with important implications for climate
change projections. The project focuses on the Southern Ocean, the cloudiest
place on the planet and also a region that strongly impacts the global climate
system by serving as a sink for carbon and heat. The proposed research will
bring together cloud and climate dynamics expertise to enable fundamental
advances in cloud-circulation coupling and its influence on climate. The
integrated educational activities will produce engaging and thoroughly vetted
curriculum on polar regions and climate modeling that will be used within
classrooms at the University of Colorado, within under-represented communities
in Colorado, and then distributed students world-wide and educators through
educational partners. Through the proposed educational research on the
effectiveness of using a polar hook in the classroom, the study will also
identify effective instructional approaches for student learning and engagement.