* 1554018
* CAREER: Dynamic Invasive Species Control Optimization Via Integrated Education and Research (DISCOVER)
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2016,02/28/2018
* Esra Buyuktahtakin Toy, Wichita State University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 02/28/2018
* USD 500,000.00

1554018 (Buyuktahtakin). The goal of this research is to design optimal
intervention and resource allocation strategies to protect ecological systems
from the detrimental impacts of invasive species. This research goal will be
pursued through four specific objectives: (1) designing a novel mathematical
optimization framework; (2) investigating a new class of game theoretic problems
to coordinate multiple stakeholders (e.g., government, land managers,
cooperatives) in invasive species management and provide insight into public
policy decisions; (3) formulating and solving novel surveillance and control
problems under uncertainty; and (4) performing experiments to demonstrate the
potential benefit of the proposed models and algorithms by using real-life
cases. The education objective of this CAREER program is to create decision
models for use in outreach, educational, and management activities; in return,
interactions with stakeholders, students, and teachers will provide feedback for
designing cutting-edge and practical mathematical
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research efforts will include: (1) design of a
novel decomposition-based optimization framework that will help to overcome a
big challenge of computational complexity in spatio-temporal optimization; (2)
development of rigorous optimization models and methods to solve high-
dimensional resource allocation problems in environmental management; (3)
development of a decision support tool to provide efficient management practices
for invasive species management, in collaboration with ecologists, managers, and
policy makers; (4) advancements in theory and methodology through a rigorous
analysis of uncertainty and novel surveillance and control modeling; (5) a new
class of game theoretic models and algorithms that can be used to provide
fundamental insights into the design of public policies for environmental
management; and (6) modeling, algorithmic, and computational advances in
discrete optimization, which potentially may help solve other important
optimization problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is co-funded by the
CBET/ENG Environmental Sustainability program and the DMS/MPS Division under
BioMaPs.