* 1554017
* CAREER: Probing Stem Cell Differentiation With Synthetic Biology
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2021
* Tara Deans, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie George
* 04/30/2021
* USD 503,184.00

PI: Deans, Tara &lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1554017&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
demand for stem cells is anticipated to continue to rise due to their expected
ability to treat disease, use in novel diagnostic technologies, and for
pharmaceutical screening. However, before these goals can be realized, a better
understanding of the mechanisms regulating their fate is required. Stem cells
integrate the many signals that surround them and execute cellular behaviors
based on these inputs. These attributes can be harnessed and manipulated using
synthetic biology to tightly control gene expression in dynamic patterns, in
addition to programming cells to sense and record changes in their
microenvironment. Upon successful completion, this work will enable a better
understanding of the mechanisms involved in stem cell fate decisions that may
eventually be exploited to direct differentiation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Both
intrinsic (transcription factor expression), as well as extrinsic
(environmental) mechanisms are thought to be involved in the regulation of stem
cell self-renewal, and their commitment to differentiate into more specialized
cell types. This interplay between intrinsic and extrinsic cues in
differentiation poses challenges to studying the mechanisms involved in their
proliferation and terminal differentiation. These challenges can be addressed
using genetic circuits. The completion of this research will produce tools to
query the different timings, identities, and interactions of the internal and
external signals of cell fate. This will be accomplished by developing
strategies for probing stem cell differentiation using genetic circuits with the
following objectives: (1) to expand the genetic toolbox for dynamically
controlling gene expression in mammalian cells, (2) to assess changes in the
extracellular microenvironment as stem cells differentiate by connecting genetic
circuits to important receptors known to be involved in cell fate choices, and
(3) to use these tools to probe stem cell differentiation. All of the results of
this research will be made accessible to the research community. An additional
important broad impact area of this research program is education and outreach
of STEM fields at a variety of levels including elementary school, high school,
and undergraduate students.