* 1554140
* CAREER: Algorithms and Decision Models for Learning in Health Care Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2022
* Mohsen Bayati, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 05/31/2022
* USD 500,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) grant aims to build new
algorithms and mathematical models for optimizing decisions in healthcare
systems. Growing availability of digital health records has created many
opportunities for transforming health care delivery facilities such as
hospitals, potentially improving their quality and operational efficiency. For
example, recent research shows the benefits of guiding decisions in a hospital
via statistical predictions. However, predictions are worthless when they cannot
be integrated with the organization's workflow. In this regard, new ways of
combining predictions with operations research models are needed. This research
tackles mathematical barriers to the integration of operations research and
statistical modeling. An example of this integration would be building new
optimization algorithms that can adapt to patterns of uncertainty in the data at
hand. The findings of this research can potentially improve quality of medical
care and reduce health care costs. In addition, because this research lies at
the intersection of machine learning, medicine, operations research, and
statistics, it can help train the next generation of academic scholars (with
emphasis on underrepresented groups) on this multidisciplinary
area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A common theme of statistical models in the age of
big data is to characterize uncertainty via parametric or non-parametric models
in a "high dimensional" space. High dimensional space refers to the space of
available predictor variables that could contain information about uncertain
outcomes in a decision task. Models based on high-dimensional data are
particularly useful in healthcare because healthcare systems are complex, with
many system-specific features in their patient populations and practice
patterns. Such potential applications have led to a large body of recent
literature (known by high-dimensional statistics) to deal with algorithmic and
statistical challenges of such modeling framework. In contrast, in the
operations research literature, the uncertainty is typically restricted to few
known probability distributions to make mathematical analysis more tractable.
This research aims to relax the aforementioned restrictions by combining ideas
from the high-dimensional statistics with the mathematics of operations
research, and applying the resulting models to two application areas -- wait
time prediction in emergency departments, and personalized administration of new
treatments. For example, in settings that can be modeled as multi-armed bandit
problems, new theory that can help reduce the uncertainty in decisions by
utilizing availability of many predictor variables in addition to the data on
past decisions can be useful. Reducing this knowledge gap requires developing a
new class of algorithms and asymptotic theory when the number of predictors
grows faster than time periods or the number of samples. Another challenge that
needs to be addressed is that in statistical setting the samples are usually
assumed to be independent, however this assumption fails in decision systems
with feedback where current decisions may impact future samples.