* 1554474
* CAREER: The biological nitrogen isotope systematics of ammonium consumption and production
* GEO,OCE
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2022
* Julie Granger, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 04/30/2022
* USD 791,496.00

The nitrogen (N) cycle in the marine environment is controlled by biological
processes. Unfortunately, quantifying these processes and assessing their effect
on the N cycle is difficult by direct measurements because of large spatial and
temporal differences. Isotopic composition measurements of N provide a means to
constrain these processes indirectly; however, there is still a great deal to be
understood about isotope fractionation of recycled nitrogen through biological
processes, which has made interpretation of novel nitrogen isotope data
difficult. A researcher from the University of Connecticut plans to determine
the influence of biological consumption and production on the isotope
fractionation in ammonium. By helping to understand the processes surrounding
fractionation of recycled ammonium at the organism level, this research will
create a basis for which future researchers can better interpret isotope
composition data to infer nitrogen cycle dynamics. A graduate student, a
postdoctoral fellow, and two or more undergraduate students will be involved in
the research. The researcher plans to integrate science with community-engaged
learning by developing an undergraduate field and laboratory course that will
require the students to present their research to stakeholders in the community.
There will be a manual created for this course that will be disseminated in
open-access forums for teachers hoping to develop similar courses.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Biological nitrogen isotope fractionation associated with
nitrogen recycling remains poorly constrained despite the advent of a variety of
new techniques to analyze nitrogen isotopes in recent years. The use of isotopic
composition data can be incredibly useful to interpreting nitrogen cycle
processes in the ocean that are difficult to measure directly, which makes it
crucial to further understand the processes behind fractionation to catch up
with the advancement of the datasets available to researchers. This research
will characterize the isotope fractionation dynamics of ammonium during
biological consumption and production. The researchers will investigate whether
the characteristic low concentrations of ammonium in the surface ocean affect
isotope fractionation when the ammonium is recycled and whether there is a
trophic isotope effect associated with ammonium recycling by protozoan grazers.
With this research, there will be a baseline from which researchers can
interpret recycled nitrogen dynamics from ammonium isotope datasets. The methods
of comparing nitrogen cycling studies will become significantly clearer with
such a standard making interpretation uniform by removing significant
uncertainties.