* 1554876
* CAREER: The Composition of Dense Matter and Observations of Neutron Stars
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2022
* Andrew Steiner, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Continuing Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 06/30/2022
* USD 425,000.00

Stars with masses greater than eight times the mass of the sun end their lives
in an explosion called a core-collapse supernova. If the original star is
between eight and twenty times the mass of the sun, the supernova leaves behind
a neutron star. Neutron stars are ultra-dense objects with the mass of the sun
and a diameter of about 15 miles. Normal matter is made of atoms consisting of
electrons and nuclei, nuclei are made of neutrons and protons, and neutrons and
protons, in turn, are made of up and down quarks. The gravitational force in the
center of a neutron star, however, is sufficient to compress neutrons and
protons together so tightly that neutrons and protons may be forced to convert
into exotic particles containing strange quarks. The question of whether or not
strange quarks are present in neutron stars, and the more general question of
the nature of extremely dense matter, are some of the principal questions facing
the nuclear physics and astrophysics communities. This project aims to answer
these questions and to determine the nature of matter in the center of neutron
stars where gravity compresses matter to a thousand trillion times the density
of water. This project involves training opportunities for students and
postdoctoral fellow. Community outreach includes the education of students
through the continued development of a Studio Physics course, involvement in
research, and a web-based visualization of neutron
stars.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nuclear experiments and observations of neutron
stars have successfully generated novel constraints on the equation of state of
matter at densities near and above the central densities in atomic nuclei.
However, our current understanding of high-densities is limited: we do not yet
know the composition of the ground state. This project uses a combination of
nuclear theory matched to nuclear data and neutron star observations to
determine the composition of neutron star cores. Modern models of strongly-
interacting matter will be combined with new nuclear structure calculations of
neutron-rich nuclei in order to construct state of the art models of the neutron
star crust and core. These models, and their concomitant uncertainties, will be
calibrated with nuclear data and compared with neutron star cooling, mass, and
radius observations. For example, neutron star cooling data has already given
indications of fast cooling arising from a large proton-to-neutron ratio. This
project will study the posterior probability distribution for the proton-to-
neutron ratio and several other observables that will give insights into neutron
star composition. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal is co-funded by the
Theoretical Nuclear Physics Program in the Physics Division and the Division of
Astronomical Sciences at NSF.