* 1554998
* CAREER: California Megadroughts in Context: Integrating High Resolution Speleothem Records with Isotope-enabled Climate Models and Translating Climate Data for the K-12 Classroom
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2016,02/29/2024
* Jessica Oster, Vanderbilt University
* Continuing Grant
* David Verardo
* 02/29/2024
* USD 595,334.00

This CAREER project generally aims to integrate high-resolution, multi-proxy
speleothem records of climate change during the last deglaciation and Holocene
from two California caves with isotope-enabled paleoclimate models in an effort
to constrain changes in precipitation amount and source and identify the drivers
of hydrologic change in California, including severe drought. Speleothem records
(i.e., oxygen and carbon isotopes, crystal fabrics, trace elements, strontium
and uranium isotopes) will be developed from cave monitoring. An isotope-enabled
reactive transport modeling tool will be used to parse the multiple interrelated
environmental influences on environmental proxies. This research will help
advance speleothem initial uranium isotope ratios, an emerging proxy for
infiltration rate, by conducting high-resolution measurements through key
climatic transitions and by investigating the spatial and temporal variability
of Uranium isotope ratios in cave drip water. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Central and
northern California speleothem records developed in this project will be
integrated with other regional records to create time-varying maps of
precipitation change along the U.S. west coast. Quantitative comparison of these
maps with isotope-enabled climate models for time slices through the last
deglaciation and Holocene will help clarify the driving mechanisms behind
precipitation change and regional climate variability. Expected outcomes of the
research include: 1) development of a history of precipitation variability along
the U.S. west coast consisting of overlapping stalagmite records from multiple
proxies for extending to 33,000 years before the present; 2) cross-validation of
proxy and monitoring data with isotope-enabled reactive transport models 3)
evaluation of speleothem initial Uranium isotope ratios as a paleo-infiltration
indicator; 4) detailed records of inter-annual to multi-decadal precipitation
variability at sites with contrasting modern precipitation responses to ocean-
atmosphere oscillations and perspective on the evolution of these patterns
through time; 5) evaluation of the driving mechanisms of California
precipitation variability, including megadrought conditions, through proxy-model
comparisons; and 6) improved understanding of the role of changing moisture
source in the development and decay of drought
conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The education plan builds on the researcher's
ongoing relationship with the School for Science and Math at Vanderbilt
University (SSMV) through multi-year mentoring of a team of high school students
from the Metropolitan Nashville Public Schools (MNPS) who will conduct field
experiments, geochemical research, and ultimately, the creation of an online
educational tool for use in Tennessee classrooms. The goal of the online portal
is to present the wealth of climate and paleoclimate data available online in a
way that is useful and accessible for teachers, with the hope of transforming
the way climate science is taught in K-12 classrooms by making data-driven,
immersive learning on this topic more achievable. This project will involve
graduate, undergraduates, and high school students to produce an educational
product that has the potential for a lasting positive influence on Tennessee
science classrooms and beyond.