* 1554846
* CAREER: Induced seismicity: Increasing understanding of fluids in fault zones and engaging stakeholders for rapid knowledge transfer
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2016,12/31/2022
* Kathleen Keranen, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 12/31/2022
* USD 585,000.00

Earthquakes occurring near oil and gas production wells have surged in number
and public visibility within the US in recent years. These earthquakes may be
triggered by pressure changes in subsurface rock layers resulting from injection
or withdrawal of fluids, and are referred to as induced seismicity. These
earthquakes pose a hazard to local residents and create challenges for energy
production. However, despite recent research, we remain unable to determine,
prior to injection, whether wells in a given area are likely to induce
earthquakes, and if so, of what number and magnitude. This research seeks to
determine the primary factor(s) controlling the triggering of induced
seismicity, to test seismic methods of detection of increased fluid pressure
along subsurface fault zones that may potentially increase seismic risk, and to
investigate whether faults produce detectable seismic signals during the
initiation of fault slip during moderate earthquakes. Results from this research
will be combined with related studies to provide current and unbiased scientific
information regarding induced seismicity to stakeholders, such as local
residents, oil and gas regulators, oil and gas corporations, or scientists
advising these groups. The results will have broad global significance for
energy resource development since induced seismicity has occurred in association
with wastewater disposal wells, hydraulic fracturing operations, geothermal
stimulation, gas production, and gas storage. Induced seismicity is a potential
challenge for long-term carbon storage in the subsurface, one of the primary
solutions proposed to remove carbon dioxide from the atmosphere, thus mitigating
the impacts of climate change. Results from this research may also provide
insight into the processes by which fault slip initiates during
earthquakes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will acquire seismic data using
long-term and dense passive seismic networks, encompassing regions of high-
volume wastewater disposal near known large faults. Data will be used to monitor
the seismic or aseismic nature of pressure propagation away from active wells,
and to probe the seismic responsiveness of the local faults. Forty-five
broadband seismometers will be deployed at about 5 km spacing in two 18-month
deployments, first in Oklahoma and subsequently in a complementary region of
active fluid injection. Within the spatial footprint of the first deployment, a
high-density array will be deployed over actively evolving seismicity.
Specifically, the research will address 1) whether dense arrays are capable of
continuously mapping pressure migration fronts away from wastewater disposal
wells by detecting signals from fluid pressure migration; 2) the degree to which
this migration is focused along a narrow pathway of faults/fractures, or
dispersed over multiple pathways; 3) whether large fault zones are seismically
reactive to the larger nearby earthquakes; and 4) whether seismic source
characteristics change temporally as fluid pressure increases. The region within
north-central Oklahoma includes active seismicity, large disposal wells, and a
major fault system. In the second region, with a contrasting geological
environment, this research will test and refine methods to detect signals of
high fluid pressure approaching faults. Results from both deployments will be
synthesized in the global context of induced seismicity. This research seeks to
engage local residents and to help them become more confident in finding the
information necessary to make informed decisions important in their lives. The
scientific results will be communicated to stakeholders, within the context of a
frequently updated synthesis of research completed by other groups. This work
will engage next-generation leaders in the fields of hazards and resources
across geoscience and engineering.