* 1554230
* CAREER: Polynomial Optimization and Dynamical Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/01/2016,01/31/2022
* Amir Ali Ahmadi, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 01/31/2022
* USD 500,000.00

Polynomial optimization is a high-impact area for engineering and computational
mathematics, which holds the key to some fundamental problems of discrete
optimization, power engineering, theoretical computer science, and of particular
interest to this proposal, dynamics and control. One of the most powerful
approaches for handling polynomial optimization problems with rigorous and
global guarantees is via algebraic techniques. These techniques form an exciting
area of optimization that combines classical concepts of algebraic geometry with
modern tools of numerical optimization. Despite their enormous potential, the
applicability of algebraic techniques has always been limited by a fundamental
challenge, which is scalability. In the first half of this proposal, the PI puts
forward a new set of research directions that if successful can lead to major
advancements in our ability to solve large-scale polynomial optimization
problems. In the second half of the proposal, the PI brings ideas from dynamics
and control into polynomial optimization. He investigates the potential of
dynamical systems for solving polynomial optimization problems and introduces a
new class of optimization problems where explicit polynomial constraints are
coupled with dynamical systems constraints such as stability, safety, and
collision avoidance. Efficient algorithms for these problems can have a sensible
societal impact by broadening the class of applications in engineering and
operations research that we can solve to global or near global optimality. These
include design of complex robotic systems, verification of safety-critical
software embedded in airplanes or medical devices, optimization of the power
grid, control of systemic risk in our financial networks, and a more effective
preparation against the spread of epidemic diseases. In addition to the research
component, the PI's proposal has a strong educational component, which similarly
encourages synergistic activities between optimization and control. Examples
include the initiation of a Princeton Day of Optimization and Control, and a
revamping of the early undergraduate curriculum in optimization to highlight the
modern connections of the field with control and computer science.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A slightly more technical description of the project is as
follows. The majority of algebraic techniques in polynomial optimization use the
so-called sum of squares relaxation, which relies on expensive-to-solve
semidefinite programs. By contrast, the new algorithms that the PI proposes
dispense with semidefinite programming altogether. They instead work with linear
programs and second order cone programs, which are intrinsically more scalable
types of convex optimization problems. These algorithms inner approximate the
sum of squares cone in a hierarchical format and with increasing accuracy. The
PI proposes a number of applications of his optimization algorithms in dynamics
and control, such as an automated construction of Lyapunov functions for
verification of large-scale nonlinear and hybrid control systems. Conversely,
the PI will investigate the potential of dynamical systems and Lyapunov theory
for providing better local search and lower bounding techniques for polynomial
optimization problems. Finally, the PI proposes an algorithmic study of a class
of optimization problems whose constraints come from requirements on the
trajectories of a dynamical system that initiate from a basic semialgebraic set.
These requirements could include convergence to desired equilibrium points,
boundedness, collision avoidance, invariance, reachability, etc. These novel
optimization problems have an array of applications in uncertain and dynamic
environments and their study leads to new interactions between dynamical
systems, conic optimization, computational complexity theory, and convex
geometry.