* 1554322
* CAREER: Mechanical Behavior of Flexible Electronic Films
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/15/2016,05/31/2022
* Brendan O'Connor, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Wells
* 05/31/2022
* USD 505,000.00

The objective of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) grant is to
improve the understanding of the mechanical behavior of organic (polymeric)
semiconductor films. Insight into the relationships between mechanical and
electrical properties will provide guidelines to achieve mechanically robust
flexible electronics for applications such as wearable electronics and low cost
solar energy. Organic semiconductors are particularly promising for flexible
electronics due to their relatively compliant nature associated with their
molecular structure. Mechanical failure in use, primarily due to repeated
flexing, has hindered the commercial adoption of organic films for flexible
electronic applications. This award provides support to investigate the impact
of molecular structure, film microstructure, and device design on performance
variation and failure modes of devices under flexure. Research will also include
the role of cyclic bending and environmental factors such as moisture on
mechanical stability. This research crosses multiple disciplines including
mechanics of materials, materials processing, and semiconductor device physics
and will provide a stimulating training environment for students. The education
plan includes the development of a certificate program in manufacturing and
mechanics of emerging thin film electronics to train future leaders in this
emerging field. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research objectives will be addressed
through the following interrelated tasks: (i) determining the effect of
molecular structure and molecular packing characteristics on the mechanical
behavior of conjugated polymer films, (ii) establishing the impact of multi-
component polymer blend morphology on electrical and mechanical response, (iii)
characterizing interfacial features in heterogeneous films, such that
delamination and cohesive failure modes can be mitigated, (iv) determining the
features that drive performance variation and degradation under sub-critical
mechanical loading under various loading protocols and environmental conditions,
and (v) developing standardized mechanical test methods for flexible
electronics. A focus will be on organic thin film transistors and organic
photovoltaic devices that capture unique and fundamental operating
characteristics so that the research products may be extrapolated across broad
device platforms. Mechanical properties of interest include film stiffness,
ductility, fracture strength, and cohesive and adhesive fracture energy that
will be measured using four-point bending, double cantilever beam testing, and
buckling metrology methods. The intellectual merit of the proposed research is
found in the development of a fundamental framework relating polymer
semiconductor structure to mechanical and optoelectronic characteristics
enabling mechanically robust layered organic and organic-inorganic systems.