* 1554690
* CAREER: Adapting Flexible Display Technology for Optogenetic Peripheral Nerve Stimulation
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/01/2016,01/31/2022
* Jennifer Blain Christen, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Svetlana Tatic-Lucic
* 01/31/2022
* USD 500,000.00

Proposal Title: CAREER: Adapting Flexible Display Technology for Optogenetic
Peripheral Nerve Stimulation&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project Goals: The PI will
investigate using light from flexible displays to wrap around and stimulate
nerves genetically modified to be light sensitive.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;a)
Nontechnical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Biolelectronic medicine is a new
approach to treating diseases by direct stimulation of specific nerves which
triggers the body to treat itself without the use of pharmaceuticals. This
emerging area of research shows incredible promise for a variety of diseases,
but current methods of stimulating individual nerves within a fiber are
inaccurate and/or cause damage to the nerve. Optogenetics is a new technique has
revolutionized interface with the nervous system by using light to stimulate
nerves rather than more traditional electrodes. Light can stimulate a nerve
without physically penetrating and damaging the nerve like many electrical
stimulation techniques. However the optical stimulation has only been shown with
low resolution in two dimensional patterns. This work exploit flexible display
technology used in flat panel televisions; a small array will wrap around and
stimulate the nerve in a three dimensional configuration. The goal is to
simultaneously shine several pixels, each too weak to stimulate, on the nerve to
get enough light to activate the nerve where the beams cross. This will give
very specific targeting of nerves.&lt;br/&gt;In addition, this grant will
support the development of a bioelectronics workshop. The workshop will allow
students, especially underrepresented minority students, to make their own
measurements from the brain of a bug and their own muscles. The students will
learn about how these bioelectronics can enable therapeutic and prosthetic
technology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;b) Technical
Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Bioelectronic medicine is a new approach to
treating disease by direct stimulation of specific nerves which triggers the
body to treat itself without the use of pharmaceuticals. Targeted stimulation of
the nervous system can upregulate the body's response to immune deficiency and
downregulate its response to autoimmune disease. Traditional nerve stimulation
uses electrical stimulation outside of the nerve fiber to target individual
axons or groups of axons, but the resolution of this technique is very poor.
Squeezing the nerve can improve this resolution but only near the surface. More
invasive techniques cut open the nerve and substructures to place extremely fine
wires next to the nerves to improve resolution, but this is very invasive and
can cause damage. This work leverages a new technique for neural stimulation,
optogenetics. Optogenetics is the use of light to stimulate neurons that have
been genetically sensitized to specific wavelengths. While this technique has
revolutionized neural interface, the implementation has been fairly low
resolution and two dimensional.&lt;br/&gt;This work uses ultra-thin flat panel
display technology wrapped around the sciatic nerve to stimulate motor neurons.
This enables a stimulation technique that is non-invasive to the nerve. In
addition, it will increase the resolution of stimulation beyond other techniques
external to the nerve. Multiple emitters can be used with optical power below
the threshold for optogenetic stimulation simultaneously, so the intersection of
the emitted light from each of the pixels will be sufficient to stimulate the
axon. This should increase the resolution with which stimulation can be targeted
within a nerve fiber. The efficacy of the system will be demonstrated using
transgenic mice with motor neurons specifically transfected. An arrays of
emitters will be wrapped around a mouse sciatic nerve with electromyography
(EMG) used to confirm the stimulation.&lt;br/&gt;In addition, this grant will
support the development of a bioelectronics workshop. The workshop will allow
students, especially underrepresented minority students, to make their own
neural and EMG recordings. The students will learn about how these
bioelectronics interfaces can enable therapeutic and prosthetic technology.