* 1554435
* CAREER: Nanostructured Soft Substrates for Responsive Bioactive Coatings
* MPS,DMR
* 02/01/2016,01/31/2023
* Cecilia Leal, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Nitsa Rosenzweig
* 01/31/2023
* USD 500,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award by the Biomaterials program
in the Division of Materials Research to University of Illinois at Urbana-
Champion is in support of studies to elucidate key fundamental properties of
biocompatible lipid materials. This research would enable the design of coating
materials for nanostructures, drugs and nucleic acids. Potential outcome from
this research could be the ability to design smart materials that are able to
interface with the human body to heal wounds, repair bones, as well as deliver
drugs, vaccines, antibiotics, etc., by remotely programmable delivery system
with the desired drug load, at the correct location and predetermined time
point. Such capabilities could obviate unnecessary surgeries, periodic hospital
visits for intravenous drug administration, and reduction in the undesirable
side effects. This award will integrate the research activities into training
and outreach activities, and include active recruitment of underrepresented
minority students in STEM by developing an active-learning based middle-school
summer camp for girls in materials science. Additionally, this award included
outreach activities with three different populations, namely middle school and
incoming graduate students, and inmates at a local prison. The investigator will
share the research findings in a workshop about the medical challenges in
engineering areas that are being developed as part of the Education Justice
Project, which offers educational opportunities to incarcerated individuals.
This effort has proven to be of high impact in reducing the rates of inmate
misconduct. In addition, this program offers an instructional program combined
with family support groups that could result in better educational
accomplishments of inmates' children.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports a research in the development of
studies to elucidate key fundamental properties of novel materials that are
biocompatible and prepared from non-bilayer lipids layers on different
substrates. With this award, the investigator will study molecular-scale
processes leading to highly structured surface deposited non-bilayer lipid thin
films for the delivery of drugs and nucleic acids. The main goals of the project
are: a) to understand polymorphism of lipid and associated species on surfaces;
b) to fine tune film nanostructures with underlying surfaces and environmental
cues; and c) to integrate lipid-film complexes on the surface. This investigator
will vary surface chemistry, substrate geometry and environment to establish the
conditions that decide the structure and orientation of lipid-drug and lipid-
nucleic acid complexes deposited onto surfaces. As part of this research, the
investigator will study molecular-scale processes leading to highly structured
surface deposited non-bilayer lipid thin films for the delivery of drugs and
nucleic acids. In this work, the researcher will combine different
characterization methods such as Small Angle X-ray Diffraction with cell culture
assays to unveil a fundamental understanding of the self-assembly of lipid-based
thin-films onto a surface. The scientific broader impacts of this research are
possible design of device-coating materials with predictable nanostructures and
drug/gene elution profiles. This award will integrate the scientific outcomes
into outreach and education, targeting three different populations, namely
middle school and incoming graduate students, and inmates at a local prison.