* 1554926
* CAREER: Experimental and Theoretical Investigation of the Electrodynamics and Structuring of the Low-latitude Ionosphere
* GEO,AGS
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2023
* Fabiano Rodrigues, University of Texas at Dallas
* Continuing Grant
* Shikha Raizada
* 03/31/2023
* USD 534,621.00

The research supported by this award will advance our understanding of the space
near Earth (geospace) with focus on the variability of the electric fields over
height and over time within the low latitude ionosphere, which is that region of
the upper atmosphere located between approximately 50 and 300 miles altitude. It
is formed by a mixture of atmospheric neutral species and charged particles
(ions and electrons) created, mostly, by the absorption of solar radiation. The
dynamical behavior of geospace depends on various physical processes occurring
in the Sun, in the Sun-Earth environment, and in the lower (below 50 miles)
atmosphere. The research plan of this award will combine existing ground-based
radar measurements made in Peru with space-based measurements. These results
together with new measurements would be utilized to assist the development of
computer numerical models that would provide better specification of the low-
latitude ionosphere and its dependence upon local time, solar flux levels, and
geomagnetic activity. The broader impact of the funded work will provide
professional training for undergraduate and graduate students in the fields of
science, technology, engineering and mathematics. The project will also enhance
the curriculum of the Physics program at UT Dallas. Finally, the project is
expected to also increase public literacy about scientific and technological
aspects of the Earth's geospace environment through the medium of public
lectures presented at the Space Center at regular
intervals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research plan to combine measurements and
modeling would achieve greatly-improved understanding of fundamental physical
processes responsible for the ionospheric dynamical behavior. The outcomes of
this study will also help to evaluate, more accurately than currently possible,
the impact of the ionosphere in the propagation of radio waves used by various
technological systems (GPS, telecommunications, remote sensing, over-the-horizon
radars, etc.) providing strong relevance to societal needs in connection with
space weather forecasting.