* 1554630
* CAREER: SusChEM: Nickel Catalyzed Arylation: Reaction Development and Mechanistic Investigation
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2021
* Dipannita Kalyani, Saint Olaf College
* Continuing Grant
* Laura Anderson
* 06/30/2021
* USD 125,020.00

In this CAREER project funded by the Chemical Catalysis Program of the Chemistry
Division, Professor Kalyani of the Department of Chemistry at St. Olaf College
is developing Ni-catalyzed methods to construct biaryl bonds. Biaryls are used
for numerous commercial applications. New carbon-carbon bond forming reactions
using readily available, inexpensive and/or renewable substrates and earth
abundant Ni-catalysts are being developed. These studies may ultimately
contribute to the design of more economical and greener processes for the
production of compounds prevalent in pharmaceutical, agrochemical and material
science industries. St. Olaf undergraduate researchers benefit from a state-of-
the-art experience in organometallic catalysis, a possible prelude to careers at
national labs, employment in the chemical or pharmaceutical industry, or faculty
appointments. The research program strengthening the scientific work force. In
addition, Professor Kalyani has designed a course to introduce non-science
students to science by addressing global economic and sustainability challenges.
Finally, in collaboration with the St. Olaf College Upward Bound Program for
high school students, outreach activities introduce minority and disadvantaged
students to the exciting world of organometallic chemistry in our everyday
lives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Transition metal catalyzed methods for the
construction of biaryl compounds are well-established. However, the vast
majority of these methods use expensive precious-metal catalysts such as
palladium and rhodium. Furthermore, aryl halides are the most common coupling
partners employed for these reactions, and their use leads to environmentally
undesirable halide wastes. Professor Kalyani's research program addresses these
limitations through the use of earth-abundant nickel (Ni)-catalysts and non-
halide aryl sources. The insights gained from the mechanistic studies may be
helpful in the design of versatile new Ni-catalyzed reactions capable of
activating carbon (C)-hydrogen (H), C-oxygen (O) and C-C bonds. Both high school
and college students participate in Professor Kalyani's research project, where
they are introduced to chemistry and develop a sound foundation to conduct,
interpret, and communicate scientific research.