* 1554046
* CAREER: Precise Assembly and Evaluation of Sequence-Defined Macromolecular Architectures
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2021
* Christopher Alabi, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Nicolay Tsarevsky
* 03/31/2021
* USD 500,000.00

Sequence-defined oligomers are short polymers with chemical and biological
properties that can be dictated by controlling the composition and relative
arrangement of the building blocks. Motivated by their potential applications in
biological systems, such as therapeutics, Prof. Alabi of Cornell University
develops novel approaches to the synthesis of sequence-defined polymers and
investigates how the composition and sequence affect their properties.
Educational and outreach activities are integrated throughout the duration of
this research project through a common theme that is focused promoting peer-to-
peer learning and empowering young aspiring scientists to take up leadership
positions in communicating science ideas to the broader public. Based on the Dr.
Alabi's experience creating a comprehensive 3-day workshop for underrepresented
high school students, this project develops an "Ambassador Program" that
involves teaching and supporting high school students how to disseminate ideas
in science and engineering to their peers and the broader public.

Building on the method invented by the Alabi group for the synthesis of
sequence-defined linear oligothioetheramides (oligoTEAs) that undergo pre-
programmed self-assembly into desired 3D architectures, this research project
aims to further develop novel, efficient methods for the synthesis of sequence-
defined multicyclic structures. Towards this challenging goal, this research
investigates how molecular composition and sequence influence chain dynamics,
the efficiency of macrocyclization, and ultimately the properties of the
macromolecular assemblies. In addition to providing research training to
graduate and undergraduate students, an "Ambassador Program" is being developed
to train and equip high school students with the leadership and communication
skills required to disseminate topics in science and engineering to their peers
and the broader public.