* 1554038
* CAREER: Additive Manufacturing using Electrospray Printing of Nanoparticle Inks
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2022
* Paul Chiarot, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Wells
* 05/31/2022
* USD 500,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award will enable a novel
additive manufacturing methodology for printing thin-films of nanoparticles. In
additive manufacturing, objects with complex shapes are built up by depositing
materials layer-by-layer. This approach has revolutionized the creation of large
three-dimensional prototypes. However, it is not yet feasible to use this
technology to print well-ordered layers at fine length scales. The ability to
precisely control the position and orientation of the nanoparticles (i.e. the
microstructure) within a thin-film is essential since this governs the
electrical, mechanical, and optical properties of the film. The next-generation
of high-performance devices for use in energy production, health care, and
security will require a high-throughput manufacturing methodology that provides
fine feature control. This award supports fundamental research on electrospray
printing, a process that has the potential to offer precise control over thin-
film structure while maintaining high-volume production. With this technique,
electric fields are used to control the production of thin functional layers
from nanoparticle solutions. This research will contribute to the acceleration
of manufacturing innovation in the United States by enabling the creation of
high technology jobs in the area of printed functional nanomaterials.
Additionally, this effort will train and motivate students of varied levels and
backgrounds in additive manufacturing through their engagement in
interdisciplinary research and international
partnerships.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Establishing the processing-structure-
property relationships for thin-films of functional materials produced by
electrospray printing will enable the process to become a viable manufacturing
method. Key findings include identifying how the excess nanoparticle electric
charge imparted by electrospray governs the structure of a printed deposit. This
new knowledge will facilitate the creation of a novel printing technique
incorporating substrate-level Coulombic intervention to control the
microstructure at a scale that is yet to be achieved. Coulombic intervention
uses a fringing field created in the vicinity of a target substrate to
accurately steer and position the charged particles emitted by electrospray.
Experimental studies and simulations will be used to establish a comprehensive
framework for electrospray printing. Probabilistic modeling will provide
critical insight into the evolution of an electrospray printed deposit that is
difficult to obtain experimentally. This model will ultimately be used to design
the structure of printed deposits for targeted functionality. The influence of
substrate topology and material properties on film structure will also be
elucidated to advance the versatility of electrospray printing.