* 1554183
* CAREER: Safe, High-Performance Li-Ion Batteries Through a Fundamental Investigation of Thermal Transport in Electrochemical Materials and Interfaces
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2016,09/30/2022
* Ankur Jain, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 09/30/2022
* USD 593,499.00

This project describes an integrated research and education plan for measuring
and enhancing thermal transport through key materials and material interfaces in
electrochemical energy storage devices such as a Li-ion cell (battery). Li-ion
cells offer excellent energy density and electrochemical performance in multiple
applications, including electric vehicles. However, overheating due to poor
thermal conduction is a well-known technological barrier, which directly impedes
performance and results in severe safety concerns, as shown in recent incidents
of fire in aircraft and car battery packs. There is an urgent need to identify
and alleviate the fundamental material-level root cause of poor thermal behavior
of Li-ion cells. This can potentially transform Li-ion cell performance and
safety, but is also particularly challenging due to the highly coupled nature of
thermal and electrochemical transport in a Li-ion cell over multiple length
scales, and due to the importance of preserving electrochemical performance
while improving thermal transport. This work will lay the foundation of
microscale thermal engineering of electrochemical energy storage materials for
current and future devices. Experimental and theoretical research methods
developed in this work will be applicable to several other related engineering
systems, such as super-capacitors. Education and outreach initiatives will
address learning challenges among undergraduate students, particularly non-
traditional "commuter" students and those from under-represented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal addresses scientifically and
technologically relevant problems related to poor thermal transport in Li-ion
cells, which is a major impediment to performance and safety. A unique test
platform capable of in situ, material-level thermal and electrochemical
measurements in real time on an operating Li-ion micro-cell will be built. This
interdisciplinary research will, for the first time, measure and enhance thermal
transport in materials and material interfaces in Li-metal and solid state
electrochemical devices through interfacial chemical bridging and
microstructural changes. These research thrusts will quantify the nature of
microstructure-property-function relationships for key Li-ion materials.
Improved cell-level thermal performance due to thermal enhancement of rate-
limiting processes will directly result in safe and high performance batteries
that will transform the nature of energy conversion, transportation and
electronics through applications that are simply not possible with present
batteries.