* 1554367
* CAREER:Bio-electro-photonic Microsystem Interfaces for Small Animals
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/15/2016,01/31/2022
* Alper Bozkurt, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Svetlana Tatic-Lucic
* 01/31/2022
* USD 500,000.00

Proposal Number: ECCS - 1554367 &lt;br/&gt;Proposal Title: CAREER: Bio-electro-
photonic Microsystem Interfaces for Small Animals&lt;br/&gt;PI Name: Bozkurt,
Alper Y. &lt;br/&gt;Institution: North Carolina State
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Objective:&lt;br/&gt;The investigator proposes a
wirelessly powered injectable capsule capable of monitoring bio-potentials and
bio-photonic physiological signals including heart rate, respiration rate,
oxygen saturation, pulse transit time and core body temperature. The proposed
investigation includes a complete system integration and extensive
evaluation.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical Abstract: The
emerging field of Bionic MicroSystems offers new engineering opportunities to
solve real life problems. By fusing biological organisms with synthetic
electronic systems, a quantum leap can be enabled in our ever-lasting
engineering struggle to mimic relatively more complicated properties of
biological machines, such as autonomy, intelligence, and biocomplexity observed
across various length scales. This project targets to overcome major technical
barrier in the way of such achievement, which is the inefficiency of state-of-
art interfaces that would provide real-time information about the state of the
biological organism. The proposed microsystem will open a physiological window
to improve understanding of the physiology of small animals in their natural
environment. The unique interdisciplinary and hands-on nature of this project
will help us to reach out to all citizens"women and men, underrepresented
minorities, and persons with disabilities"and train them to use bioelectronics,
biophotonics, and wearable wireless physiological systems. Further, we will
design other modules including presentations, show and tell displays, and design
contests. We will also use these to develop a new course and lab modules. We
will engage with the public at large by means of our collaboration with local
museums. In these activities, we will leverage our successful track record of
media coverage by and continuing interaction with prominent national and
international media agencies.&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract: Our long term goal
is to enable microsystem based platforms that would perform various
physiological measurements wirelessly in small animals. In doing so, we can
respond to the critical need for a novel minimally invasive class of systems for
continuous recording of key physiological parameters in natural environments
without disturbing natural behavior. To address the challenge of higher power
consumption of such systems, we will (a) benefit from the advantages of
subcutaneous measurements and (b) design custom front-end circuits that would
reduce power consumption through multiple strategies. To enable wireless
assessment of multiple physiological parameters in ultra-miniaturized form
factors, the microsystems will include state-of-the-art circuit approaches,
wireless power and communication systems, and sealed packaging with extruding
electrodes. The efficacy of the system will be assessed on a four platform
testbed: (a) in silico using a computational model, (b) in vitro using a tissue
phantom, (c) ex vivo using animal cadavers, and (d) in vivo using rat models.