* 1554094
* CAREER: Mechanism for Controlling Ionic Valences in Transition Metal Doped Laser Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2023
* Yiquan Wu, Alfred University
* Continuing Grant
* Nazanin Bassiri-Gharb
* 06/30/2023
* USD 558,543.00

This project is jointly funded by the Office of International Science and
Engineering and the Ceramics Program in the Division of Materials
Research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: This CAREER project
achieves a fundamental understanding of the formation, stability, and
manipulation of defects in optoelectronic materials in order to more effectively
synthesize high-quality laser materials with tailored properties. This line of
research is extremely important in the development of new optical devices, and
has not yet been adequately pursued and understood. This project is
transformative, as it will open new avenues for utilizing dopants to design and
synthesize optical and photonic materials with new capabilities and
functionalities. The research has potential impacts on a wide range of important
applications, including laser machining and manufacturing, laser-sparked fusion
energy, laser communications, high-energy particle and radiation detection,
medical imaging, etc. The project has developed an educational program called
Collaborative Exchange Research and Materials in Ceramic Sciences (CERAMICS) to
help students gain research experience abroad, primarily in Asian countries,
through an exchange program. This experience provides students with a more
global view of research activities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: The
overall objective of this CAREER project is to address the fundamental materials
science questions associated with using off-valence ion substitution to control
the valency of dopant ions in laser and optoelectronic materials. To answer
these questions, a thorough understanding of the formation, stability, and
manipulation of cation defects and ionic valencies in select materials is being
developed. Specifically, the intention of this project is to study the
mechanisms by which the valencies of dopant ions can be tuned, by controlling
the local oxidizing or reducing environment. Modification of local environments
can generate different electronic and coordination structures, which changes the
behavior of the optically-active ion centers in a material. This project applies
simulation methods to study models with different dopants and/or combinations of
dopants to predict possible spectroscopic properties. Electron microscopy is
used to examine the distribution of dopants and vacancies in different
materials, and to determine the location of substitutional ions; whether they
exist in lattice sites or are segregated at grain boundaries. This work brings
about unique opportunities to design new optical materials for applications in
next generation devices such as ceramic lasers and scintillation detectors. The
project also includes a dedicated enhanced educational experience for students,
which trains future generations of optical and photonic materials engineers.