* 1554990
* CAREER: The Last Glacial Termination in Interior Asia
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2023
* Aaron Putnam, University of Maine
* Continuing Grant
* Yurena Yanes
* 04/30/2023
* USD 602,521.00

The climate event that ended the last ice age - dubbed the "last glacial
termination" - involved the greatest natural global warming of the recent
geologic past. This was also the last time in which atmospheric CO2 rose by a
substantial amount prior to the industrial period. The last glacial termination
therefore represents a spectacular natural experiment played out by the Earth
system that can be studied in order to decipher the underlying dynamics of the
climate system and its sensitivity to forcing factors, such as atmospheric CO2.
This project aims to determine when, and how rapidly, glaciers receded and the
climate warmed at the end of the last ice age in the heart of Asia - Earth's
largest and most populous continent. This research will help identify factors
that produced this last great global warming, and to clarify the role of
atmospheric CO2 in ice-age climate cycles. This work will provide immersive,
field-based, and cooperative educational experiences for the next generation of
scientists. The project will bring together a research team that includes
underrepresented high-school students and STEM teachers from the South Side of
Chicago, graduate and undergraduate students from the U.S.A., Mongolia, and
China, and graduate students of science journalism. The overarching goal is to
establish and nurture international and cross-cultural educational and
scientific partnerships that are built to last well beyond the duration of this
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Identifying the causes of the last glacial
termination is a major objective of the earth and climate sciences, and requires
detailed chronologies of sensitive paleoclimate proxies that monitored the last
glacial-to-interglacial transition across the planet. The purpose of this CAREER
research is to develop such chronologies from the center of Asia for the
reduction of mountain glacier extent from the peak of the last ice age to
today's conditions. Glacier chronologies will be based on precise and accurate
10Be surface-exposure dating of glacial landforms in the mid-latitude Altai
range of Mongolia and in the monsoonal eastern Himalaya of China. Glaciological
modeling will convert these glacier reconstructions into records of glacier-
inferred atmospheric temperature, which will in turn be compared with signatures
of incoming solar radiation, greenhouse gases, as well as other proposed
drivers, to discriminate among possible causes of the last termination. This
project will be carried out following an integrated research and education plan
that implements a cooperative, field-based learning strategy in which students
at different levels learn by teaching each other. The collaborative, cross-
cultural, multi-national, and multi-generational team will share knowledge and
experiences in the field and throughout the scientific process. This team will
consist of (1) graduate and undergraduate students from the University of Maine,
(2) students and researchers from Mongolian and Chinese institutions, (3)
students and science teachers from the Gary Comer College Preparatory school ? a
public charter school devoted to improving the lives of underserved minority
students from the South Side of Chicago, and (4) embedded science journalism
graduate students from the Medill School of Journalism who will produce stories
for publication and broadcast, thus documenting scientific outcomes for the
public.