* 1554739
* CAREER: Restoring Musculoskeletal Function by Designing Implantable Passive Mechanisms
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2023
* Ravi Balasubramanian, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Jeanne Small
* 05/31/2023
* USD 651,882.00

1554739&lt;br/&gt;Balasubramanian&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project designs
miniature implantable mechanisms for attaching muscles to tendons and bone in
orthopedic surgery. The implants take the form of passive mechanisms, such as
soft tendon networks, pulleys, and linkages. Instead of directly attaching
muscles to tendons and bone using sutures, a surgeon can use the passive
implants to re-route and re-arrange how a patient's tendons create movement at
the joint. By doing so, the implants enable increased force or range of motion
at a joint using the patient's own muscles and without using any external power
or electronics. Overall, the implants enable new surgeries that provide the
patient improved and customized manipulation and locomotion function when
compared with the current suture-based surgical paradigm. In terms of impact,
this project is expected improve quality of life for the disabled, seniors, and
veterans, lead to new research in allied areas such as biomaterials and
bioethics, and lead to new medical devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
develops a framework for the design of such implantable mechanisms after
quantifying the movement deficits that arise in the current suture-based
surgical paradigm. In particular, this project develops implants for two
surgical applications: an implant that differentially distributes forces and
movement from one muscle to multiple tendons for use in a hand surgery to
restore grasping capability following median-ulnar nerve palsy; and an implant
that scales up forces for use in a foot surgery to restore the collapsed foot
arch. The implants will be validated through biomechanical simulations, human
and animal cadaver experiments, and live-animal experiments. This project
integrates this research with extensive educational activities. Specifically,
this project creates new curricula using hands-on open source hardware and
software to train the next generation of leaders at the middle-school, high-
school, undergraduate, graduate, and teacher levels in understanding the
mechanics of human body movement and using robotics to improve human body
movement. The project also includes outreach programs to increase participation
of women and under-represented minorities in the STEM fields within a culture of
inclusivity and equality.