* 1554714
* CAREER: From Performance-Based Engineering to Resilience and Sustainability: Design and Assessment Principles for the Next Generation of Buildings
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2021
* Henry Burton, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 12/31/2021
* USD 516,000.00

The research objective of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award
is to create a unified design and assessment methodology that accounts for the
various ways that cost, resilience to hazards, resource consumption, and
environmental and social impacts are interconnected throughout a building's
service life. A major challenge related to developing the next generation of
buildings in the United States is increasing their resilience to natural
hazards, while, at the same time, incorporating sustainable practices into their
construction, maintenance, and operation over their lifespan. Current approaches
to quantifying building performance are largely based on individual attributes
such as energy efficiency, resilience to hazards, or cost. However, these
attributes are often in conflict with each other, making definitive design
solutions elusive. Through a unified design and assessment methodology, this
holistic treatment of a building's life cycle performance will provide insights
into the possible benefits, interdependencies, and tradeoffs associated with
specific resilience and sustainability strategies. The research findings will be
integrated into the educational and public outreach components of the project
including (a) new curricula that prepares future practitioners, academic
faculty, and decision-makers to address complex building design, assessment, and
management problems, (b) sustained engagement in initiatives to recruit and
retain underrepresented minorities and women in structural/earthquake
engineering, and (c) an interactive exhibit that will be showcased at various
community-based institutions in the Los Angeles area, to raise public awareness
of the opportunities and challenges faced when implementing strategies to
enhance the resilience and sustainability of buildings.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;A
discrete-event simulation model will be used to quantify, in a probabilistic
manner, the effect of earthquake-related disruption on a building's service life
functionality. The model will account for the interaction among seismic
resilience and economic, environmental, and social impacts. Life cycle
performance optimization algorithms will be formulated to consider multiple
stakeholder preferences and objectives. Another aspect of the research will be
directed towards creating a multi-criteria decision-making framework that
supports the design and service life management of seismic building systems. The
scientific methods and tools to be developed as part of the research program
will be evaluated and validated by using them to conduct case studies in the
design and life cycle assessment for a set of real buildings. The research
program will benefit the broader society by enabling developers to provide more
compelling reasons to owners in both the private and public sectors to request
enhanced building systems with resilient and sustainable features that exceed
the minimum performance level found in most U.S. design codes. The value derived
from improved service-life functionality and reduced life cycle environmental
and economic costs will have the potential to offer building owners dramatically
greater returns on their investment.