* 1554146
* CAREER: Designing Novel Structural Surfaces for Desired Vibration Transmission and Attenuation
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/01/2016,01/31/2023
* Melih Eriten, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Eva Kanso
* 01/31/2023
* USD 599,913.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project will investigate
experimental and modeling techniques that will enable the formulation of
multiscale interface models. Interfaces are the most compliant and dissipative
sites in structural assemblies, and their properties govern the dynamic response
of load-bearing structures. Limited understanding of underlying governing
mechanisms has lead to descriptions of interface properties that are based on
empirical laws of limited validity and applicability. The PI's CAREER goal is to
investigate the factors determining interface properties, and tailor them for
desired vibration transmission and attenuation within a structure. The models
formulated as part of this project will account for the length and velocity-
dependent response of interfaces and will be employed to design single-material
surfaces with tunable structural integrity, and vibration transmission and
attenuation characteristics. This novel design approach opens new avenues in
vibration control, noise cancellation, shock mitigation, and energy storage and
transfer. Latest laser processing techniques enabling scalable surface
patterning techniques will be used to fabricate interfaces to be tested and
characterized in this project. The educational goal of this award is to expose
the students, high school teachers and the general public to contact mechanics
and dynamics research through research experiences in summer training programs
and scientific exhibitions. The PI will also develop a new curriculum based on
active and experiential learning principles to address low retention rates in
science, technology, engineering and mathematics. Activities will incorporate
group work, multimedia projects, tournament-style design competitions, and
remote-access experiments into the PI's undergraduate and graduate
courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award develops multiscale interface
models, and uses them to achieve desired dynamic response in load-bearing
structures. Unique in-situ transmission electron microscope scratch tests, and
multiscale experiments will be conducted to study how dislocations, cracks and
coherent slip influence the interface response to external loading. Multiscale
interface models will be developed after those experiments. Scalability of those
models to macroscale interfaces will be validated by testing surfaces with
controlled length scales. Thanks to their accuracy, efficiency and physical-
basis, those models will provide an effective solution to intractable large-
scale structural dynamics problems involving interfaces. Using those interface
models, the PI will optimize interfaces for enhanced damping figure of merit,
and broad frequency band gaps, both of which regulate vibration transmission and
attenuation properties of structures. Optimum interfaces will then be
manufactured and tested under transient and harmonic loading.