* 1554777
* CAREER: Molecular Mechanism of Atmospheric Mercury through Speciation-Resolved Experiments
* GEO,AGS
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2023
* Alexei Khalizov, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 04/30/2023
* USD 711,534.00

This CAREER project is focused on developing a better understanding of
atmospheric mercury. Mercury is a highly toxic pollutant released by fossil fuel
combustion and waste incineration, primarily in the form of gaseous elemental
mercury (GEM). GEM is involved in long-range transport that can result in the
transfer of mercury to the oceans. This project will investigate the kinetics of
mercury reactions in the atmosphere. The improved knowledge of mercury chemistry
obtained by this project will be critical for assessing the environmental
impacts of mercury.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The science objectives of the proposed
research are to: (1) Elucidate the kinetics and mechanism of gas-phase reactions
of mercury bromide (HgBr) to evaluate the lifetime of GEM and the molecular
speciation of gaseous oxidized mercury (GOM); (2) Investigate the heterogeneous
uptake of GOM on surfaces to improve understanding of the processes that form
particle-bound mercury; and (3) Investigate ion-molecule reactions of GOM to
identify reagent ions that can be utilized for direct detection of GOM in the
atmosphere by chemical ionization mass spectrometry (CIMS). Questions that
motivate this research include: (a) what atmospheric chemicals are responsible
for the conversion of HgBr to stable gas-phase products? (b) What is the
chemical nature of those products? (c) What are the rate coefficients of
associated reaction pathways? (d) Which of the gas-phase products can bind
effectively with atmospheric particulate matter? (e) Can these gas-phase and
particle-bound products be detected and quantified directly?