* 1554708
* CAREER: Metabolomic Analysis of Chondrocyte Mechanotransduction
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2022
* Ronald June, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Wendy C. Crone
* 04/30/2022
* USD 630,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Program project will investigate
cartilage mechanotransduction in response to different types of forces and
examine how energy is used by cartilage. Joints such as the knee or the hip are
important for everyday activity like walking. These activities result in forces
on the cartilage in the joint. Because more than 50 million Americans suffer
from some type of joint disease, understanding how cartilage response to forces
is important for improving joint function. Mechanotransduction is the process
that cartilage uses to sense and respond to forces. There are many aspects of
cartilage mechanotransduction that are not yet known. The results of this
project will provide a foundation of information that will improve the basic
understanding of how cartilage functions. The potential societal benefits
include new knowledge that will help scientists and engineers develop new
treatments for problems like arthritis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Chondrocytes, the
cells of cartilage, respond to mechanical loads by both known and unknown
mechanisms. Metabolomic profiling describes the functional state of the cell by
quantifying changes in small molecules using liquid-chromatography and mass
spectrometry. The first objective of this project is to define both shared and
distinct metabolomic responses for chondrocytes in shear and compressive
loading. The second objective is to examine the conversion of mechanical energy
from applied compression into biological energy used by chondrocytes. For these
studies, human chondrocytes will be encapsulated in hydrogels of physiological
stiffness. These gels will be subjected to relevant mechanical deformations, and
metabolites will then be extracted. Both global and targeted metabolomic
profiling will be used to analyze the responses of chondrocytes to the applied
deformations. The targeted metabolomic data will be integrated into a systems
model of energy metabolism, and analyses will examine how mechanical
deformations alter chondrocyte energy usage. The significance of this work is
that by examining both global and targeted metabolomic responses to loading,
these studies will provide the knowledge necessary to design and administer
loading regimes for restoring cartilage and joint health.