* 1554814
* CAREER: DNA-Catalyst Conjugates for Site-Selective Transformations in Biological Contexts
* MPS,CHE
* 02/01/2016,09/30/2022
* David Gorin, Smith College
* Continuing Grant
* Christine Chow
* 09/30/2022
* USD 661,930.00

The Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry Division is funding Dr.
David J. Gorin from Smith College to develop chemical reagents that selectively
modify one compound in a complex biological mixture. Currently, transforming one
molecular target in a mixture with many competing molecules is a major challenge
for chemical researchers. The strategy being developed relies on DNA molecules
capable of folding into complex three-dimensional structures and adhering to
specific targets of interest. The DNA serves as an adhesive to bring a modifying
chemical structure into close proximity, resulting in selective modification of
the target. These new reagents are being applied to perturb and study molecular
processes in living systems, including communication within bacterial
populations that are important for understanding infections. Undergraduates at
Smith College, the nation's largest liberal arts college for women, are key
contributors to the research. In order to increase the Science, Technology,
Engineering and Mathematics (STEM) undergraduate engagement and the success of
women, and especially women of color, course-based research and guest lectures
by diverse STEM role models are incorporated into the introductory organic
chemistry classes. The impact of these and other curricular innovations are
assessed through the deployment of a competition-based assessment plan for
student capacities alongside more traditional approaches for tracking student
outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research is to develop reagents
for the selective chemical modification of one target molecule in a complex
biological mixture. A new class of selective catalysts that recognize and bind
to a particular target, thereby increasing the rate of a desired reaction, are
being developed. Specifically, selective and high-affinity DNA aptamers are
being covalently linked to well-established low molecular weight catalysts,
including organo- and transition metal-catalysts, to create DNA-small molecule
catalyst conjugates (DCats). DCats enable enzyme-like selectivity with synthetic
reagents, promising a fundamentally new capability to target a chemical reaction
to any molecule of interest. Generality is being demonstrated in an array of
reaction chemistries on both small molecules and protein substrates. In
addition, a DCat is being developed to investigate N-acyl homoserine lactone
chemical communication within populations of bacteria. This application
demonstrates the broad potential of DCats as tools to study biological systems
and other complex mixtures. Smith University undergraduates are centrally
involved in the research, which represents a springboard for STEM graduate study
and careers. Incorporation of the proposed research into the introductory
organic chemistry laboratory class broadens the impact of the research by
reaching a greater number of students, especially those who might not vigorously
pursue research opportunities on their own initiative.