* 1554212
* CAREER: Experimental and Theoretical Studies of Mechanics Interacting with Electric/Optical Fields in Liquid Crystal Elastomers
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2022
* Shengqiang Cai, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 03/31/2022
* USD 591,605.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project will investigate coupling
phenomena in liquid crystal elastomers, a combination of liquid crystal
molecules and polymer networks. Liquid crystal elastomers have many special
properties which have led to diverse applications ranging from artificial
muscles to stretchable optical devices. Because of the complex molecular
structure, many phenomena observed in liquid crystal elastomers are still
elusive and the unique properties of liquid crystal elastomers have not been
fully explored. This research will develop an innovative and robust technique to
fabricate liquid crystal elastomers with desired properties. The PI will also
formulate a mechanics theory of liquid crystal elastomers with large
deformations that may be triggered by various external stimuli. The results from
the project will promote further development of liquid crystal elastomers for a
wide range of applications, such as responsive elements used in soft robotics,
active materials used in energy harvesting/conversion systems and soft materials
used in various actuators or sensors. Moreover, the impact of the project will
be broadened via the integrated education and outreach programs including course
development, a mini summer camp and outreach to high school
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research objective of this multidisciplinary
project is to investigate multi-field coupling phenomena in liquid crystal
elastomers, using a using a combined theoretical, computational, and
experimental approach. We will develop a strain-engineering technique to apply
predesigned inhomogeneous strain fields onto a lightly-crosslinked liquid
crystal elastomer film during its second-step crosslinking reaction so as to
obtain patterned molecular orientations in the material. Combining experiments
and theoretical studies, we will further explore the interplay between mechanics
and electrical/optical field in liquid crystal elastomers with the target of
realizing diverse voltage or light-induced deformation modes in the material. As
a result, this research project will result in a better understanding of the
behaviors of liquid crystal elastomers, provide mechanistic insights into the
dynamic behaviors of biological materials with similar molecular structures and
promote new engineering applications of the special material.