* 1554895
* CAREER:Revealing the Complex Fluid Dynamics of Conventional Liquids Using Vibrating Nanoparticles
* MPS,DMR
* 03/15/2016,08/31/2022
* Matthew Pelton, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 08/31/2022
* USD 689,999.00

Non-technical abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scientists have developed an
extensive understanding of how conventional liquids, such as water, behave on
ordinary time and length scales, and have also developed an understanding of the
individual molecules that make up the liquids. However, the behavior of liquids
remains poorly understood between these two extremes, impeding the development
of technologies such as molecular sensors, and limiting scientific understanding
of the function of biological molecules. The main reason for this gap in
knowledge has been the lack of experimental methods to probe the short length
scales and fast time scales involved. The principal investigator has recently
developed a novel method to access this regime directly, using short laser
pulses to monitor the vibrations of nanometer-scale metal particles floating in
the liquids. This project applies this experimental method, together with
rigorous theoretical models, to develop a fundamental understanding of the
unusual and complex properties of ordinary liquids at nanometer length scales
and picosecond time scales. The research is integrated with educational
activities that have the overall objective of improving the recruitment,
retention, and success of underrepresented minorities and transfer students in
the physical sciences. This involves three interconnected activities: (1)
outreach to incoming minority and transfer physics students; (2) involvement of
undergraduate students in the research project; and (3) a rebuilding of the
Modern Physics Laboratory course to involve modern educational approaches and
contemporary physics topics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to provide a
quantitative understanding of the non-Newtonian effects that arise in
conventional liquids, such as water, when they interact with a rapidly moving
solid nanostructure. Simplifying assumptions that are used for fluid-dynamics
problems at larger scales break down at the nanometer scale. In particular, the
common assumption that conventional liquids have a purely viscous response no
longer holds, because the characteristic times for the motion of nanoscale
objects are comparable to molecular relaxation times in the liquids. This
project investigates this complex response experimentally using a method,
recently developed by the principal investigator, based on ultrafast laser
spectroscopy of vibrating metal nanoparticles suspended in the liquids.
Measurements of the gigahertz-scale mechanical vibrations of metal nanoparticles
in viscous liquids are used to obtain a quantitative, phenomenological
description of the linear, shear viscoelastic response of conventional liquids.
Extensions of the experiments access more complex aspects of the viscoelastic
response, including compressibility, terahertz-frequency response, and nonlinear
viscoelasticity. The experimental results are compared to molecular-dynamics
simulations in order to explain how the continuum viscoelastic response emerges
from microscopic interactions. By providing a link between microscopic,
molecular-level descriptions and bulk, fluid-dynamical descriptions of liquid
properties, the project addresses the grand challenge of understanding how
continuum behavior in liquids emerges from microscopic interactions among the
molecules that make up the liquid.