* 1554511
* CAREER: Harnessing the Power of the Phosphate-Binding Protein PstS to Recover Phosphorus
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2022
* Brooke Mayer, Marquette University
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 07/31/2022
* USD 504,530.00

1554511&lt;br/&gt;Mayer&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;On a global scale, there is an
overabundance of waste phosphorus with a simultaneous lack of commercially
available phosphorus for use. This contradiction stems from the crucial role of
phosphorus for the growth of all biological organisms, plants and animals. As a
rate-limiting nutrient, excess phosphorus in the environment is responsible for
eutrophication, the leading cause of freshwater impairment. Conversely,
phosphorus is vital to global food security as it sustains high agricultural
productivity. Worst-case estimates suggest that rapidly diminishing mineable
phosphorus reserves could be depleted beyond the realm of economically feasible
extraction within a century. In the face of this looming crisis, the recovery of
"waste" phosphorus from wastewater and environmental surface waters is no longer
a luxury, but an urgent imperative that is the focus of this
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Unfortunately, conventional wastewater treatment
is incapable of satisfying new sustainability metrics of capturing phosphorus at
low levels and recovering it as a valuable resource. Therefore, the overarching
project objective is to elucidate the fundamentals of phosphorus-specific high
affinity phosphate-binding protein and evaluate phosphorus removal and recovery
efficiency. This is directly relevant to the principal investigator's (PI's)
career trajectory as it integrates nutrient recovery, environmental
microbiology, sustainability, and STEM education. The pursuit of mutually
reinforcing research and educational objectives establishes a strong foundation
for the PI's future portfolio of research discoveries and educational
advancements. The proposed research will provide the first exploration of
phosphorus-specific high affinity phosphate-binding protein in the context of
phosphorus sorption and desorption for controlled phosphorus recovery
applications. The study will elucidate the fundamental basis of phosphorus-
specific high affinity phosphate-binding protein and quantify phosphorus removal
and recovery using two protein-based systems: 1) E. coli bacteria engineered to
surface-express phosphorus-specific high affinity phosphate-binding protein, and
2) phosphorus-specific high affinity phosphate-binding protein immobilized on
synthetic media. Preliminary data indicate that phosphorus-specific high
affinity phosphate-binding protein can remove phosphorus, but basic research is
needed to improve understanding of the basis of phosphorus-specific high
affinity phosphate-binding protein binding and its phosphorus recovery
potential. By enhancing the fundamental scientific understanding of phosphorus-
specific high affinity phosphate-binding protein capabilities, this project will
substantially advance sustainable treatment in the context of the joint criteria
of phosphorus removal and recovery. This work is novel in that, for the first
time, the potential for controlled phosphorus removal and recovery using
immobilized and surface-displayed phosphorus-specific high affinity phosphate-
binding protein systems in both water and wastewater will be investigated. The
proposed research advances broader societal outcomes, including improved
understanding of sustainable technologies; increased minority participation in
STEM; and development of a diverse, globally competitive STEM workforce. The
results will foster development and evaluation of sustainable biomimicry-
inspired technologies for phosphorus recovery. This effort has broader
implications for environmental water quality, wastewater infrastructure, mining,
global food security, and associated economic and sociopolitical implications.