* 1554790
* CAREER: A Framework for Revealing How Locomotor Control Emerges from the reciprocal Interactions of Neural and Mechanical Systems
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2016,09/30/2022
* Simon Sponberg, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 09/30/2022
* USD 785,413.00

Animals move with remarkable stability and agility through nearly every
environment. To do so, they rely on interacting neural and mechanical systems
that must operate in the context of the physics of sensing, actuation, and
environmental interactions. Modern data acquisition tools provide unprecedented
access to the underlying neural, muscular, and mechanical signals that implement
control. However, these signals alone are not a framework for understanding how
sensory information transforms into motor outputs. This CAREER project leverages
several emerging experimental and analytical techniques to show how locomotor
dynamics emerge from this sensorimotor transform. This framework for extracting
principles of sensorimotor control is based on combining high-resolution
neuromuscular recordings, information theoretic and dimensionality-reduction
data analytics, and the formal language of system identification and control
theory. The experimental framework of this proposal is transferrable to other
living and engineered systems composed of many subsystems connected by feedback
such as gene or protein networks, cell mechanics, or population dynamics.
Principles of locomotor control that emerge from this work will synergize with
the BRAIN initiative and similar programs by providing context through which to
interpret a deep, detailed understanding of brain structure, anatomy, and
connectivity. They will also address challenges in the new era of robotics and
neural engineering. There is a pressing need for neuro-technologies that enable
versatile movement while embodied in physical systems. More broadly this work
will enable translation of research-based undergraduate learning into scientific
and education products. It will bring a neuroscience component to the growing
Physics of Living Systems curriculum at Georgia Tech. Within the VIP program,
students will receive training at the interface of biology, physics, and
engineering by engaging in research-based learning that is organized into a
vertical mentoring system. Ultimately the study of how brain and body control
movement is an accessible context in which to engage the public and further
converge education of physics and biology even outside the walls of the research
university.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research uses three experimental platforms
(two animals and one robot). They provide insights into the shared neural and
mechanical processing challenges animals face despite using different modes of
locomotion. The research program includes recording and altering a nearly
complete motor program (the set of all neuromuscular commands to appendages)
with spike-level resolution while an animal behaves in a virtual reality
environment. The PI's work also explores the performance consequences of
different control architectures and the sensorimotor determinants on
maneuverability. The program will use the interdisciplinary study of movement to
create a scientific foundry for the Physics of Living Systems at Georgia Tech
with an emphasis on how physics approaches provide a context for understanding
neural signals. The core of the foundry will be a vertically integrated research
team of undergraduates that will complete the loop of research-based education
to classroom-inspired research. To transfer the impact outside the university,
the researchers will team with local high school teachers to innovate new
education tools based on the accessibility of high-speed imaging, surface
electromyography, and the study of movement.