* 1554349
* CAREER: Computational Approaches for Life Cycle Inventory Database Development
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2016,01/31/2022
* Ming Xu, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 01/31/2022
* USD 509,800.00

1554349 (Xu)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research aims to advance the current
practice of developing Life Cycle Inventory (LCI) databases into a faster, less
expensive process that still generates reliable LCI data. The research will (1)
create a framework for modeling and analyzing LCI networks, (2) develop
computational models for estimating missing LCI data, and (3) apply these models
to evaluate LCI data quality and predict LCI data for emerging technologies. The
education plan will (1) engage a diverse group of LCA practitioners during the
course of the project, (2) deliver open source software add-ons for LCA
practitioners to easily use the computational models developed in the proposed
research, (3) develop an education theory grounded curriculum module
incorporating research outcomes for broader dissemination, and (4) train
undergraduate and graduate students with diverse background in STEM fields by
engaging them in the research program and other education activities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will develop computational approaches for
estimating missing data in Life Cycle Inventory (LCI) databases based solely on
limited known data, without relying on time-consuming, expensive empirical data
collection. The approach transfers the latest knowledge from network science to
LCI database development. An LCI database represents the interdependence of unit
processes and environmental interventions. The ensemble of such interdependence
characterizes the structure of the underlying technology network (or LCI
network). If sufficient enough, observed LCI data, although limited, can be used
to extract structural features of the underlying LCI network. Such structural
features, in turn, can be used to predict the structure of the unknown area of
the LCI network, which is equivalent to estimating the unknown data in the LCI
database. This research will first create a framework for modeling and analyzing
LCI networks. This framework will then be used to develop and validate a variety
of link prediction models to estimate missing data for LCI databases. Finally
the validated link prediction models will be used to evaluate LCI data quality
and predict LCI data for emerging technologies for testbed databases selected in
consultation with stakeholders.