* 1554353
* CAREER: Characterization and Simulation of Failure Mechanisms in Soft Fibrous Tissue
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/01/2016,02/28/2022
* Trevor Lujan, Boise State University
* Standard Grant
* Laurel Kuxhaus
* 02/28/2022
* USD 574,000.00

The meniscus is a soft fibrous tissue that helps protect the joint surfaces in
the knee. Meniscal tears account for over 500,000 hospital visits per year in
the United States. The tearing of the meniscus and other soft tissues is not
understood, making it difficult to predict when they will fail. Without
understanding the microscopic events that cause failure of the individual tissue
molecules, methods to prevent the failures are hard to create. This Faculty
Early Career Development (CAREER) Program award will increase the scientific
knowledge of failure in soft tissue when it is loaded either once or many times.
This research includes experimental, theoretical and computer prediction
approaches, including simulations of soft tissue fracture using advanced
methods. This project will use the imaging and predictions developed from the
research to create a computer program for high school educators that accurately
simulates injury to the knee that can be used in science classes to motivate a
student towards a scientific or medical career.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The central
technical objective of this research project is to build and validate a
computational model that describes and predicts failure in human meniscus. The
research team will perform quasi-static and fatigue failure experiments on
cadaveric specimens to determine whether meniscal fractures are regulated by
collagen fiber alignment and density. Researchers will measure the organization
and composition of the extracellular matrix in mechanically tested specimens to
directly link soft tissue microstructure to failure behavior. The team will also
develop mathematical models to predict fracture behavior based on the strain
energy of the collagen fiber network, and will use these models to predict the
experimental failures observed in young and aged meniscal tissue. This project
will be the first to characterize the anisotropic fatigue behavior of human
meniscus, and will be the first to visualize meniscal tears using an extended
finite element method to split regions that exceed failure criteria.