* 1554428
* CAREER: Structure Prediction and Design of Molecular Crystals with the GAtor Genetic Algorithm Package
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2016,12/31/2021
* Noa Marom, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 12/31/2021
* USD 658,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;The Division of Materials Research and the
Division of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure contribute funds to this award. It
supports computational research, algorithm development, and education on
predicting properties of molecular crystals. Molecular crystals are used for
many technological applications, including organic electronics, solar cells, and
non-linear optics. They are of particular importance to the pharmaceutical
industry because most drugs are marketed as molecular crystals of the
pharmaceutically active ingredient. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Molecular crystals are
held together by van der Waals interactions between molecules. Unlike chemical
bonds, van der Waals interactions arise from quantum mechanical fluctuations of
the electron density that leads to a weak but long-ranged attractive
electrostatic force. &lt;br/&gt;Because van der Waals interactions are weak, a
given molecule may crystallize in more than one structure. Different crystal
structures that could lead to molecular crystals that possess markedly different
physical and chemical properties can all be nearly the most favored structure.
Accurate calculations are required to predict the structure that is the winner
of this competition and to be able to design new molecular crystals.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through the portal of computer simulations, the PI will
gain access to the vast configuration space of materials structure and
composition. She will explore the uncharted territory of molecular crystals that
have not been synthesized yet and predict their properties knowing only their
elemental composition and the laws of quantum mechanics. In this way, promising
candidate molecular crystals for specific applications may be identified and
used to guide synthesis efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Genetic algorithms (GAs)
are guided to the most promising configurations by computer simulation that
implements the "survival of the fittest" principle of evolution. Combining
structural "genes" of the fittest structures in the population lead to
"offspring" that propagate desirable features, while random mutations are
employed to maintain diversity. This approach is implemented in a GA software
package, GAtor, for computers that can perform many operations at the same time.
The PI will distribute the GAtor software package to the broader
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award also supports educational activities.
The goals of the educational plan are to: (i) impart discipline-specific
knowledge and technical skills; (ii) develop the foundational skills of science
and engineering, such as problem solving, critical thinking, and computational
thinking; (iii) instill professional skills, such as literature research,
scientific writing, and presentation skills; (iv) prepare students for a career;
and (v) broaden the participation of women and underrepresented minorities. This
will be achieved via research mentoring, teaching of graduate and undergraduate
courses, and the "Women Leaders in Physics and Engineering" seminar
series.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;The Division of
Materials Research and the Division of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure contribute
funds to this award. It supports computational research, algorithm development,
and education on molecular crystals. The goal of the proposed research is
computational structure prediction and design of molecular crystals with
tailored properties from first principles. This will be achieved by developing a
versatile genetic algorithm (GA) package, GAtor, capable of conducting both
energy-based and property-based optimization with high accuracy and high
efficiency. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research plan comprises two phases: (I)
the Structure Prediction phase seeks to predict the most stable structure(s) of
a molecular crystal, given a "stick diagram" of a single molecule- a grand
challenge embodied by the Crystal Structure Prediction blind test; and (II) the
Crystal Engineering from First Principles phase seeks to design molecular
crystals with target properties for applications in organic electronics and
photovoltaics by property-based GAs- an emerging paradigm in computational
materials design. The PI will use density functional theory based simulations
that include dispersion to accurately describe the potential energy landscape
arising from van der Waals interactions. Many-body perturbation theory methods
will be used to accurately describe excitonic properties.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The educational component is aimed to: (i) impart
discipline-specific knowledge and technical skills; (ii) develop the
foundational skills of science and engineering, such as problem solving,
critical thinking, and computational thinking; (iii) instill professional
skills, such as literature research, scientific writing, and presentation
skills; (iv) prepare students for a career; and (v) broaden the participation of
women and underrepresented minorities. This will be achieved via research
mentoring, teaching of graduate and undergraduate courses, and the "Women
Leaders in Physics and Engineering" seminar series.