* 1554061
* CAREER: Laboratory Studies on the Chemical Characterization of Atmospheric Emission Sources and their Oxidative Evolution using Novel Instrumentation
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2016,02/28/2022
* Brent Williams, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 02/28/2022
* USD 510,800.00

1554061&lt;br/&gt;Williams&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Pollutants emitted to the
atmosphere have a wide array of natural and anthropogenic origins. These
pollutants almost immediately undergo oxidative aging processes that transform
their molecular composition, ultimately influencing their fate. Vapor and
particle pollutants, either emitted directly or formed from atmospheric
photochemistry, have detrimental health impacts and can alter the climate. This
proposed project will specifically look at organic compounds which comprise a
major fraction of air and particulate pollution. To understand the health and
climate impacts of specific emission sources, it is necessary to assign these
pollutants to their sources of origin. This project will address improved
measurement methods and focused laboratory studies to obtain detailed chemical
composition of source-specific gases and particles as they undergo oxidative
evolution in the atmosphere.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary goal of this
project is to advance the understanding of the sources and transformation of
organics emitted to the atmosphere through (1) creation of new in-situ
instrumentation for chemical characterization of gases and particles, (2)
controlled laboratory studies of the emissions and gas-to-particle formation
pathways/potential from simple precursor vapors to realistic complex sources,
(3) development of an open-access and searchable mass spectral and source
profile database, and (4) integrated education and outreach activities including
an academia/industry research experience program for undergraduates and direct
research involvement from grade 6-12 students as part of a Peer Mentoring
Pipeline Program. The current understanding of the chemicals released from
natural and anthropogenic emission sources is limited, and the knowledge of the
subsequent chemical transformations of these chemicals that occur while in the
atmosphere is even more limited. At the conclusion of this project, metrics will
be available for incorporation in model simulations and for field observation
interpretation on volatility- and polarity-resolved source-specific chemical
composition at the molecular and compound-class level. Additionally, new
parameterizations, reaction mechanisms, and gas-to-particle aerosol production
yields will be provided for a variety atmospheric oxidants (e.g., OH, O3, NO3)
at different concentrations, for a variety of sources (e.g., single gases of
differing volatilities and chemical functionality, simple mixtures, complex real
sources), with consideration of other atmospheric variables (e.g., NOx and SO2
additions, seed particle types, and humidity levels). New instrumentation will
be produced that extends chemical characterization of these emissions across a
range of volatilities (from the most volatile gases to the least volatile
condensed-phase material), offering new insights on specific atmospheric
transformation pathways and fates of these materials. A new academia/industry
research experience program in Atmospheric Science and Technology will offer
undergraduate students an opportunity to work in both settings, helping to guide
their career paths through first-hand experience. This will strengthen
academic/industry connections and advance the field. In addition, grade 6-12
students will play a direct role in laboratory studies through the Peer
Mentoring Pipeline Program.