* 1554531
* CAREER: Development of an Integrated Analytical Framework for Urban Sustainability
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2016,05/31/2017
* Simi Hoque, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 05/31/2017
* USD 508,714.00

T1554531 (Hoque)

This CAREER grant is aimed at developing an Integrated Urban Metabolism
Analytical Tool (IUMAT) to evaluate and predict the impacts of energy and water
use, land use, and transportation systems at an urban scale. IUMAT is designed
to systematically quantify aggregate impacts in terms of performance metrics,
such as GHG emissions and energy use.The PI will develop new methods and
analytical tools for three different modules that operate within the IUMAT
framework - Energy & Water, Land Use, and Transportation.

This research will involve compiling and analyzing data from varied sources as
well as developing statistical methods to identify the relationships between
modules. An interdisciplinary team-based undergraduate course will be developed
to evaluate the effectiveness of sustainable urban programs. Students will also
have additional research opportunities to evaluate sustainability initiatives in
collaboration with UMass Facilities. STEM workshops and internships on urban
sustainability will be developed for middle and high school girls through a STEM
program called Eureka! The modules will be tested and validated using real world
contexts; and the PI will create case studies and develop decision tools that
will inform the sustainable planning process. Collaborative partnerships with
local planning agencies will be formalized through a Planning Stakeholders
Advisory Board that will provide guidance and datasets for evaluating the
credibility and usability of IUMAT modules.