* 1554858
* CAREER: Exploring Hidden Sectors
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2022
* Joshua Ruderman, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 08/31/2022
* USD 400,000.00

This CAREER award funds the research activities of Professor Joshua Ruderman at
New York University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Significant evidence suggests that
most of the matter in our Universe is composed of an unknown source known as
"dark matter". Experiments conducted over the next few years will make dramatic
progress testing the extent to which dark matter is a particle that interacts
with ordinary matter. Meanwhile, the Large Hadron Collider (LHC) is exploring
the highest energies ever probed. The LHC recently discovered a remarkable new
particle, the Higgs boson, and is now studying the properties of this new
particle. The LHC may also discover additional new particles as well. Against
this backdrop, Professor Ruderman will pursue an original program of research
and education concentrating on the origins of dark matter and the Higgs. He will
study the exciting possibility that there exist new hidden sectors of particles
which have thus far escaped experimental detection because they are very weakly
interacting with ordinary particles. He will explore new models in which dark
matter is a hidden-sector particle, or in which the Higgs boson interacts with
hidden-sector particles. In order to help in spreading physics to a broad
audience, Professor Ruderman will also establish a competitive "Physics in Media
Travel Award". He will partner with NYU's Tisch School of the Arts to send film
students to visit physics experiments that will appear in their movies. He will
also partner with NYU's Science, Health and Environmental Reporting Program
(SHERP) to send science journalism students to visit physics experiments which
will be featured in their stories. Resulting films will be screened at local
high schools, and resulting stories will be disseminated online in various
journalism venues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More specifically, Professor Ruderman
will explore novel cosmologies for hidden-sector dark matter in which the
annihilation rate is exponentially suppressed, predicting dark matter
exponentially lighter than the TeV scale. This exponential suppression occurs
when dark matter annihilates into heavier states, or is in equilibrium with
heavier particles that are annihilating. Professor Ruderman will develop new
observational tests for light dark matter, including searches for UV and soft
X-ray photons emitted by dark-matter decays or annihilations. Professor Ruderman
will also explore the interplay of hidden sectors with Higgs physics. He will
develop novel models with a fine-tuned Higgs mass and light hidden-sector
scalars that interact with the Higgs. He will also explore supersymmetric models
with a natural Higgs mass in which stops are light and abundantly produced at
the LHC but nevertheless hidden behind top-quark backgrounds.