* 1554744
* CAREER: SusChEM: Activation and Electrocatalytic Reduction of CO2 by Abundant Metal Complexes and Development of K-12 Electrochemical Educational Projects
* MPS,CHE
* 02/01/2016,06/30/2022
* Jenny Yang, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 06/30/2022
* USD 642,596.00

CAREER: SusChEM: Activation and Electrocatalytic Reduction of CO2 by Abundant
Metal Complexes and Development of K-12 Electrochemical Educational Projects
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although carbon dioxide is currently viewed as a waste by-
product in the burning of fossil fuels and an atmospheric pollutant with
contributions to climate change, it is also the primary building block used in
nature for chemical synthesis and energy storage. In this project, Dr. Yang is
investigating how to mimic nature's method of efficiently using carbon dioxide
(CO2) to form more useful products. To achieve this goal, Dr. Yang is exploring
new metal compounds inspired by the active site of natural enzymes. The specific
focus of the research is to convert carbon dioxide to carbon monoxide, providing
a pathway to turn CO2 from a harmful waste product into a major feedstock in
industrial processes that synthesize valuable carbon-based products and fuels.
Carbon monoxide is currently generated primarily by burning fossil fuel
resources; however this research takes an alternative approach, using energy in
the form of electricity, which has the potential to capitalize on energy
generation by solar energy collection and other renewable-energy production
methods. As a result, the goals of this research represent an important broader
societal impact towards accessing carbon-neutral cycles for chemical materials
and fuels. The latter may enable the expanded use of renewable resources for
energy, enhancing our national energy independence and reducing reliance on
fossil fuel resources. Professor Yang is also involved in several outreach
programs that inspire excitement about experimental science in K-12 students,
with an emphasis on traditionally underrepresented or under-served populations.
The goals of these programs are to encourage science, technology, engineering,
and mathematics (STEM) careers in order to broaden the base of future
professionals necessary for continued national technological innovation and
growth. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With funding from the Chemical Catalysis Program
of the Chemistry Division, Dr. Jenny Y. Yang of the University of California,
Irvine is synthesizing a series of transition metal complexes with ligands that
contain proximate Lewis acid functionality. The transition metal center and
Lewis acid functionality are positioned for cooperative activation of CO2
reduction. This type of cooperative CO2 activation is inspired by the active
site of the nickel-iron [NiFe] carbon monoxide dehydrogenases, which catalyze
the reduction of CO2 to CO at high rates, selectivity, and efficiency. The goals
are to 1) investigate the cooperative effect of proximate Lewis acids in
transition metal complexes towards the activation of CO2 at mild reduction
potentials, and 2) apply this knowledge toward the development of abundant metal
electrocatalysts for fast and efficient CO2 reduction to CO. The first goal
furnishes information generally applicable for CO2 activation to reduced
products. The second goal focuses on reduction to CO, a versatile C1 precursor
for fuels and other high value products. New catalysts for CO2 reduction have
significant broader impact, since they are beneficial for CO2 recycling in
renewable energy fuel cycles or incorporation into useful materials. Progress is
quantitatively measured by improvements in catalyst rate, stability,
selectivity, and overpotential (efficiency). Dr. Yang is also actively involved
in several outreach programs that instruct and excite students about STEM
careers in K-12 students. This CAREER award fosters the development of teacher-
scholars at the start of their scientific careers.