* 1554787
* CAREER: SusChEM: Metal-Metal Bonds as Active Sites in Catalysis
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2021
* Christopher Uyeda, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* John Gilje
* 05/31/2021
* USD 650,000.00

In this project supported by the Chemical Catalysis Program of the Chemistry
Division, Professor Christopher Uyeda of the Department of Chemistry at Purdue
University studies molecular transition metal catalysts containing dinuclear
active sites. In nature highly complex systems that contain two or more metals
carry out electron transfer transformations that are central to biosynthesis and
energy management. In contrast, molecular catalysts that are currently used to
promote related reactions have comparatively simple structures, most commonly
containing just a single metal center. This single metal must mediate all of the
bond-breaking and forming events. In principle, new classes of catalysts that
contain multiple metals could exhibit metal cooperativity as seen in the
naturally occurring systems. These could exhibit unique properties as compared
to their more well-established mononuclear counterparts. This research aims to
develop the fundamental principles underlying the design of robust and efficient
synthetic multinuclear catalysts. The project also contains an educational
component that will introduce high school and beginning undergraduate students
to catalysis research. Providing such research opportunities at Purdue
positively impacts the engagement of high school students in cutting-edge
research.

This research focuses on the development of new redox-active ligand
architectures that support metal-metal bonds of defined composition. By
capitalizing on ligand-centered redox couples, the resulting dinuclear complexes
are capable of engaging organic substrates in many of the elementary two-
electron processes (e.g. oxidative additions and reductive eliminations) that
form the basis for catalytic transformations. An overarching goal of this
project is to connect the electronic features of metal-metal bonds to their
activity and selectivity in catalysis. As such, detailed mechanistic insights
into these systems are sought by (1) developing electronic structure models
through a combination of experiment and theory, (2) characterizing plausible
catalytic intermediates, (3) studying catalytic processes using reaction
kinetics and other physical organic techniques, and (4) conducting well-
controlled comparative studies between mononuclear and dinuclear catalysts.
These activities are integrated with an educational component that focuses on
providing opportunities for young students, including local high school
students, to engage in the catalysis research being carried out in university
labs.