* 1554411
* CAREER: Interface Engineered Amorphous Alloys for Thermoplastic Forming of Ductile Bulk Metallic Glasses
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2022
* Jason Trelewicz, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Alexis Lewis
* 07/31/2022
* USD 500,000.00

Metallic glasses have evolved into a new class of high-strength engineering
materials with compelling benefits for the aerospace, electronics, and
automotive industries. However, their technological utility has been hindered by
a propensity for localized failure in tension and limited processing routes for
bulk production. This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award supports
research to engineer amorphous alloys structures with enhanced ductility and
formability for the production of bulk metallic glass sheets. Deformation
behavior and its dependence on microstructural variables will be elucidated
through synergistic computational and experimental research activities. For the
first time, interface engineered bulk metallic glass sheets will be synthesized
through additive spray manufacturing, which will provide a myriad of new
opportunities for the design and production of metallic glass components through
thermoplastic forming. Research activities are integrated into new educational
initiatives that advance the engagement of underrepresented students in minority
participation programs, provide curriculum enrichment for engineering majors,
and facilitate the establishment of a sustainable mechanism for interfacing with
regional high schools. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports
fundamental research to understand the mechanisms underpinning strain
delocalization in interface engineered amorphous alloys containing intergranular
regions of excess free volume. The guiding hypothesis is shear localization in
metallic glasses can be interrupted by regions of excess free volume that
promote the distributed nucleation of many subcritical shear bands, thus
producing a more homogenous plastic response via elimination of a dominant shear
front. The research team will perform molecular dynamics simulations of shear
localization collectively with advanced characterization and nanomechanical
testing of interface engineered amorphous alloys to elucidate the role of
interfacial structure and amorphous grain size in the mechanics of strain
delocalization. Innovations in additive spray manufacturing will be devised to
enable transformational microstructures that effectively delocalize the
accumulation of plastic strain via distributed microplasticity. A chief societal
impact of this research is the ability to produce ductile amorphous alloy sheets
via additive spray manufacturing that can be used to revolutionize the sheet
metal industry as well as produce bulk metallic glass components through net-
shape thermoplastic forming processes.