* 1554794
* CAREER:   Unifying approaches to non-uniform hyperbolicity
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2023
* Vaughn Climenhaga, University of Houston
* Continuing Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 07/31/2023
* USD 624,683.00

There are many phenomena in the real world that we perceive as having random,
unpredictable behavior, despite the fact that they follow underlying rules that
are completely deterministic and well understood. For example, when we roll a
pair of dice, they fly and bounce according to physical laws that are non-
random, but the outcome of the roll is nevertheless random. A more sophisticated
example is weather; although we understand atmospheric dynamics and can make
reliable short-term predictions, the exact behavior of the weather several weeks
from now remains largely random and unpredictable. The theory of hyperbolic
dynamical systems studies the mechanism that drives this evolution from
predictability to randomness. When this mechanism operates consistently no
matter what state the system is in, the system is said to be "uniformly
hyperbolic". Such systems are well-understood, but this uniformity condition is
so restrictive that it rarely applies to physically realistic examples. A more
realistic condition is "non-uniform hyperbolicity", where the increase in
randomness only happens some of the time, but nevertheless appears eventually
for typical initial conditions. Several different approaches have been used to
study non-uniformly hyperbolic systems, each with its own advantages and
disadvantages. The goal of this project is to develop a unified theory of non-
uniform hyperbolicity by clarifying and strengthening the connections between
these existing approaches; by introducing new tools; and by studying new classes
of examples.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Historically, the two most successful
approaches to non-uniform hyperbolicity are Pesin theory (introduced in 1976)
and Young towers (introduced in 1998). Recent work by the PI and his co-authors
has introduced "effective hyperbolicity" and "non-uniform specification". All
four approaches study non-uniform hyperbolicity via invariant measures, but the
connections between them are not yet clear, and different approaches have
different applications. For example, Pesin theory gives powerful results once an
appropriate invariant measure has been selected, but the other three approaches
are more useful for finding distinguished invariant measures such as SRB
measures and equilibrium states. Similarly, Young towers yield stronger
statistical properties than the other approaches, but construction of a tower
may be quite difficult. Recently Sarig gave a construction of countable Markov
partitions using Pesin theory, which allows a tower to be built for any
hyperbolic measure, but gives no information on the rate of decay of the tail of
the tower, which is necessary for statistical properties such as the central
limit theorem. Preliminary results by the PI and his co-authors give an
alternate construction that yields estimates on the decay rate; the PI will
develop this approach to obtain strong statistical properties for a broad class
of hyperbolic measures, including the SRB measures constructed using effective
hyperbolicity and the equilibrium states constructed using non-uniform
specification. As a first concrete example, geodesic flow in non-positive
curvature will be considered; these techniques are expected to give rapid decay
of correlations for the unique measure of maximal entropy and other equilibrium
states, and to give polynomial decay of correlations for the regular component
of Liouville measure (subject to geometric conditions on the manifold). More
generally, the connection between the four approaches will significantly
strengthen the tools of effective hyperbolicity and non-uniform specification;
it will also make the the powerful theory of Young towers easier to apply, and
give a precise sense in which all four approaches are equivalent. A longer-term
goal is to extend the class of rigorously understood non-uniformly hyperbolic
examples; one important planned application is to Teichmuller flow, which has
deep geometrical significance.