* 1554013
* CAREER: Optofluidic Lasers at the Liquid-Liquid Interface: A Versatile Biosensing Platform
* ENG,ECCS
* 01/01/2016,08/31/2022
* Yuze (Alice) Sun, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Svetlana Tatic-Lucic
* 08/31/2022
* USD 500,000.00

Proposal Title&lt;br/&gt;CAREER: Optofluidic Lasers at the Liquid-Liquid
Interface: A Versatile
Biosensing&lt;br/&gt;Platform&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project Goals&lt;br/&gt;This
CAREER project investigates bio compatible and bio configurable
optofluidic&lt;br/&gt;lasers that are self assembled at the liquid-liquid
interface and explores their&lt;br/&gt;transformative applications in
bioscience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nontechnical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER
project integrates research, educational, and outreach components
to&lt;br/&gt;lead the innovations in both optofluidic lasers and biosensing
technologies in&lt;br/&gt;healthcare. The novel approach is enabled by
multidisciplinary integration of&lt;br/&gt;photonics, microfluidics, MEMS, and
bionanotechnologies that creates a new&lt;br/&gt;modality of all liquid laser
array that can be controlled and configured by&lt;br/&gt;bio/chemical molecules
and fluids.&lt;br/&gt;The project includes prominent interdisciplinary education
and training&lt;br/&gt;components for undergraduate and graduate students. Plans
are also in place to&lt;br/&gt;promote involvement of underrepresented students,
which leverages the UTA's&lt;br/&gt;status as one of the Historically Black
Colleges and Universities and Minority&lt;br/&gt;Serving Institutions. Special
attention is paid to recruit and retain female students
in&lt;br/&gt;engineering. Finally, the proposed project has extensive outreach
programs to train&lt;br/&gt;high school students and engineering teachers and to
disseminate knowledge and&lt;br/&gt;research discoveries to the general
public.&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this CAREER
project is to develop an array of bio compatible and&lt;br/&gt;bio configurable
optofluidic lasers that are self assembled at the liquid
liquid&lt;br/&gt;interface and study this novel optofluidic laser enabled
versatile biosensing&lt;br/&gt;technology platform to achieve exceptional
detection sensitivity, selectivity, and&lt;br/&gt;throughput in various
biological and biomedical sensing applications. The
proposed&lt;br/&gt;optofluidic laser features a monolayer laser gain material
(i.e., only a few&lt;br/&gt;nanometers thick) confined at the liquid liquid
interface, which allows biological&lt;br/&gt;and biochemical molecules to access
and directly modulate the laser gain material,&lt;br/&gt;and thus forms the
basis of enhanced detection sensitivity and selectivity. The&lt;br/&gt;proposed
laser sensing platform is studied for rapid and low cost
multiplexed&lt;br/&gt;cancer biomarker detection towards a final goal of
addressing current challenges in&lt;br/&gt;the point of care medical diagnostics
and health monitoring. The outcomes&lt;br/&gt;generated from this research will
lead to new development and discoveries in the&lt;br/&gt;field of bioinspired
optofluidic devices and engineering, as well as fundamental&lt;br/&gt;research
on extreme sensing and extreme photonics.