* 1554178
* CAREER:Open-Source Data Analytics for Distribution Systems Management and Operations
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/01/2016,09/30/2022
* Ram Rajagopal, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Nash
* 09/30/2022
* USD 500,000.00

Distribution system operations (DSO) are designed to maintain reliability in the
presence of predictable variability. Future distribution systems will operate in
a dramatically different environment with deep penetration of distributed energy
resources (e.g. solar, EVs, storage, smart loads) and widespread adoption of
novel devices for network management resulting in increased variability. Unless
DSO can be adapted to these conditions, performance and revenues of future
utilities will be severely impaired. How to adapt Future systems will generate a
wealth of data from consumers, line sensors and network equipment. Utilizing
this data for learning, prediction and resource coordination is challenging and
not fully understood. This proposal seeks to connect "bits to watts" utilizing
modern data analytics in order to enable scalable and cost effective DSO for
future distribution networks. In particular the proposal explores new approaches
in machine learning, optimization and behavior learning and their applications
in power systems. The methods will be implemented in a software platform:
Visualization and Insight for Demand Operations and Management (VISDOM). The
research component of the proposal will enable emissions reductions and massive
scaling of the management of behind the meter resources. It contributes to the
budding smart grid data analytics industry expected to reach a $6 billion market
size by 2020. The education component of the proposal will create a novel
curriculum and online education in data thinking to prepare the data analytics
workforce of the future. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will make use of
large spatial and temporal data sets from industry and utilities to explore new
approaches in machine learning, stochastic control &amp; optimization and
behavioral economics to address problems in power systems. The central problems
that will be addressed are: (i) Build an adaptive consumer behavior learning
framework that scales to large numbers of consumers; (ii) Investigate
probabilistic demand forecasting and pricing methods at multiple scales ranging
from individual residential consumers to communities; (iii) Develop a novel
network reconstruction and monitoring framework to learn the power distribution
network from data; (iv) Create data and simulation driven placement and
coordination mechanisms for residential demand-side resources; and (v) Utilize
an interactive platform that engages consumers in real-time to develop novel
randomized trial approaches and apply it to innovative behavioral programs.
Impacts such as increasing the value of consumer demand flexibility by more than
50% are expected. The resulting methods will be made available in open-source in
the VISDOM platform. VISDOM can support a thriving community of academics and
industry partners that experiment with demand side management. Currently, every
project develops non-transparent and limited analysis mechanisms that consume
time and resources. More broadly, the time-series data based approaches
developed in this proposal are applicable to other fields such as marketing,
healthcare and e-commerce. The education component will advance concepts from
data thinking into power systems. The proposed curriculum includes a new hands-
on course in data analytics for energy systems for undergraduate and masters
students; online adult education courses directed at utility professionals and a
broader audience and a K12 experimental practicum prepared with high school
teachers visiting the PI's lab in a summer program. In addition, a smart grid
seminar involving distinguished speakers from academia and industry will be
supported and made available online.