* 1554078
* CAREER: The Role of Surface Anisotropy in the Cellular Entry of Janus Particles
* ENG,CBET
* 02/15/2016,09/30/2022
* Yan Yu, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* William Olbricht
* 09/30/2022
* USD 500,000.00

CBET - 1554078&lt;br/&gt;PI: Yu, Yan&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Janus particles are
specialized particles whose surfaces have two distinct parts with different
surface chemistry on each part. This two-faced feature makes Janus particles
especially useful in novel biomedical applications, such as programmed drug
delivery, provided the Janus particles can enter cells to carry out their
functions. However, effects of the two-faced feature on cellular entry is not
well understood. The goals of this CAREER project is to elucidate physical
principles governing the entry of Janus particles into cells. Results from this
project will provide guidance on how to use surface anisotropy to control the
entry of synthetic particles into cells, which has the potential to transform
the way multifunctional drug delivery particles are designed. The project will
also promote interdisciplinary sciences and education at the interface of
chemistry, engineering and biology. A Biomaterials Ambassadors outreach program
will be established to bring interdisciplinary sciences to K-12 students and
teachers in rural communities in Indiana. This new program will help address the
urgent need of improving education in hard-to-reach areas. Visual methods of
learning will also be developed to foster critical thinking in undergraduate
education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER project will focus on ligand-guided
cell entry of Janus microparticles. The hypothesis underlying the project is
that the surface anisotropy of Janus particles alters the mechanism of cellular
entry by changing the interplay between competing forces. To test this
hypothesis, dynamics of Janus spheres will be measured with a new single-
particle tracking method, which will reveal particle-cell interactions in multi-
dimensions. Cellular dynamics, including membrane deformation and actin
protrusion, will be measured with high-resolution fluorescence microscopy. The
competition between surface anisotropy and shape in controlling the cellular
entry pathways will also be investigated with non-spherical Janus particles. The
results will establish a direct and quantitative connection between the
particle-level anisotropies and the cell-level responses with unprecedented
spatial and temporal resolution.