* 1554760
* CAREER: SusChEM: New Methods for Cu-Catalyzed Cross-Coupling Reactions
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2016,05/31/2022
* Michael Brown, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 05/31/2022
* USD 675,000.00

In this (CAREER) project funded by the Chemical Catalysis Program of the
Chemistry Division, Professor Michael K. Brown of the Department of Chemistry at
Indiana University is introducing new methods for the catalytic construction of
carbon-carbon bonds, which is an important objective in modern organic
chemistry. The overarching goal of this research is to utilize inexpensive
copper (Cu)-catalysts to assist in the synthesis of useful molecules such as new
pharmaceutical agents. This new catalytic method promotes sustainability by
using first row (non-precious metal) copper catalysts. Such catalyst are more
abundant, less toxic and less environmentally harmful than precious metal
catalysts. The educational goal is accomplished by developing engaging
chemistry-themed classroom activities and by evaluating, improving and
replicating a permanent chemistry-themed exhibit at a children's museum recently
developed by the Brown Lab. These activities introduce and connect a known
concept, smell, to something unknown, chemical structure. Professor Brown's
efforts meet two needs in science education: development of chemistry-themed
exhibits at science museums, and introduction of chemistry to children at a
young age.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor Brown is developing two general
classes of Cu-catalyzed methods for carbon-carbon bond formation: 1) Suzuki-
Miyaura-type cross-coupling reactions, and 2) Suzuki-Miyaura-type cross-coupling
reactions that are interrupted by an alkene. Implementation of these methods
enables chemists in academia and industry to access complex molecular scaffolds
that were previously difficult to prepare. The impacts and intellectual merit of
these studies are expected to be the following: 1) introduction of inexpensive,
sustainable Cu-catalysts for Suzuki-Miyaura-type cross-couplings, 2) discovery
of new methods for the functionalization of readily available unactivated
alkenes, and 3) uncovering new modes of reactivity with Cu-catalysts. This
research promotes sustainable chemistry by using first row (non-precious metal)
copper catalysts. The educational goal is accomplished by developing fun and
engaging organic chemistry-themed classroom activities and by evaluating,
improving and replicating a permanent organic chemistry themed exhibit at a
children's museum recently developed by the Brown Lab. These activities
introduce and connect a known concept, smell, to something unknown, chemical
structure. As the educational component of his project, Professor Brown is
developing materials that educate children in grades K-6 about very basic
concepts related to molecular structure and organic chemistry.