* 1554019
* CAREER: Corrugated Graphene Superlattice Structures by Strain-induced Shrink Nanomanufacturing
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/01/2016,01/31/2022
* SungWoo Nam, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 01/31/2022
* USD 510,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) grant will study a novel shrink
nanomanufacturing process for nano-scale patterning of two-dimensional
nanomaterials such as graphene. Shrink nanomanufacturing refers to the process
of creating miniaturized patterns and topographies of various shapes and
dimensions by a thermally-induced shrinking process. This approach, which is
analogous to everyday shrink-wrapping and heat-shrink tubing, has the potential
to generate patterns or corrugated structures for next generation electronics
without the need for costly fabrication, such as nanolithography. To date,
shrink nanomanufacturing has been limited to non-semiconducting materials for
non-electronic applications. This award will support fundamental research to
provide the knowledge base for the development of shrink nanomanufacturing for
functional two-dimensional nanomaterials. The new process will enable precise
control of patterns, topographies and properties which are attractive for
applications such as wearable electronics, internet-of-things, healthcare and
biomedical devices. The results of this research will broadly benefit U.S.
manufacturing competiveness, the overall economy and public welfare. The
involvement of student veterans in developing our multi-disciplinary approach to
shrink nanomanufacturing will broaden the participation of underrepresented
groups in research and engineering education across multiple disciplines
including manufacturing, electronics, and materials science.

Atomically-thin two-dimensional (2D) nanomaterials such as graphene, MoS2 and
TMDs, can be elastically wrinkled or buckled under large compressive deformation
stresses whilst preserving their novel electrical properties. This unique
behavior of 2D nanomaterials opens up novel opportunities to use elastic strain
and topography control to engineer electrical and optical properties. However,
lack of manufacturable approaches and a current knowledge gap of fabricating
corrugated structures have precluded the use of strain and topography for
shaping the 2D nanomaterials. This research will investigate the fundamentals of
shrink nanomanufacturing of corrugated 2D material superlattice structures to
fill this knowledge gap. The process of shrink nanomanufacturing utilizes
elastic buckling of 2D atomic layer materials when a large compressive strain is
applied by shrinking a thermoplastic substrate. Using graphene as the model 2D
nanomaterial, the research team will investigate the size-scaling of corrugated
superlattice structures, study how the strain and topography of corrugated
structures impact the electrical and optical properties, develop a roll-to-roll
process of shrink nanomanufacturing for precisely engineered patterns and
topographies, and explore applications in strain sensors and tunable optical
absorption materials.