* 1554253
* CAREER: Simulation-Enhanced Virtual Design Environments for Fluid Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2022
* Jason Hicken, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Jablokow
* 04/30/2022
* USD 508,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) grant aims to make the design of
fluid systems more intuitive, accessible, and inexpensive. Fluid systems, such
as aircraft, biomedical pumps, or turbines, play a vital role in many sectors of
the U.S. economy. Due to the complex physics of fluid flow, these systems are
often difficult and costly to design. This presents a barrier to start-up
companies seeking to develop products that involve such complex fluid flows. The
complicated nature of fluid flows also poses a barrier in engineering education,
where students often struggle to achieve intuition regarding fluid flows. To
mitigate these barriers, this award envisions an immersive, virtual-reality
design environment in which engineers can interact with aircraft or heart pumps
in the same way artists interact with clay. A key requirement of this vision is
the ability to provide engineers with instantaneous performance predictions as
they shape their virtual designs. This award will help build the knowledge
necessary for real-time prediction of complex fluid flows, thereby enabling the
next generation of tools for immersive computer-aided design and engineering
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Predicting the performance of fluid systems
quickly and accurately for preliminary design remains a challenge due to the
nonlinearity of the governing equations and the large cost of high-fidelity
simulations. Reduced-order models provide a suitable alternative approach, since
they have the potential to significantly reduce computational cost with only a
small reduction in accuracy. The innovation explored in this award is to create
reduced-order models that achieve high accuracy for boundary quantities that
engineers are typically interested in, e.g., lift and drag, rather than high
accuracy for the overall flow. Specifically, the research team will investigate
adjoint-based basis functions to construct reduced-order models suitable for
prediction of such boundary integrals. After using the reduced-order model to
find a preliminary design, a numerical optimization based on a high-fidelity
model can be applied to refine the design parameters. Here, numerical error
estimation and control is especially important, because an optimization
algorithm may exploit numerical errors rather than physics to optimize the
quantity of interest. This research will explore the use of simultaneous
geometry and mesh optimization as a means of addressing error control. Finally,
after optimization, an engineer may need to explore the design space in order to
meet qualitative constraints or consider tradeoffs. The research team will test
the hypothesis that matrix-free spectral methods can re-parameterize and
approximate the design space in such a way that engineers can make real-time
changes without significantly impacting optimality and feasibility.