* 1554393
* CAREER: In Situ Nanomechanics of High-Performance Anode Materials for Sodium-Ion Batteries
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2021
* Shuman Xia, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 12/31/2021
* USD 599,999.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Program project will characterize
the nanomechanical and electrochemical interactions in sodium-ion battery
electrode materials and develop constitutive models to elucidate the
morphological and structural evolution in these materials. As one of the most
widespread technologies for energy storage, lithium-ion batteries have been
under intense studies over the past two decades. Sodium-ion batteries are being
considered as a low-cost alternative because sodium is much more earth abundant
and less geographically constrained than lithium. However, the development of
advanced sodium-ion batteries has been hindered by a significant unexplored gap
in understanding the mechanics of high-performance electrode materials. The
proposed research spans several disciplines, including mechanics, materials
science, physics, and electrochemistry. The fundamental understanding obtained
in this research will make a profound impact on these disciplines. The
multidisciplinary work will train undergraduate and graduate students with a
broad range of skills and knowledge, and expose them to the complementary
research of experimentation and modeling. The research will also involve K-12
teachers and students, particularly females and minorities, through various
outreach programs at the Georgia Institute of Technology. The research results
will be integrated into the lab modules of a new course on experimental solid
mechanics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Energy storage and release of sodium-ion battery
electrodes involves a complex set of mechanical and electrochemical processes,
including deformation, stress generation, mass transport, phase transformation,
and chemical reaction. A fundamental understanding of the mechanics and its
strong coupling with other physical phenomena is required to achieve
breakthroughs in the sodium-ion battery technology. The research objective of
this award is to develop an in situ nanomechanical testing platform for the
constitutive characterizations of sodium-ion battery electrode materials. The
experimental framework will be employed to investigate the in situ mechanics of
sodiated/desodiated germanium and germanium-tin alloys, which are two promising
high-performance anode materials for advanced sodium-ion batteries. The space-
and time-resolved constitutive behaviors from experimental measurements will be
incorporated into a continuum computational model for predictive simulations of
the mechanical degradation and morphological evolution in solid electrode
materials.