* 1554683
* CAREER:  The Effects of Process Facilitation on Emotion Regulation
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2023
* Kateri McRae, University of Denver
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 05/31/2023
* USD 785,585.00

We can try to change our emotions by changing our thoughts, but sometimes this
is not successful. This CAREER project tests the innovative prediction that
certain thoughts engage neural processes to improve our ability to regulate
emotions under certain conditions. The researcher, Dr. Kateri McRae, at the
University of Denver, will examine whether what a person is doing and what parts
of their brain are most active, just before changing their thinking, will
matter. When a task uses cognitive processes that overlap with brain regions
used during emotion regulation, then the regulation that follows will be easier
and more effective. The educational portion of the CAREER projects has two
parts. First, undergraduate students will partner with community members to
develop multimedia resources about emotions and emotion regulation that will be
available via the internet. Second, outreach to the community and
underrepresented students will focus on teaching them about making valid
conclusions from psychological science, and learning what neuroscience measures
in particular can tell us. The potential benefits of this project include
discovering the conditions that allow people to manage their emotions. Benefits
also include educating a large community about emotion regulation, neuroscience,
and the scientific method.

The central hypothesis of this CAREER proposal is that overlapping cognitive and
neural processes pave a path for emotion regulation by enhancing cognitive
reappraisal. Central to this hypothesis is that rather than being passive
victims of their emotions, people have tools they can use to influence their
emotions. This project tests the hypothesis that three cognitive processes
facilitate subsequent emotion regulation. The first process involves our brains'
tendency to resolve conflict quickly and efficiently. This project examines the
effects of cognitive processes involved in emotional conflict resolution. The
second process is decreasing self-focus and thus emotional responses. The third
process involves top-down emotion generation, such as that generated via
language or rich narratives. Validated experimental manipulations are used with
multiple measures of affect across six laboratory experiments. Each of the three
candidate processes will be manipulated in their own study. Psychophysiological
measures (e.g., electrodermal activity, heart rate, respiration) and self-
reports will be used, and their effects on cognitive reappraisal examined. Three
fMRI neuroimaging studies (one per process) will test the hypothesis that
overlapping neural processes characterize effective precursors of cognitive
reappraisal. Lastly, a large-scale neuroimaging analysis will collapse across
the three fMRI studies to identify brain regions that are common to successful
cognitive reappraisal across contexts. The educational dissemination plan
includes having undergraduate students work with community members to develop
multimedia presentations, and discussing neuroscience research methods focusing
on valid and accurate conclusions. The implications include a better
understanding of processes that lead to efficient emotion regulation, thereby
enhancing personal well-being and productivity. The implications also include
facilitating better understanding of psychological science across a variety of
populations.