* 1554354
* CAREER: Quantum-mechanical methods for electronic excited states in complex systems
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2022
* Albert DePrince, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 04/30/2022
* USD 473,445.00

Professor Eugene DePrince of Florida State University is funded by the Chemical
Theory, Models, and Computational Methods program of the Chemistry Division to
develop new theories and computer algorithms to aid in the description of the
electronic structure of complex molecules and materials. Dr. DePrince and his
group are developing techniques that describe a system with many electrons using
an approach (two-electron reduced-density matrix: 2-RDM) that reduces the
problem to two electrons, rather than the more familiar and complicated many-
electron techniques. Because the 2-RDM approach is more compact than the many-
electron wave function, these methods enable large computations on complex
systems that are not possible using conventional approaches. The theories and
algorithms being developed facilitate the discovery and characterization of
novel molecules and materials relevant energy conversion, catalysis, and
advanced energy storage technologies. Professor DePrince is also developing
Chemical Physics courses, a lecture series, and online educational content with
the goal of establishing a Chemical Physics PhD track in the Department of
Chemistry and Biochemistry at Florida State University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project aims to develop a theoretical and computational framework for the
description of electronically excited states in complex systems. Here, the term
complex refers to systems that fall into one of two categories: (i) molecules
whose electronic wave functions cannot be described qualitatively by a single
electronic configuration (i.e. strongly correlated systems) or (ii) molecules
embedded in extreme environments, such as those in the vicinity of a plasmonic
nanoparticle, where intense external electric fields can significantly perturb
the electron density for the molecule. For the former category, frequency- and
time-domain methods are being developed to extract excited-state information
from variational two-electron reduced-density matrix (2-RDM)-driven complete
active space self-consistent field computations. For the latter category, the
investigator and his group are developing fully-quantum mechanical approaches
that simulate plasmon-molecule interactions in the time domain. Because the
plasmon is modeled in a quantum-mechanical way, such an approach captures
quantum-mechanical effects, such as entanglement and coherences between plasmon
excitations. Professor DePrince places the codes developed as part of this
research effort in the public domain in either free or commercial electronic
structure packages. Making these codes available to the public facilitates the
discovery of novel materials and the advancement of the numerical methods
developed throughout the project.