* 1554957
* CAREER: Advanced Molecular Architectures for Electronically-Active Radical Polymers
* MPS,CHE
* 03/01/2016,02/28/2021
* Bryan Boudouris, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* George Janini
* 02/28/2021
* USD 504,316.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The development of new electronic
materials is critical to a number of technological fields that range from
defense applications to personal electronic devices to biomedical monitoring and
drug delivery. This project will develop new kinds of plastic electronic
materials that are lightweight, flexible, and stretchable in nature. In
particular, it will establish how such polymers can be used in next-generation
flexible electronic devices. In addition to having robust mechanical properties
these plastics also can be deposited in a manner that is consistent with low-
cost production techniques like inkjet printing. Furthermore, these efforts will
correlate the mechanical properties of the newly-synthesized materials with
electronic properties of plastic materials. In achieving this goal, the project
will be able to establish the fundamental design principles that will allow for
a new class of plastic conductors to be implemented in a number of energy
conversion, energy storage, and biomedical devices, which will aid the nation
and individual consumers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Additionally, this effort will
support the training of graduate, undergraduate, and high school students in the
realm of fundamental and applied polymer science. In particular, a high school
research program will be implemented in order to attract a larger number of
students from economically-disadvantaged families to the polymer science field
so as to increase the diversity of the upcoming population of scientists and
engineers. Also, the general public will have access to these same types of
polymer science lessons due to the development of a massive open online course
(MOOC) that will be focused on polymer synthesis and application. In this way,
the effort presented here will offer significant fundamental polymer science,
polymer engineering, and educational impacts that will allow for the advancement
of new plastic electronic materials in both the near and long
terms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Electronically-active macromolecules have been of
intense investigation for their application in a number of advanced energy
conversion and energy storage modules. To date, the majority of the effort
regarding these polymeric materials and polymer-based devices has focused on
closed-shell polymers containing a rather high degree of conjugation along their
macromolecular backbones. Recently, however, a new class of oxidation-reduction-
active (redox-active), non-conjugated organic entities known as radical polymers
(i.e., macromolecules comprised of non-conjugated backbones and with pendant
groups bearing stable radical sites) have attracted a great deal of attention
for their relatively high performance in electrolyte-supported and solid-state
organic electronic device applications. However, it is becoming apparent that,
without fundamental advances regarding the polymer chemistry and polymer physics
of open-shell macromolecules, the true potential of radical polymer systems will
not be established despite the potential advantages that radical polymers could
have relative to conjugated polymer systems. This effort will address these
issues through the coupling of polymer synthesis with fundamental polymer
physics measurements and the electrical characterization of these designer
macromolecules. In particular, the PI and his group will: (1) synthesize a suite
of targeted macromolecules containing select backbones, stereoregularities, and
open-shell architectures; (2) evaluate the structural, thermal, and flow
properties of these newly-synthesized materials; (3) correlate the electronic
properties of the novel radical polymers to their chemical, thermal, and
structural properties; and (4) refine the design of the macromolecules in order
to elucidate their fundamental structure-property-performance relationships. In
this way, this effort will provide the design principles that should allow for
the radical polymers to be translated into commercially-relevant, commodity
materials. This, in turn, also will allow open-shell macromolecules to play a
larger part in the growing organic electronics industry.