* 1554776
* CAREER: Control and Analysis of Atomic Few-Body Dynamics
* MPS,PHY
* 04/15/2016,08/31/2022
* Daniel Fischer, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Continuing Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 08/31/2022
* USD 800,000.00

Understanding systems of interacting particles is one of the key challenges of
physics, and has both fundamental and technological relevance. Such systems
generally cannot be fully described in closed analytical form (mathematical
expressions that can be written down) for more than two particles, even if their
individual properties and the forces between them are precisely known. This
dilemma is well-known as the "few-body problem" and it limits the extent to
which one can predict the states of the particles (e.g. their positions and
velocities) for any time in the future. Therefore, advancing the knowledge of
phenomena that emerge due to the complex interplay of several particles requires
the joined theoretical and experimental exploration for a wide range of
situations. In this project, few-body phenomena of quantum systems consisting of
atoms, their electrically charged components (electrons and ions), and photons
(the particles of light) will be studied. Such quantum systems represent an
ideal testing ground of few-body physics for multiple reasons: First, few-body
effects in these systems are ubiquitous and relevant to many research fields and
numerous technical applications, particularly in areas such as materials
science, quantum chemistry, biological science, and information processing.
Second, advanced experimental techniques are available which allow manipulation
of the parameters of the few-particle quantum state with a high degree of
control and accuracy. Moreover, modern spectrometers enable snapshots to be
taken of the state's change over time, allowing details of the state's dynamics
to be analyzed. Techniques for the control of atomic few-body systems and for
the analysis of their dynamics which have been developed in the past twenty
years (largely independently of each other) will be combined in the present
project for the first time. This will enable the observation of few-body quantum
phenomena while being able to tune the system parameters, and it will allow
benchmarking theoretical models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;On a more technical level,
this project involves the control and analysis of atomic few-body systems using
laser cooling and manipulation techniques to prepare a large variety of initial
states, ranging from single excited or polarized lithium atoms to large
ensembles of atoms that are cooled to quantum-degeneracy. Systems of only very
few atoms can be confined in a micrometer-sized optical dipole trap and their
interaction can be tuned close to Feshbach resonances. For the analysis, a
"reaction microscope" will be employed allowing the coincident measurements of
the momentum vectors of atomic fragments after ionization of the lithium atoms
by femtosecond or attosecond laser pulses. In essence, there are three
fundamental questions to be addressed in the proposed experiments: First, how do
the ionization dynamics depend on the relative orientation (or helicity) of an
ionizing laser field and a polarized target atom? Such experiments will help to
understand fundamental symmetries and ultimately control the interaction of
laser fields with chiral (atomic or molecular) targets, which play a crucial
role e.g. in biochemistry. Second, how is the disintegration of an atom due to
the interaction with an ionizing field influenced by its environment? This is
experimentally only studied for clusters or solid targets, but largely
unexplored for more dilute systems. Apart from the fundamental importance of
this question, the dependence of the ionization dynamics on the environment is
relevant to the understanding of the damage of biological tissue due to
radiation. Finally, how does the correlated wave function of a few-particle
system change as a function of the particle number and interaction type and
strength? The possibility to "engineer" simple few-body systems and observe such
systems comprehensively would allow one to "simulate" and understand fundamental
quantum phenomena that occur in natural or artificial materials.