* 1554724
* CAREER:Emergent properties in synthetic active matter: self-organization and synchronization
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/2016,02/28/2022
* Jeremie Palacci, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Mann
* 02/28/2022
* USD 636,343.00

Non technical abstract&lt;br/&gt;In Nature, biological systems have evolved to
operate under variable conditions with high fidelity and enviable ability to
tune and self-assemble. For example, cells divide or differentiate and muscles
contract. This wealth of phenomena is possible because living systems consume
energy as a token to pay the toll to achieve those emergent behaviors. The aim
of this CAREER project is to provide a comprehensive picture of the key
mechanisms at stake. To this end, the research team will use a bottom-up
approach with a variety of experiments using artificial and microscopic building
blocks, which consume energy. The ultimate goal is to design novel, smart and
active materials and bring the biological organization to the materials world.
The cutting-edge research program mutually integrates with the development of a
soft matter curriculum for undergraduate and graduate students. Excellence in
education is transverse and relies on two strategic axes: (i) an outreach effort
using the natural appeal of "soft" materials, e.g. splashing ketchup or
cornstarch at science fairs or getting students into the lab, and (ii) a science
"without walls" components with a bi-annual
seminar.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical abstract&lt;br/&gt;The aim of this five-
year CAREER program is to harness the out-of-equilibrium nature of synthetic
colloidal active matter to explore its physical principles and create novel
materials with advanced functionalities. It is an experiment-driven proposal,
rooted in fundamental questions about the mechanisms of emergent phenomena in
nature, here addressed with purely synthetic components. It focuses on self-
organization and synchronization with different realization of self-propelled
particles using microfluidics, colloid science and microscopy techniques. The
thrust of this project is the wealth of original experiments, which complement
each other to provide a comprehensive picture of the key mechanisms required for
the emergence of complexity in non- equilibrium systems. This approach will
pioneer developments beyond soft matter physics and explore uncharted fields of
out-of-equilibrium physics from self-organization to motility in biology. The
creation of novel materials with cutting-edge functionalities will have an
impact in material science, nano- and bioengineering.