* 1554576
* Career: Fundamental Studies of Sustainable Wireless Communication System Powered by Renewable Energy
* ENG,ECCS
* 01/01/2016,09/30/2022
* Lin Cai, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Huaiyu Dai
* 09/30/2022
* USD 500,000.00

Wireless communications powered by renewable energy sources have been emerging
as a promising solution to mitigate the carbon footprints to achieve a green
radio network. However, renewable energy sources, such as solar and wind, are by
nature unstable in their availability and capacity, which poses new challenges
in the design and deployment of a sustainable communication network. The project
will develop theoretical tools, propose new protocols and cross-layer
optimization methods to enable an energy sustainable communication network. The
multidisciplinary project will also foster the integration of research and
education and provide both undergraduate and graduate students, particularly
women and minority students, with an opportunity to participate in various
training projects, which further inspire students to pursue high quality
research with critical thinking. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In a renewable energy
powered communication network, the fundamental design criterion and main
performance metric have shifted from energy efficiency to energy sustainability,
i.e., to ensure the harvested energy can sustain the user demands with
satisfactory quality of service provisioning. In this project, a novel
performance metric, the energy sustainability, is first formulated, based on
which the energy sustainable performance of a communication system will be
systematically analyzed, characterizing the dynamic energy charging and
discharging processes. The analysis will be leveraged to investigate a series of
fundamental research issues on sustainable communication and networking,
including energy management, network deployment, admission control, adaptive
resource allocation, and medium access control. Analytical tools in queueing
theory, game theory, stochastic optimization, probability theory, and random
processes will be used in the design, analysis, and optimization of the proposed
algorithms and protocols to ensure energy sustainable operation of a wireless
communication network. The research outcomes of the project have potential to be
implemented in the next generation wireless communication network powered by
renewable energy.