* 1554044
* CAREER: Suspensions of Noncolloidal Particles in Yield Stress Fluids: Fluid Mechanics, Rheology and Microstructure
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2016,12/31/2020
* Sarah Hormozi, Ohio University
* Standard Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 12/31/2020
* USD 553,974.00

CBET - 1554044&lt;br/&gt;PI: Hormozi, Sarah&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Slurries are
concentrated suspensions of particles in a viscous liquid. They are found in
natural settings, such as landslides, mudslides, and underwater avalanches, and
in industrial settings, such as in tailings from mining operations. The goal of
this CAREER project is to develop experimental and modeling methods to examine
the fluid dynamical behavior of slurries when the viscous liquid that conveys
the particles exhibits complex behavior on its own. The experiments will cover a
wide range of flow regimes, and the results will fill an important knowledge gap
in understanding the flow characteristics of slurries. This understanding is
essential to make accurate predictions of how natural disasters start and spread
and to avoid or reduce their impacts. Data acquired in the project will be
useful to researchers who are interested in developing new models of slurries
and to practitioners who develop equipment to process these complex materials.
In addition, results from the project will be incorporated into classes at Ohio
University. Researchers working on the project will participate in a variety of
outreach programs, including TechSavvy, a career conference for girls and the
adults who support them, and a residential Technology Camp for high school girls
that provides opportunities for young women to explore careers in engineering
and technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER project focuses on the
development of experimental and modeling techniques to investigate rheological
properties of slurries in which the suspending liquid by itself exhibits non-
Newtonian behavior, including a yield stress and shear-thinning. For example,
this is the case in mine tailings and debris, where small colloidal particles
impart non-Newtonian behavior to the suspending liquid that affects the rheology
of suspensions of larger, noncolloidal particles. The experiments will span low-
Reynolds number to inertial regimes, and will determine the particle pressure
tensor and the kinetics of shear-induced migration of the particles. Radiography
and three-dimensional micro-tomography will be used to determine the local
volume fraction of the particles and the local stress components. Particle
imaging and tracking velocimetry will be used to characterize the underlying
microstructure, i.e., the spatial and temporal arrangement of the particles, and
connect it to the macroscopic rheology of the slurry. Results will be used to
develop accurate theoretical frameworks to model geophysical flows and predict
initiation, spreading dynamics and runout, which will help limit the impact of
natural disasters.