* 1554641
* CAREER: Personal Epistemology in Engineering Education
* ENG,EEC
* 04/01/2016,09/30/2022
* Devlin Montfort, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 09/30/2022
* USD 509,336.00

Investigating How Engineers and Students Understand and Use Their Own
Knowledge&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The US currently faces a number of challenges,
from developing new sources of energy to managing increasing health costs -
which require new approaches for their solutions. The pace of technological
change is rapidly increasing at the same time, such that the tools available and
the challenges now being faced are not the same ones that will be present in
only a few years. Thus, it is imperative that the education of engineers
includes teaching them to use existing knowledge in new ways to tackle
unexpected problems. This study investigates how students and engineers
understand their own knowledge, so we will be better able to address students'
existing knowledge models and help them develop into more agile, efficient
engineers of the future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to
understand how students' personal epistemologies (i.e. their assumptions about
what it means to know something, and what counts as knowledge) develop through
their experiences in engineering education and practice. As students learn,
professors teach, and administrators work toward constant improvement, they are
all operating from within their own personal epistemologies and making
fundamental assumptions about how knowledge and certainty are generated, shared
and re-formed. In particular, they all make assumptions about the epistemology
of engineering and what characterizes an engineering way of knowing. Currently,
epistemological assumptions about engineering practice are largely unspoken and
unexamined. Current research suggests that many faculty members operate under
different assumptions about knowledge, and that these differences limit their
potential to develop or collaborate toward common goals. This project will use
interviews and thematic analysis to bring to light the personal epistemologies
of engineering students and faculty, and help orient them to the epistemological
demands of engineering practice. It is essential that central stakeholders
develop tools and resources to discuss their own and others' personal
epistemologies to achieve the goals of engineering education, and to make sure
that those goals remain oriented to achieving significant social good. The
practical goals of this project can be expressed as four specific aims: (1)
Characterize the personal epistemologies of engineering students and practicing
engineers; (2) Critically analyze the implications of students' personal
epistemologies in the contexts of engineering education and practice; (3)
Iteratively develop, implement and assess materials and methods for
epistemological learning in engineering content courses, and; (4) Develop
broader understanding of personal epistemologies among engineering educators and
engineering education researchers.