* 1554519
* CAREER: SusChEM: Develop Unprecedented Chain-growth Polymerization Method to Access Structurally Defined Hyperbranched Polymers
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2023
* Haifeng Gao, University of Notre Dame
* Continuing Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 03/31/2023
* USD 650,000.00

Polymers, a type of giant molecules with high molecular weights, are found in
many facets of everyday life that utilize plastics, rubbers, resins, and foams.
To provide robust and affordable polymer materials, one thrust in polymer
chemistry is to develop efficient and inexpensive polymerization method that can
prepare well-defined polymers with precisely controlled structures, compositions
and dimensions. These polymers could be translated into functional materials for
specific applications, such as self-healing materials, nanocomposites, coatings,
lubricants, microelectronics and nanomedicines. In this project, funded by the
Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program of the Division of
Chemistry, Professor Haifeng Gao at the University of Notre Dame develops a
facile one-pot one-batch polymerization method that can prepare functional
polymers with highly branched structures and very narrow size distribution. The
research program is integrated with an education plan to develop undergraduate-
level polymer courses and outreach activities (which including an annual Notre
Dame Soft Materials Symposium and Science Fair) to stimulate academic-industrial
collaboration and to engage the participation of local high school students and
teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research seeks to develop a conceptually new
polymerization method that applies the copper (Cu)-catalyzed azide-alkyne
cycloaddition (CuAAC) polymerization of ABm (m is greater than or equal to 2)
monomers to form polytriazole-based hyperbranched polymers in one pot. An
important feature of this method is the confinement of the Cu catalyst within
each hyperbranched polymer molecule, resulting in a chain-growth polymerization
mechanism with a linear increase of polymer molecular weight and decreased
polydispersity with reaction conversion. In addition, the dangling B group in
the linear unit is expected to demonstrate higher reactivity than those in the
terminal unit, resulting in a fast conversion of linear unit to dendritic unit
in hyperbranched polymers and ultimately achieving a high degree of branching.
The research activities provide hands-on laboratory training to the graduate and
undergraduate students at Notre Dame in organic synthesis, polymer chemistry,
and various characterization techniques. The students are developing
presentation skills targeting both expert and non-expert audiences. The broader
education and outreach impacts are magnified by: 1) improving the impact of
current and new polymer chemistry topics in the undergraduate and graduate
curriculum, 2) lecturing at local high schools to raise the public awareness of
advanced polymer materials and nanotechnologies, and 3) organizing an annual
Notre Dame Polymer Materials Symposium to stimulate academic-industrial
collaborations and engaging the participation of high school students and
teachers in a local science fair.