* 1554941
* CAREER: Effects of Chemical Aging on the Ice Nucleation Properties of Natural and Anthropogenic Atmospheric Particles
* MPS,CHE
* 02/01/2016,01/31/2022
* Ryan Sullivan, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 01/31/2022
* USD 591,979.00

Through this CAREER award funded by the Environmental Chemical Sciences Program
in the Chemistry Division at the National Science Foundation, Professor Ryan
Sullivan of Carnegie Mellon University is experimentally investigating the
effects of atmospheric chemical processing on ice formation initiated
(nucleated) by particles in the environment. While chemical reactions are known
to alter the freezing properties of ice-nucleating particles, current
representations of the process by which water droplets become ice particles in
cloud and climate models are largely based on the properties of fresh (or
unaged) particles. By determining the changes in the freezing properties of
realistic particle systems, this research advances our understanding of how
human activities affect cloud evolution and ice formation. The development of
educational modules to be loaned to K-12 teachers expose young students to the
chemical science and measurement of air pollution, acid rain, and cloud forming
reactions. The creation of a series of new hands-on laboratory experiments for
the core undergraduate instrumental analysis course at CMU enhances the training
of college students in modern chemical analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mineral
dust and volcanic ash particles, and biomass burning (wood smoke) aerosol, is
chemically aged using a chamber or flow tube reactor to determine the effects of
atmospheric processing by anthropogenic pollutants on the contact and immersion
freezing properties of these important natural sources of ice-nucleating
particles. The effects of chemical aging on particle composition, mixing state,
and ice nucleation properties are determined using an extensive combination of
online and offline single-particle characterization. This includes online
analysis using two single-particle mass spectrometers, and offline
spectromicroscopic analysis of particles and ice crystal residues. The contact
freezing efficiency of these particle systems is directly measured using a
chilled aerosol optical tweezers system. Immersion freezing temperature spectra
of particles immersed in droplets is obtained using a droplet in oil cold plate
system. This research produces a comprehensive dataset regarding the
heterogeneous ice nucleation properties of important types of ice nucleating
particles, and the effects of atmospheric processing on their freezing ability.
The measurements is parameterized to produce improved representations of the
chemical composition and related ice nucleation properties of biomass burning
and mineral particles in cloud and atmospheric chemistry models.