* 1554544
* CAREER: New Annulative Methods for the Synthesis of Complex Meroterpenes
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2021
* Thomas Maimone, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Jin K. Cha
* 04/30/2021
* USD 605,543.00

With this CAREER Award, the Chemical Synthesis Program of the Division of
Chemistry is supporting the research of Professor Thomas Maimone of the
University of California, Berkeley. Professor Maimone is developing new tools
for organic synthesis that are designed to facilitate the construction of
complex polycyclic compounds. One tool allows new rings to be added to a
molecular structure, and another allows the size of the ring to be changed by an
oxidation reaction. Professor Maimone is applying these synthetic tools to
develop rapid and efficient syntheses of molecular structures in a family of
natural product called polycyclic polyprenylated acylphloroglucinols. Members of
this family of are protect neurons and have potential use for the treatment of
neurodegenerative conditions such as Alzheimer's disease. This work is expected
to have broad applications in the field of organic synthesis as well as
medicinal chemistry. As the educational component of his project, Professor
Maimone is developing a research symposium that focuses on introducing community
college students to synthetic organic chemistry research. A hands-on research
component has been designed for intensive summer research under the mentorship
of a UC-Berkeley graduate chemistry student. In addition to activities at the
community college level, this CAREER Award also supports research activities at
the elementary school level as part of the Bay Area Scientists in Schools(BASIS)
program in the Berkeley and Oakland unified school districts. Both of these
endeavors are expected to increase interest in science fields, particularly
chemistry, across a highly diverse student body representative of the larger Bay
Area community.

Professor Maimone is developing new synthetic reactions to facilitate the
construction of complex polycyclic compounds. The simple feedstock chemical
diketene is being developed as a novel annulation reagent. In addition, this
research describes the study of oxidative carbon-carbon bond rearrangements
promoted by hypervalent iodine complexes. These two steps work together to
produce the conserved bicyclo [3.3.1] nonane trione motif of the polycyclic
polyprenylated acylphloroglucinols. Members of this family show a variety of
biological activities, including inhibition of neurotransmitter reuptake
(hyperforin) and choline acetyltransferase enhancement (garsubellin A). The new
synthetic methods and access to this family of natural products may have
applications in the fields of organic synthesis and medicinal chemistry. The
educational plan includes the development of new course material on the
synthesis of heterocycles, which is targeted towards advanced undergraduate
chemistry majors and graduate students. Many chemists work in the pharmaceutical
industry where such knowledge of heterocyclic chemistry is important.