* 1554783
* CAREER: Phase Transitions in Some Discrete Random Models and Mixing of Markov Chains
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2023
* Nayantara Bhatnagar, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2023
* USD 390,815.00

Water turning into ice at its freezing point or the magnetization of iron are
examples of phase transitions in physical systems. At the transition point, the
properties of the system such as the volume or heat capacity may change
discontinuously. The aim of our research is to study phase transitions in
mathematical models using probabilistic tools in the following three directions.
(1) The longest increasing subsequence (LIS) of a permutation is the length of a
maximal subsequence of the permutation in which the elements increase. How long
is the LIS for a uniformly random permutation? This question has been studied in
connection with practical applications such as sorting sequences, disk drive
scheduling and airplane boarding times. The mathematical study of the LIS has
revealed deep and unexpected connections of the problem with areas such as the
theory of random matrices, analytic combinatorics and random polymer models. The
proposed research aims to study the LIS when the permutation is drawn from
certain non-uniform distributions and associated phase transitions. (2) Many
computational problems can be phrased as constraint satisfaction problems (CSPs)
where one wants to find a solution to a number of variables with a set of
constraints imposed on them. CSPs were first studied in computer science
motivated by applications to artificial intelligence. To study the difficulty of
finding solutions in typical rather than worst case scenarios, researchers study
random CSPs. Using sophisticated heuristics, physicists have made detailed
predictions about the location and nature of phase transitions in random CSPs.
The accuracy of these heuristic predictions motivates the importance of
discovering the rigorous mathematical foundations of these techniques. (3)
Interacting particle processes are used to model large, randomly evolving
interacting systems of agents that arise in the natural sciences including in
physics and in biology. The exclusion and interchange random walks are examples
of such interacting particle processes. In the symmetric case the long term
mixing behavior of the random walk and the nature of phase transitions is well
studied. The goal of this research is to understand the mixing properties of
natural asymmetric and weighted versions of these processes. While achieving
these three goals, the principal investigator will create exciting research
opportunities for graduate and undergraduate students in probability, mentoring
programs with the goal of retention of women in mathematics, and the development
of online curricular material.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main aim of this project
is to develop new theory and analysis for phase transitions in certain discrete
probabilistic models. The first problem is to study the limiting distribution of
the LIS in non-uniformly random permutations by way of analyzing the
fluctuations of the LIS as the parameter of the distribution is varied. The
distribution is known to be Gaussian in one regime of the parameter and Tracy-
Widom in another and we aim to study this transition. The second problem is to
study the condensation and clustering transitions in random CSPs such as the
hardcore model on random graphs. The research aims to identify the location of
the reconstruction threshold more precisely in these models and to explore the
connection to the clustering transition. Finally, the proposal will consider
Markov processes such as asymmetric exclusion and interchange and attempt to
relate the mixing times and spectral gaps of these processes to the
corresponding quantities for a single particle and to understand the cutoff
phenomenon for these processes.