* 1554412
* CAREER: Information Accuracy and the Use of Social Data in Planning for Disaster Response
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/01/2016,01/31/2023
* Ashlea Milburn, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Daan Liang
* 01/31/2023
* USD 507,815.00

The focus of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Program award is a
new class of decision models capable of harnessing the power of uncertain social
data for disaster response logistics planning. Information critical in planning
logistics activities to support disaster response has traditionally been
gathered via time-consuming efforts such as on the ground assessments. The use
of social media during emergencies enables collecting a larger amount of
potentially life saving information in a shorter amount of time. Many emergency
managers have indicated their agency would take action on social data only after
verifying it. This strategy contradicts the timeliness of social data; one of
its primary advantages. The products of this research will directly address
concerns over the usefulness of social data in decision making by quantifying
the value of considering the information at various stages of verification.
Results will be translated to the first responder community via a simulated game
to provide a comparative demonstration of response planning with and without
social data. New generations of engineers will be inspired to pursue careers in
humanitarian logistics and infiltrate the field with social data concepts by
integrating games and case studies into courses and summer programs and
involving students in the research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Novel models for
uncertainty in real-time logistics planning will be developed that contribute to
dynamic and stochastic routing in a number of ways. First, traditional
assumptions of homeostatic probability distributions for modeled random
variables do not hold, as crowdsourcing efforts constantly provide new
information regarding the relative degree of belief in the accuracy of uncertain
social data. Second, the models will allow timely action on uncertain requests
instead of delaying resource allocation until the complete demand scenario is
known. Sampling methods to account for these differences will be developed.
Seminars and expert interviews with the first responder community will be
conducted to select relevant routing problem variants and information formats.
These activities will also determine a set of social data logistics strategies
of practical interest to emergency managers, defined as policies that specify to
what extent social data should be incorporated in a response plan. Developed
models will be used to assess strategy performance across a diverse set of test
instances based on real disasters. This will result in the identification of
scenarios where social data integration can improve response efficacy,
potentially transforming disaster response with methods that enable serving
(saving) a larger number of needs (lives) in a shorter amount of time.