* 1554057
* CAREER: Actualizing Latent Diversity: Building Innovation through Engineering Students' Identity Development
* ENG,EEC
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2022
* Allison Godwin, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 03/31/2022
* USD 553,848.00

CAREER: Realizing Latent Diversity: Building Innovation through Engineering
Students' Identity Development&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The U.S. needs new and
innovative engineering solutions to meet the global demands of our growing
economy. However, most engineers graduating from engineering degree programs are
more alike in their problem solving approaches, ways of thinking, and
engineering identities than different in their skills as innovative thinkers.
Students who do not conform to this mold of "being an engineer" are often
alienated from engineering, do not develop engineering identities, and leave
engineering, which reduces the much-needed human potential for innovation. This
project responds to these challenges by characterizing and empirically
understanding how to support students' innovative mindsets and engineering
identities. These underlying differences are termed latent diversity, attributes
that are present as potential sources for innovation, but are not visible or
actualized. The outcomes of this work will help create more inclusive college
classrooms that accept a wider set of students and produce engineers who can
adopt various perspectives for innovative problem solutions. These diverse
engineers will be more prepared to address the grand challenges of the 21st
century. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of this project is to
characterize how diverse students experience the culture of engineering and
negotiate their identities as engineers. This research can actualize the power
of students' alternative mindsets and ways of thinking for greater innovation in
engineering solutions. It also expands traditional strands of research on
diversity in engineering in complementary and transformative ways. This project
uses mixed methods to determine: 1) what kinds of diversity in thought,
innovation mindsets, and attitudes are present in engineering students; 2) how
undergraduate students with latent diversity form engineering identities within
an engineering community of practice over time; and 3) what support, both inside
and outside of the classroom, can be provided to promote inclusion of students
with latent diversity in engineering. To garner this insight, national survey
data from first-year engineering students will be collected and latent diversity
will be characterized by using topological data analysis. From these results,
longitudinal narrative interviews with latently diverse students will be use to
understand students' identity development and how this identity development is
supported or hindered by their classroom experiences and institutional
structure. These narratives will be analyzed both deductively (informed by
identity-trajectory theory) and inductively (based on individual experiences) to
propose a new theoretical framework of latent diversity that can be incorporated
into researchers' and practitioners' ways of understanding how to educate
engineering students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The integrated education plan will
implement pedagogies to support the development of latently diverse students in
first-year engineering programs (a critical time point at which many talented
students are lost from engineering programs). Workshops for educators, co-
curricular support program staff, and engineering administrators and policy
makers will be developed to reframe ways of thinking about engineering students
and enact evidence-based practices that can support students both in and out of
the classroom. This approach will provide key engineering education personnel
with novel tools to develop a new generation of innovators. The integrated
research and educational plan will directly impact the educational experiences
of thousands of engineering students to develop innovative, rather than
homogeneous, engineers.