* 1554488
* CAREER:  Linking Graph Topology of Learned Information to Behavioral Variability via Dynamics of Functional Brain Networks
* MPS,PHY
* 02/15/2016,01/31/2021
* Danielle Bassett, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 01/31/2021
* USD 555,234.00

The ability to learn relational data is critical to human life as we know it. By
learning the relationships between syllables and words, or scientific and
mathematical concepts, we produce language, form lexical knowledge, develop
physical intuition, exercise logical deduction, and attain expertise in our line
of work. Collectively, these relational data can be described as a graph in
which nodes might represent syllables or concepts, and edges might represent
shared content or conditional probabilities. Yet, how the organization of such a
graph impacts our ability to learn the data or the neural processes that affect
learning is far from understood. In this project the PI will use network science
as a mathematical framework within which she will study the human learning of
relational patterns, and answer the question of whether graphs that are complex
in the mathematical or naturalistic senses are more or less difficult to learn,
or require different neural processes. To facilitate broader impacts, these
efforts incorporate art to transform STEM to STEAM, a recent international
innovation that improves long-term retention of content and scientific
reasoning. The goals of this program are (i) to create a local community - from
preschoolers to adults - who are generally inspired by cutting edge science, and
who more specifically appreciate the concepts of network architectures in
natural information and in their brain?s ability to learn that information, (ii)
to produce undergraduate and graduate students trained at the interdisciplinary
boundary between network science and neuroscience to address critical and timely
scientific questions that transcend national boundaries, (iii) to develop course
material that incorporates these timely research questions, and (iv) to polish
and release teaching materials developed in these aims to international and
global collaborators, and to the public. The PI complements these efforts with
extensive mentorship for women and underrepresented minorities in STEM fields,
and with educational outreach efforts in under-served inner-city Philadelphia
schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In particular the PI will use a 3-pronged approach
that employs (i) engineering-based tools from network science to systematically
define graph ensembles of relational information with dissociable topologies,
(ii) behavioral studies to determine which graph topologies are easier or harder
to learn, and (iii) functional neuroimaging to identify predictors of individual
differences in learning. Exploratory work seeks to translate the knowledge
gained in these areas to instructed learning of scientific concepts. In this
proposal, the PI brings together her background in theoretical physics and
network science, her expertise in multimodal human neuroimaging, her current
research program intersecting engineering and cognitive neuroscience, and her
recently developed methods to predict individual differences in learning from
the dynamics of human brain functional connectivity to determine how the graph
topology of relational information maps to individual differences in human
learning behavior as produced by dissociable neurophysiological processes.