* 1554497
* CAREER: Adjustable-Voltage-Ratio Magnetoelectric Transformer: A New Voltage Conversion and Control Device for Smart Grids
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/01/2016,08/31/2022
* Liyan Qu, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 08/31/2022
* USD 500,000.00

Voltage conversion (i.e., converting voltage from one level to another) and
control (i.e., regulating voltage within a certain range around the nominal
value) is an important issue for the secure, economic operation of modern power
grids, particularly future smart power grids with significant penetration of
renewable energy resources. In current power grids, on-load tap-changing (OLTC)
electromagnetic transformers, and step-voltage regulators have been commonly
used for voltage conversion and control. However, the tap-changing mechanisms
used in OLTC transformers and step-voltage regulators are typically a mechanical
mechanism or an electromechanical mechanism with a slow response and can only
adjust the voltage ratio of the transformer or regulator in discrete steps.
Therefore, OLTC transformers and step-voltage regulators cannot meet the
requirement for flexible, continuous, and fast-acting voltage conversion or
control for future smart power grids. The current alternative is the solid-state
transformer (SST). However, SSTs are currently still limited by voltage and
power ratings of the solid-state devices and available circuit topologies.
Moreover, when compared to traditional electromagnetic transformers, SSTs would
require more complicated and expensive thermal management and may have a shorter
life expectancy. This Faculty Early Career Development Program (CAREER) project
will explore and prove a novel concept for a magnetoelectric transformer with a
continuous and quickly adjustable voltage ratio for flexible, fast-acting
voltage conversion and control to help secure the electricity supply,
accommodate more renewable energy integration, and reduce the cost of
electricity delivery. In addition, the project team will build a thriving,
diversified electric power and energy program through the integration of
graduate and undergraduate research and teaching with K-12 outreach. The program
will provide a unique platform for training a new generation of young
professionals to accommodate the changing environment and meet the emerging
workforce and educational needs of the U.S. power and energy
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research goal of this project is to develop a
complete framework for designing, prototyping, modeling, controlling, operating,
and demonstrating a novel adjustable-voltage-ratio (AVR) magnetoelectric
transformer for flexible, continuous, and fast-acting voltage conversion and
control of power grids. The new capabilities of the proposed concept will be
achieved through the development of: (1) a new voltage-controlled
magnetoelectric device with an adjustable permeability to control the magnetic
flux in the transformer, (2) a new transformer configuration for the integration
of the flux control devices, and (3) new models and methods for controlling the
voltage ratio of the transformer by regulating the magnetic flux using the new
flux control devices in the transformer. This project will provide an innovative
and transformative solution for overcoming the existing limitations of existing
voltage conversion and control devices used in power grids. The physical and
operating principles to be established and the models and design framework to be
created for the new AVR transformer will build a solid theoretical foundation
for future development and application of the proposed concept in power grids.
Once the proposed concept is proven by this project, further development and
deployment of the concept will require new advancements in different
disciplines, such as electrical engineering, material science and engineering,
system and control engineering, and mechanical engineering, thus stimulating the
creation of new interdisciplinary research. The findings of this project will
impact the control and operation of the future power grids, and will contribute
to the creation of a smart power grid to provide better electric energy
security, efficiency, and sustainability.