* 1554877
* CAREER: Constraining the Chemical Evolution of Galaxies with MaNGA
* MPS,AST
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2021
* Christy Tremonti, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Sarah Higdon
* 12/31/2021
* USD 948,944.00

The team will investigate the abundance of an element, oxygen, commonly found in
nearby galaxies with star-studded disks of gas. Over time, the gas in a galaxy
is chemically enriched by successive generations of stars. Oxygen is used to
trace how this "pollution" varies within a galaxy and from one galaxy to
another. This information will help solve the important problem of how galaxies
evolve. Senior team members will train junior members. The team will also
develop a hands-on exhibit for a science museum. The innovative exhibit will
mimic the research equipment and use custom software to demonstrate the research
technique. In a tour de force, the team will use a cutting-edge observing
technique - multi-fiber spectroscopy - to measure oxygen variations within about
3600 galaxies from the just-started survey for Mapping Nearby Galaxies at Apache
Point Observatory (MaNGA). The team's specific goals are to (1) quantify the
oxygen gradients, (2) study their relationships to the galaxies' physical
properties, (3) study how winds from a galaxy redistribute its oxygen, and (4)
search for the abrupt falloffs in oxygen that signal accretion of relatively
pristine gas. This research will provide insights into the physical processes
that drive chemical enrichment. Those insights will, in turn, lead to important
improvements in theorists' simulations of how galaxies evolve.