* 1554855
* CAREER: SusChEM: Computational Studies of Light-Induced Dynamics in First-Row Transition Metal Complexes
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2023
* Elena Jakubikova, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 03/31/2023
* USD 575,000.00

In this CAREER project funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics &amp;
Mechanism B Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Elena Jakubikova of the
Department of Chemistry at North Carolina State University investigates how
transition metal complexes based on earth-abundant metals interact with light.
The goal of this project is to utilize computer modeling to obtain a deeper
understanding of structure-property relationships in such complexes, so that new
chromophores, photocatalysts or photomagnetic materials may be designed. The
project lies at the interface of computational, inorganic, and physical
chemistry, and is therefore well positioned to introduce computational chemistry
as a valuable tool to a wide range of students at the high school, undergraduate
and graduate levels. Collection of dyes in the Max A. Weaver Dye Library at
North Carolina State University is used to motivate the research and educational
activities of high school and undergraduate students. The students contribute
developing a set of data for the library to benchmark computational
methodologies for calculations of visible absorption spectra and to screen dyes
for use as chromophores in dye-sensitized solar cells.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
rational design of chromophores and photocatalysts based on first row transition
metal complexes relies on the fundamental knowledge of how these complexes
absorb and dissipate light. In particular, understanding the mechanisms of
nonradiative decay processes, such as internal conversion and intersystem
crossing, is key to our ability to control excited state properties of these
systems. The goal of this project is to obtain a better theoretical
understanding of the mechanism of nonradiative decay in first row transition
metal complexes, so that a more rational approach to the development of
efficient chromophores, photocatalysts, and photomagnetic materials based on
earth-abundant metals can be taken. Specifically, the project focuses on
structural factors that facilitate the ultrafast intersystem crossing events in
iron-based complexes. The project involves computational studies on a series of
octahedral as well as low coordinate iron complexes utilizing density functional
theory, time-dependent density functional theory, nonadiabatic transition state
theory, and nonadiabatic surface hopping dynamics. Minority and economically
disadvantaged students are recruited through the
existing&lt;br/&gt;relationships with the NC Project SEED program and the NSF-
Research Experiences for Undergraduates Program in the Department of Chemistry.
Local high school teachers are provided with the tools and expertiseto develop
and implement their own computational chemistry modules into the Advanced
Placement Chemistry curriculum using the North Carolina High School
Computational Chemistry Server.