* 1554584
* CAREER: The Hidden Monsters: Cosmic Evolution of Obscured Supermassive Black Holes
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2022
* Ryan Hickox, Dartmouth College
* Continuing Grant
* Sarah Higdon
* 07/31/2022
* USD 672,478.00

The team will investigate obscured supermassive black holes (SBHs). Some SBHs
accrete fuel and shine so brightly that they can be detected anywhere in the
Universe. But there are hints that most SBHs are so enshrouded in fuel that they
have, so far, eluded detection. Finding obscured SBHs is not just an exercise in
tidy bookkeeping. Rather, this information will help solve the important problem
of how SBHs and their host galaxies evolve, together, over time. Senior team
members will train junior members. The team will also run videoconferences in
classrooms where guest astronomers discuss their research with high school
students. The team will focus on schools in underserved rural and urban settings
in New Hampshire, Vermont, and Connecticut.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The team's
specific goals are to study (1) how obscured SBHs populate the dark-matter halos
predicted by theorists, (2) how heavily buried obscured SBHs can become, (3)
links between the SBH's degree of obscuration and its hosting galaxy's ability
to form stars, and (4) signatures of obscured SBHs that meet in colliding
galaxies. The team will base their study on new observations with Dartmouth
College's ground-based telescopes, augmented by observations recently available
from space-based missions at infrared and X-ray wavelengths. They will also
apply powerful models recently developed for interpreting the observations.