* 1554558
* CAREER: Molecular Simulation Methods to Probe RNA Dynamics, Thermodynamics, and Interfacial Interactions
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2016,02/28/2023
* Harish Vashisth, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 02/28/2023
* USD 536,000.00

Abstract - Vashisth - 1554558&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ribonucleic acid (RNA)
molecules are not passive information carriers but molecules with versatile
chemical and physical properties that can be exploited for therapeutic,
synthetic biology, materials, bio-sensing, and engineering applications.
Underlying all these applications are the dynamics which encompass a large
number of modes, span vast spatiotemporal scales, and are connected to the
intrinsic structural features (e.g. base-pairing) and some extrinsic factors
(e.g. ligand binding). While equilibrium fluctuations in biomolecules such as
RNA are inherent, it is the large-scale conformational transitions that play a
dominant role in interfacial processes such as biomolecular recognition. Such
dynamic properties are encoded in the physical free energy landscapes of
biomolecules, the robust sampling of which can provide key thermodynamic and
kinetic information on functional conformational ensembles of RNA molecules. The
PI plans to look at conformational dynamics and interfacial interactions in
small RNA molecules to enable their use for the above mentioned
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research proposed is broadly concerned
with two questions: (1) What physical variables are responsible for local and
global conformational transitions in RNA molecules? and (2) How do these
conformational transitions facilitate interfacial interactions of RNA with a
diverse group of ligands (small molecules, short peptides, and globular
proteins)? To gain a holistic view of the dynamics and interactions, the
modeling and simulation effort will be integrated with spectroscopic (nucleic
magnetic resonance) and imaging (electron cryo-microscopy) data. Understanding
the details of how biomolecules undergo large-scale structural changes to elicit
function is an unsolved problem. It is known that biomolecules are flexible and
understanding their dynamics may provide insights into their function. Though,
it is challenging to characterize such dynamic motions because no single
computational or experimental technique can resolve motions at all
spatiotemporal scales. The proposed computational approaches use physical free-
energy landscapes in a reduced set of coordinates (while maintaining the all
atom representation) as opposed to all degrees-of-freedom. The combination of
computational and experimental techniques could establish new approaches to
study these dynamics at a wide spectrum of time and length
scales.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The educational plan will bring molecular theories,
numerical algorithms, and visualization tools to a broad spectrum of STEM
students and educators. It could impact and meet the Next Generation Science
Standards and broaden participation in engineering and biophysics, through a
broader educational initiative devoted to impart "visuospatial" thinking as a
key skill via workshops on a freely-available software tool that will be further
developed and disseminated via training of a wide spectrum of STEM population
(students, teachers, and faculty). The students will travel to regional and
national conferences, and will be exposed to international mentoring and
multicultural experiences through partnerships with flagship engineering schools
in India.