* 1554402
* CAREER: Synthetic Ultra-Wideband Millimeter-Wave Imaging for Tissue Diagnostics
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/01/2016,07/31/2021
* Negar Ebadi, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 07/31/2021
* USD 500,000.00

The proposed work will generate the required fundamental and technological
knowledge for applying the millimeter-wave technology to biomedical imaging
applications. Despite the various advantages of this low-cost technology in a
biomedical imaging context including high image contrasts and suitable
penetration depths, it has not been applied to any such application. The main
reason is its limitation in providing sufficient resolutions for diagnostic
purposes. This proposal offers a novel approach by which an ultra-wide imaging
bandwidth that cannot be realized by any conventional design method is assembled
synthetically. This will improve image resolutions to values previously
unattained. The main focus of this proposal is the development of a portable and
low-cost skin imaging device that can image tissue layers over their depths with
high resolutions while offering satisfactory contrasts between malignant and
normal tissues. By diagnosing skin tumors at an early stage, the device will
save tremendous amounts of time, effort, and patient discomfort and provide
significant cost reductions for both the individual patient and the nation's
healthcare system. The proposed research will be combined with various
educational and outreach efforts aimed at involving graduate, undergraduate, and
high school students in the proposed research and raising their interests in
bio-electromagnetics and bio-medical imaging. The PI will specifically pursue
the following main goals: 1) engaging high school students through the Liberty
Science Center's "Partners in Science" program, 2) recruiting undergraduate
students, especially from female and minority groups, through the Summer
Scholars Research Program at Stevens Institute and motivating them to continue
towards graduate studies, 3) participating in the events and seminars organized
by the Center for Healthcare Innovation at Stevens, 4) establishing a course on
biomedical applications of electromagnetics at Stevens, and 5) disseminating the
results of the research at professional conferences and technical
journals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; "Synthetic" ultra-wideband millimeter-wave
imaging, a novel approach in which an ultra-wide imaging bandwidth will be
explored. This cannot be realized by any conventional design method and is
therefore assembled "synthetically", resulting in significant improvements in
the resolution of acquired images. The synthetic increase is achieved by
dividing the desired bandwidth into a number of adjacent sub-bands or channels.
Each channel contains an antenna unit which is optimized for operation within
that specific sub-band. The sub-band antennas are successively placed in front
of the target, transmit their signals, and record the backscattered responses.
The responses are then processed and combined to synthesize an integrated signal
as if it were collected from a virtual equivalent ultra-wideband antenna. By
using this concept, the challenges of realizing high-performance ultra-wideband
antennas in the millimeter-wave regime are alleviated as each antenna is
optimized within a limited bandwidth. An imaging system will be developed based
on this approach for the detection of skin tumors in ex-vivo tissue
measurements. The system will be optimized and miniaturized through developing a
new class of wideband, miniaturized patch antennas for use in multi-static
sensor arrays. The final imaging setup will be readily applicable to point-of-
care and hand-held imaging devices. The &lt;br/&gt;"synthetic" ultra-wideband
imaging approach will lead to image resolutions which are unachievable using
conventional imaging methods. The approach is versatile, as the number and
position of the channels can be adjusted to cover any frequency range as
required for the specific application. These capabilities bring a whole new
level of functionality to millimeter-wave imaging systems and enable
applications that are not currently feasible. Furthermore, the new class of
wideband, miniaturized patch antennas which will be developed for the
miniaturization and optimization of the final imagining setup will be highly
desirable for a variety of communication and imaging applications in the
millimeter-wave regime.