* 1554429
* CAREER: Towards Integrated Understanding and Informed Mimicry of Insect Flight Mechanics and Control with Application to Micro Air Vehicles
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2016,09/30/2021
* Bo Cheng, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Irina Dolinskaya
* 09/30/2021
* USD 532,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project focuses on connections
between flying insects and innovative micro air vehicle design. Flying insects
display agility, endurance and efficiency well beyond what is achievable by any
engineered aerial system of similar size. Efforts to understand and reproduce
these capabilities are hampered by the challenge of performing controlled
experiments on live insects in reasonably natural conditions. This project will
use magnetic levitation to study the closed-loop mechanics and control of insect
flight with minimal interference from cumbersome mechanical constraints. The
principles derived from these studies will not only allow engineering
translation of appropriate flapping-wing flight strategies, but also will
delimit the regions in which more conventional rotary or fixed wing designs
outperform biomimetic approaches. Understanding how flying insects function with
integrated sensing and control, but limited computational capabilities will
enable development of miniaturized and efficient sensing, and computation
technologies for future micro air vehicles. The products of this research, from
experiments and high-speed footage of insect flight to robotic insect platforms,
will be translated into interactive exhibits for education and outreach, to
increase public awareness and interest in science and engineering.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Through synergistic integration of novel experimental apparatus and
theoretical tools, the flight performance and the underlying dynamics, sensing
and control principles of insect flight will be studied with the support of this
award. In this process, this research will advance the studies of insect flight
with three primary goals: (i) develop a suite of novel experimental apparatus
that overcomes the limitations in the conventional tethered and free-flight
insect experiments, therefore, enable controlled experiments on live insects
engaged in a variety of flight maneuvers; (ii) derive functional models of
insect sensorimotor control system, encompassing low-level reflexive control for
local stability and high-level control for global maneuverability. Such models
will elucidate how insects solve robust flight control problem subjected to
unstable flight dynamics and limited neural control resources; (iii)
systematically compare the aerodynamic power and efficiency between flapping
flight and rotary flight, therefore determining under which condition flapping
wing surpasses rotary wing as a more advantageous solution to millimeter-scale
micro air vehicles.