* 1554835
* CAREER: Dopant-free conductive bioelastomer development
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2024
* Yi Hong, University of Texas at Arlington
* Continuing Grant
* Nitsa Rosenzweig
* 05/31/2024
* USD 500,000.00

Non-technical section:&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award by the Biomaterials Program
in the Division of Materials Research is to develop new unicomponent conductive
biodegradable elastomers. Conductive materials are critical for advanced tissue
regeneration, smart drug release and bioelectronics with high impacts on
research and industry. Current conductive materials contain multiple components,
which result in complexity, instability and uncontrollability of the material
properties which limits their applications in biomedicine. The proposed
unicomponent materials can address above challenges to bridge the gap between
conductive materials and biomedicine. The proposed mechanism and methodologies
can be utilized to design new conductive materials for broader applications, not
just limited to biomedicine. Furthermore, the education and outreach for k-12,
undergraduate and graduate students is integrated with the multidisciplinary
cutting-edge material research. The challenge/interactive-driven teaching will
be designed for undergraduate/graduate students with emphasis on the
participation of Hispanic students and enhanced curriculum. Elementary and high
school students will be encouraged to join the Interaction-Enhanced Biomaterial
Program along with their families and teachers. A workshop on conductive
materials and biomedicine will be further organized for high school,
undergraduate and graduate students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
section:&lt;br/&gt;Biodegradable conductive materials are gaining increased
interest for tissue regeneration, drug release and bioelectronics. The existing
conductive biodegradable materials are multicomponent and contain non-degradable
conductive additives or dopants. These complex components lead to low conductive
stability or dramatically affect mechanical properties with risks of toxicity
and complications in vivo, which limit their biomedical applications.
Furthermore, it is hard to tune the complex multicomponent systems for specific
material properties, and to precisely understand fundamental structure-
conductivity relationships. To this end, this CAREER project will develop
unicomponent, biodegradable, elastic and conductive materials without extra
dopants/additives. The research objectives include 1) understand structure-
property-function of the new polymer system, 2) develop new multifunctional
conductive polymers, and 3) evaluate material biocompatibility and conductivity-
cellular function relationship. Furthermore, k-12, undergraduate and graduate
students will be educated and trained in this cutting-edge research project in
the innovative biomaterial development and applications through various
approaches with emphasis on Hispanic student participation and family/teacher
involvement.