* 1554265
* CAREER: Hybrid Multimode Resonant Switched-Capacitor Converters for Renewable Energy and Point-of-Load Power Delivery
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/15/2016,01/31/2022
* Jason Stauth, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 01/31/2022
* USD 500,000.00

The field of power electronics is expected to grow in scope and importance in
coming decades due to the rising need for renewable energy generation and
storage, increasing adoption of electrified transportation, and to broadly
reduce energy consumption of end-load applications. This research effort targets
circuit, system, and implementation details of new families of power electronics
based on resonant and multimode operation of switched-capacitor (SC) families of
DC-DC converters. The work holds promise in facilitating greatly increased
utilization of high-energy-density passive devices (capacitors and inductors)
while leveraging exponential (Moore's Law) semiconductor scaling, and
transformational benefits of wide-bandgap transistors. Specific research will
address next-generation energy management circuits and architectures for
photovoltaic systems, and large-scale battery arrays used in electrified
transportation and grid-embedded energy storage. The work will also extend more
generally to a variety of applications that demand high power-efficiency in a
variety of load conditions, high power-density (small size), low cost, and
robust variable regulation capability. Research and teaching are integrated
through the training and involvement of Dartmouth graduate and undergraduate
students, specific outreach modules that will engage k-12 students and the
general public, and teaching activities that integrate research topics and
findings in the curriculum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Resonant or hybrid operation of
switched-capacitor (SC) DC-DC converters is growing increasingly attractive as
the approach benefits from many of the fundamental advantages SC topologies have
compared to more traditional magnetics-based topologies (e.g. buck or boost),
but it can eliminate many specific limitations or disadvantages of the SC
architecture. In particular, we address key knowledge gaps related to achieving
highly-efficient variable voltage regulation by using the native switching
capability of SC topologies merged with resonating or soft-charging inductors.
We will explore the prospects of merged-multiphase interleaving that have the
potential to reduce size and cost, while increasing efficiency and power-
density. Variable regulation is essential for most point-of-load applications,
but also promising as a way to implement distributed granular maximum power
point tracking (MPPT) in photovoltaic systems, and online spectroscopic
diagnostic capability in large-scale electrochemical storage systems. We will
also explore multi-mode operation to extend high efficiency across a wide load
range for a range of circuit topologies spanning moderate-low voltage and higher
voltage applications using wide-bandgap devices.