* 1554424
* CAREER: A Computational Framework for Multiscale Optimization of Sustainability for Process Supply Chains
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2016,08/31/2016
* Fengqi You, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Triantafillos Mountziaris
* 08/31/2016
* USD 512,000.00

Abstract - You, 1554558&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Public interest in carbon and water
footprints, ecosystem degradation and resource depletion, are just some of the
environmental issues that drive the process industries to exercise greater
responsibility for the environment in the design and operations of their
manufacturing systems. This increasing emphasis on sustainability has driven a
shift in process systems design and optimization from the traditional,
economics-oriented methods towards methods that balance environmental protection
in addition to economic profitability. This project is aimed at incorporating
sustainability principles systematically and effectively into the design and
optimization of process systems. Previously, such efforts were limited to the
process boundary, while now, the boundary has expanded to include the life
cycle. This broader perspective reduces the chance of unintended externalities
by shifting the problem outside a narrow process boundary. Research challenges
arise from the large size and scope of the problem, the multiscale nature of
models and data, the potential presence of multiple non-cooperative decision
makers, and the high degrees of uncertainty across temporal scales.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to address the
fundamental issues associated with multi-scale sustainability optimization of
process systems design and operations decisions. This work will augment process
systems engineering tools on supply chain optimization, sustainable engineering
and the treatment of uncertainties. The research activities are to develop: (1)
a systematic study and a novel multi-scale life cycle process systems
optimization (LCPSO) framework that accounts for and optimizes the direct and
indirect environmental impacts from the foreground process systems scale and
from the background economy scale through the integration of process systems
optimization with process-based and input-output-based models; (2) a novel and
transformative LCPSO framework based on game theoretical modeling for non-
cooperative supply chains with multiple individual decision-makers to account
for the life cycle environmental sustainability and economic objectives of
individual decision makers; and (3) a new approach for quantifying the role of
uncertainties at multiple temporal scales for LCPSO.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research has the potential to improve the economic competitiveness and
environmental sustainability of the process industries. The results will offer
insights to identify sustainable strategies for (re-)designing process systems
and improving operational practices. The proposed optimization algorithms could
result in benefits beyond the chemical engineering community and find
applications in other arenas where systematic decision-making is pursued. The
results will be integrated into education and outreach activities in the
following areas: (1) incorporation of research findings into "Chemical
Engineering Design Projects" and "Process Optimization" courses; (2) enhancing
undergraduate students' participation in research; (3) working with a local,
predominantly minority high school for an interactive STEM Saturdays outreach
program; and (4) development of a "Distinguished Junior Researcher Seminar
Series" by inviting junior research scholars in related fields to deliver
seminars at the PI's institution.