* 1554866
* CAREER: Ferroelectric and magneto-electric dynamics in multiferroics driven by intense terahertz pulses
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/2016,02/28/2022
* Diyar Talbayev, Tulane University
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 02/28/2022
* USD 579,486.00

Non-technical Abstract: A compass needle shares an important property with the
data-storage layer on your computer's hard drive - they are both magnetized, or
ferromagnetic. Another property of matter that allows data storage is
ferroelectric polarization. This research explores how materials that are both
ferroelectric and ferromagnetic respond to intense terahertz-frequency electric
fields. The goal is to establish the physics of the materials interaction with
the terahertz electric field. One terahertz frequency is more than one hundred
times faster than your computer processor speed. Thus, this research potentially
enables much faster data writing and storage functionality compared with the
technologies available today. This project also aims to educate the next
generation of scientists and engineers and to broaden the participation of women
and under-represented minorities in sciences. The planned activities enhance the
Tulane Science Scholar Program, whose goal is to attract high school students
with exceptional promise in science and mathematics into engineering
disciplines. The participation of underrepresented minorities in science and
engineering is promoted through summer undergraduate student research with
participants recruited from local Historically Black Colleges and Universities
(HBCUs) in New Orleans on paid summer assistantships. The participation of women
in sciences is promoted by the GIST (Girls in STEM at Tulane) program that
provides middle-school girls with the opportunity to meet and work with women
role models in science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract: This project
targets a new frontier in technologically advanced ferroelectrics and
multiferroics by focusing on ferroelectric and magnetoelectric dynamics driven
by intense terahertz pulses, where both spin and lattice are resonantly excited.
The goal is to discover the new physics that emerges when the coupled spin and
lattice motion is coherently driven in the very large amplitude regime. It is
hypothesized that the terahertz-driven dynamic ferroelectric and magnetic
responses can approach in magnitude the responses induced by static electric
fields and allow domain manipulation. Terahertz pulses with peak electric field
exceeding 100 kV/cm are used to coherently excite the large-amplitude ionic
motion along the ferroelectric phonon coordinates. The spin dynamics is excited
via the magneto-electric coupling of spin to the lattice motion. The response of
the order parameters is probed using terahertz and optical probe pulses. This
work aims to create new knowledge of the nonequilibrium response of matter to
intense terahertz pulses and to provide guidance for the design of future
terahertz-frequency magneto-electric and data storage devices.