* 1554560
* CAREER: Architecting Products to Balance Innovation and Competition in Business Ecosystems
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2019
* Babak Heydari, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Rob Stone
* 07/31/2019
* USD 500,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) grant will test the hypothesis
that technology firms can make strategic decisions about the architecture and
modularity levels of systems and products, so that they can use distributed
innovation networks while keeping their competitive advantage in the market. In
a paradigm shift from the traditional model in which product development is
driven by internal R&amp;D activities, new product development in many
technology firms today relies on distributed innovation. In distributed
innovation, a large number of autonomous firms, individuals and communities form
a network through their common connection with an underlying technical system.
Outcomes of this research will significantly improve the ability of engineers
and product developers to make strategic decisions regarding systems
architecture, determine the degree of openness and modularity of product
platforms, and make design decisions to trigger or strengthen long-lasting
cycles of distributed innovation. This, in turn, will increase the social value
of design through more informed strategic architecture decisions. This research
builds on several disciplines including complex and social network analysis,
game theory, engineering design and complex adaptive systems. The educational
objectives include integration of the science of complex socio-technical
networks with engineering design to create activities that foster
interdisciplinary analytical thinking in current and future
engineers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To model the interaction of system architecture
with dynamics of innovation and competition, a three-layer model will be
developed. A unique aspect of the research is that it explores how to use
explicit dynamic network representations of components, knowledge, and market
competition, and the interaction between them to improve architecture decisions
in order to maximize delivered value. In this sense, the research uses recent
advances in network theory to bridge the gap between the engineering design and
organization science and innovation management. Dynamics of modularity will be
used, as a proxy for structural changes in each of these layers and network-
embedded game-theoretic methods will be applied to create analytical models that
relate technology modularity to market modularity. Stylized models will also be
created to explore necessary conditions for stimulating episodes of
architecture-driven, self-reinforcing distributed innovation. The theoretical
thrust is complemented by an empirical study of the rapid transformation of the
commercial wireless industry via absorbing CMOS technology, and the role of
product architecture and changes in system modularity at each stage of this
transformation for the ten-year period that led to the commercialization of
smartphones. The educational activities include designing short, interactive
workshops on complex networked systems for high school students, and
collaborating with a science museum in New York City to integrate some of the
results of the research part of this grant on multi-level networks into their
visual, interactive infrastructure for K-12 students. At the college level,
tasks are aimed at integrating recent developments in complex network methods
and multi-agent systems in engineering design at undergraduate and graduate
levels.