* 1554150
* CAREER: Additive Biomanufacturing an Engineered Stem Cell Microenvironment
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2016,08/31/2022
* Robert Chang, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Wells
* 08/31/2022
* USD 500,000.00

Additive biomanufacturing is the process of printing 3D living constructs where
stem cells interface with biomaterials. A key manufacturing challenge is
establishing control of the printed biomaterial constructs to prevent stem cell
differentiation. This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award supports
fundamental research to provide needed knowledge for advancing the control of an
additive biomanufacturing process (far-field melt electrospin writing). Research
results will lead to producing engineered tissue constructs for regenerative
medicine and, therefore, impact the health sector and competitiveness of the US
biomanufacturing sector. This award also supports engineering education by
integrating 3D printing into the undergraduate curriculum, introducing high
school students to advanced manufacturing, and broadening participation of
underrepresented groups in research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In a far-field melt
electrospin writing process, a polymer material is drawn from a needle to a
collector plate, and the processed polymer from the needle tip constitutes the
charged fiber. The temperature differential between the needle tip and the plate
is defined as temperature gradient; and it affects fiber deformation (that
determines fiber diameter) and electrostatic repulsion between fibers (that,
through relative alignment of multiple fibers, determines pore size in a 3D
polymer construct). A construct with microscale fiber diameters and pore sizes
can facilitate confinement of stem cells to prevent stem cells from
differentiation. The first research objective is to understand effects of
temperature gradient on fiber deformation and electrostatic repulsion between
fibers. A multi-physics model (coupling polymer rheology and electrostatics)
will be developed to predict effects of temperature gradient on fiber
deformation and electrostatic repulsion. The second objective is to establish
relationships between fiber deformation and fiber diameter, and between
electrostatic repulsion and pore size. Scanning electron microscopy will be used
to measure mean fiber diameter and pore size in an electrospun construct. The
third objective is to understand effects of fiber diameter and pore size on 3D
stem cell confinement. A geometrical-based model will be developed to predict
effects of confined 3D focal adhesion site distribution (point contacts between
electrospun fibers and colonized cells) on stem cell function. Experiments will
be conducted to colonize stem cells on the electrospun constructs, and the focal
adhesion distribution will be measured using atomic force microscopy and
fluorescent confocal microscopy. Immunochemistry of stem cell surface markers
will be conducted to confirm stem cell confinement.