* 1554326
* CAREER: Mechanics and Physics at the Boundary Between Solid and Fluid: Probing the Thermodynamic and Kinetic Properties of Gels
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/01/2016,06/30/2019
* Yuhang Hu, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 06/30/2019
* USD 500,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project will develop a new
experimental technique to characterize the nonlinear thermodynamic and kinetic
properties of gels. Defying the classical definitions of solid and fluid, gels
are both solid-like and fluid-like. They are both ubiquitous components of
natural organisms and important engineering materials. Despite their wide
applications, the design of these materials at this stage remains mostly trial-
and-error due to a lack of fundamental understanding of the complex
thermodynamic and kinetic behaviors of gels. The success of this work will lead
to a robust and high throughput technique capable of measuring the thermodynamic
and kinetic properties of soft gels under wide range of conditions and provide a
standard toolbox for engineers to realize quantitative designs based on these
materials. The PI will also expand a Soft Squishy Lab to combine visual, tactile
and hands-on modules to connect human perception of macroscopic properties to
the underlying microstructures of soft materials at appropriate levels for K-12
students.

Gels are composed of crosslinked polymer network and solvent molecules. The
crosslinks prevent the long polymers from dissolving in the solvent; rather the
gel swells and shrinks as the small molecules migrate in and out. The solvent
uptake is a two-way street: as the solvent diffuses into the network, the
network deforms, leading to size and shape changes, while the deformation of the
network also affects the rate and amount of solvent diffusing into or out of the
network. Both the concepts and the behaviors of gels are sufficiently complex
such that ample room exists for additional work to connect principles of
mechanics, thermodynamics, and kinetics to experiments. The proposed study will
develop a technique based on an indentation method for characterizing the
nonlinear thermodynamic and kinetic properties of gels. The new technique will
allow for systematic characterization of various types of stimuli-responsive
gels under different environmental conditions. Based on a complete set of data
from the systematic measurements, an in-depth understanding of the structure-
property relations of gels can be achieved. Consequently, a physics-based
constitutive model will be built.