* 1554720
* CAREER: Scalable MIMO Spatial Filtering and Synchronization for Heterogenous Wireless Networks
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/01/2016,02/28/2022
* Arun Natarajan, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 02/28/2022
* USD 500,000.00

Wireless networks are an integral part of the information infrastructure and are
more widespread than even access to electricity in some parts of the world. The
primary challenge for next-generation wireless networks is data capacity.
Wireless data usage is doubling every year and network providers are projecting
demand approaching one gigabit per user per day. This requires a 1000x increase
in network capacity and 100x increase in worst-case data rates. Since
availability of spectrum is limited, the higher capacity must be achieved by
sharing existing spectrum among users and improving the performance of wireless
systems. However, mobile applications also require low power consumption for
longer battery life. This project will investigate energy-efficient wireless
circuits and systems for next-generation wireless networks that can provide
gigabit per second links while operating under dense spectrum reuse. Developing
such wireless systems has broad impact since improving the availability and
speed of wireless links will expand existing applications as well as enable new
applications that benefit economy and society. Synergy between education and
research includes the creation of an inter-disciplinary course on multiple-input
multiple-output (MIMO) communications. This will allow students to identify and
solve high-impact cross-domain problems in wireless networks. Outreach to high
school students will create opportunities for early exposure to research
environments, strengthening STEM pipelines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Next-generation
wireless networks will be based on MIMO systems for increased capacity in the
context of spectrum scarcity and extreme densification. This project
investigates MIMO circuits and architectures to achieve interference
cancellation and enable next-generation, high-capacity wireless networks. The
increasing speed of CMOS transistors and near-zero incremental cost of
additional transistors allow the development of novel integrated architectures
that leverage multiple transmit-receive elements to achieve higher performance
and interferer tolerance. Ensuring the scalability of such architectures in
terms of energy-efficiency and performance is critical as next-generation
networks transition to larger number of elements and higher performance. This
project will also study circuits and architectures for simplifying
synchronization between elements in large-scale MIMO arrays. Using multiple
elements to improve transceiver frontend performance results in relaxed analog-
to-digital converter requirements, thereby enabling digital-intensive
architectures that further support scalability.