* 1554385
* CAREER:Hierarchical Modeling for Rational Catalyst Design in Aqueous Conditions
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2022
* Rachel Getman, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 04/30/2022
* USD 529,122.00

Abstract (Getman, 1554385)&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will refine molecular
simulation models for catalytic reactions in the presence of liquid water and
apply the calculations to an electrochemical process for ammonia synthesis that
could potentially replace the long-standing, but energy intensive, Haber-Bosch
gas phase process. The research is integrated with an educational plan that
introduces molecular level simulation concepts to students across levels ranging
from high school to graduate research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Theoretical
understanding of catalytic materials and processes has advanced significantly in
recent years due to rapid improvements in computer resources. This theoretical
understanding is streamlining the process of catalyst discovery and moving the
field of catalysis toward the prediction of new processes and materials and away
from the traditional trial-and-error approach. However, this transition has been
slow in the area of liquid phase catalysis, especially electrocatalysis, in
large part because of incomplete understanding of the interactions that occur
between fluid molecules and the catalyst surface. The research proposed here
will take a large step toward better understanding these interactions by
considering their free energies, whereas prior treatments have only considered
their enthalpies. Traditional modeling equations will be refined and extended by
adding, for the first time, free energy contributions due to rotation,
translation, and interaction occurring between liquid-phase molecules and
species adsorbed to the catalyst surface. The refined models will then be
directed toward understanding the reaction between liquid water and gaseous
nitrogen in an electrocatalytic environment to produce ammonia under near-
ambient temperature and pressure conditions. The improved simulation models will
pave the way for a more rational approach to catalyst discovery across a broad
range of liquid phase catalytic reactions, and the educational materials will
train coming generations of students in molecular-level phenomena and the
effective use of molecular simulation tools.