* 1554717
* CAREER: Chemical Imaging through Ultrahigh-Throughput Single-Molecule Spectroscopy and Spectrally-Resolved Superresolution Microscopy
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2022
* Ke Xu, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Jose Almirall
* 08/31/2022
* USD 541,545.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division
of Chemistry, Professor Xu at University of California, Berkeley, is developing
new strategies for super high resolution and super fast chemical imaging. The
technique in development will allow him to obtain spectral signatures of
individual molecules for identification purposes as well as the spatial location
of these molecules. Moreover, his approach collects data at a much faster speed
than what currently feasible, e.g positions of millions of single molecules in
dense samples can be collected in minutes. The technique, once developed, will
be a very powerful approach for the study of single molecules in a complex
environment. For example, it can be used to study uneven distribution of
molecules at nanometer scales or to monitor molecule-nanostructure interactions
in real time, which cannot yet be achieved by existing techniques. This new
measurement capability will find many applications in chemistry, biophysics,
cell biology, and materials science. Professor Xu is also interested in
integrating what he learns from research into his teaching. He is developing new
courses on advanced microscopy and single-molecule spectroscopy for students who
are interested. He is also passionate in mentoring students, especially those
from underrepresented minority groups, by serving as a Faculty Mentor to
Regents' and Chancellor's (RC) and Cal Opportunity (CalOp) Scholars on campus.
Professor Xu and his graduate students are teaming up with Bay Area Scientists
in Schools (BASIS), a local volunteer program, to develop new science demos and
teaching materials for local, underprivileged public
schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor Xu is working to overcome the
limitations of modern super high resolution optical imaging techniques by
bringing together the spatial, temporal, and spectral dimensions of single-
molecule spectroscopy. Indeed, current approaches for the measurement of the
fluorescence spectra of single molecules are limited by low throughput and
spatial resolution. Meanwhile, emerging super-resolution microscopy methods
offer outstanding spatial resolution but no spectral information. Through the
development of a new scheme to spectrally disperse the fluorescence of single
molecules in the wide-field and achieving molecular sparseness via
photoswitching, Xu's approach enables concurrent spectral measurement and super-
localization of single molecules with ultrahigh throughput (millions of
molecules in a few minutes). Such spectrally-resolved super-resolution
microscopy capabilities would offer spectral information for large amount of
single molecules together with nanometer spatial resolution. It can therefore
enable the interrogation of the behavior of single molecules in different
chemical environments, modeling lipid bilayers and cell plasma membranes, and
revealing, in a spectrally and spatially resolved fashion, the mechanisms of
single-molecule fluorescence enhancement by plasmonic nanostructures.