* 1554204
* CAREER: Understanding the Influence of the Framework on Alkali Ion Diffusion in Polyanionic Intercalcation Electrodes
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/2016,10/31/2023
* Brent Melot, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 10/31/2023
* USD 622,773.00

Non-Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;From cellular phones to portable computers,
many major technological advances in recent years have relied on the ability to
store massive amounts of energy within extremely small batteries. These
batteries operate by reversibly inserting and removing Li-ions from
electrochemically active host materials. The goal of this work, supported by the
Solid State and Materials Chemistry program within the Division of Materials
Research, is to build a deeper understanding of what happens at the atomic level
of these hosts as Li-ions move through their crystal structures. This
fundamental knowledge is crucial for increasing the rate at which batteries can
be (dis)charged as well as prolonging their operational lifetime. In parallel,
this work seeks to use this understanding to identify new Earth-abundant
electrode materials for Na-ion batteries in order to reduce the cost of
producing large-scale energy storage systems for electric vehicles and the grid.
This project also focuses on encouraging middle school students in the Native
American communities located within the Los Angeles area to increase their
participation in STEM disciplines. Hands-on teaching demonstrations and
experiments are used to demystify the often puzzling world of electricity and
energy sciences to engage students in science from an early
age.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Polyanionic
transition metal compounds (like phosphates, sulfates, and silicates) are of
critical importance to energy storage because they do not release oxygen on
decomposition, which can exacerbate thermal runaway during cell failure, and are
therefore considerably safer than oxide-based electrodes. While a large body of
work has been dedicated to optimizing the electrochemical performance of these
materials, there is a fundamental lack of understanding about the mechanism for
Li-ion transport in these materials. Unlike state-of-the-art oxides, which
effectively exhibit isotropic changes in their oxygen sublattice, polyanionic
electrodes respond to the removal or insertion of Li through cooperative
rotations of their rigid oxoanionic subunits. This work is focused on
investigating the mechanism of alkali-ion diffusion in polyanionic intercalation
hosts using high-resolution X-ray and neutron diffraction techniques in order to
characterize how the framework of these materials changes on charge and
discharge. Understanding how these densely packed solids facilitate the motion
of positively charged ions through their lattices is critical for accelerating
the design of next-generation materials for batteries that can operate based on
the transport of larger ions like Na.