* 1554589
* CAREER: Multiscale Modeling of Gas-assisted Synthesis and Properties of Porous Nanocomposite Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2016,09/30/2022
* Alexey Volkov, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Alexis Lewis
* 09/30/2022
* USD 500,000.00

Porous materials composed of fine particles or fibers covered by ceramic
coatings have the potential to allow critical advances in the fields of ultra-
lightweight and multifunctional aerospace structures, electric energy
generation, conversion and storage, gas separation and purification, flexible
electronics, optics, and biomedical applications. New methods of synthesis and
processing can provide precise, controllable routes to forming porous
nanomaterials with tunable properties. The factors affecting the growth of
ceramic coatings and performance of synthesized materials, however, remain
unknown to the large extent. This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER)
award supports research on the development of a computational model capable of
establishing a link between parameters of the material synthesis, structure and
properties of raw nanoparticles, and properties of the synthesized materials.
The research will be integrated with the teaching activity, targeted at the
professional preparation of engineers and researchers for the next generation
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the research supported by this award
is to develop a novel multiscale methodology for predictive simulation of gas-
assisted synthesis of porous nanocomposites, composed of a scaffold of
nanoparticles or nanofibers with ceramic coatings, and characterization of their
properties. The emergence of this methodology will pave the way to computer-
aided design and on-demand tuning of properties of porous nanocomposites. A
series of atomistic simulations predicting mechanical and thermal properties of
core/shell nanoparticles and nanotubes will be performed and used to
parameterize three major components of the computational approach including the
kinetic model of the gas diffusion and heat transfer through random meso- and
macroporous materials, kinetic Monte Carlo model of transient growth of ceramic
coatings on the nanoparticle surfaces, and dynamic mesoscopic model of
mechanical deformation and thermal transport in the nanocomposites. The program
of computational experiments will be targeted at revealing fundamental
properties of the mass and heat transfer in porous materials and specific
features of the gas-assisted material synthesis. The mechanical and thermal
transport properties of virtually synthesized nanocomposites will be
characterized in a series of tests focused on the effects of the interfacial
load and heat transfer on the material elastic moduli, fracture toughness, and
thermal conductivity.