* 1554468
* CAREER: Mechanics of a New Family of Auxetic Chiral Composites
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2016,02/29/2020
* Yaning Li, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 02/29/2020
* USD 598,502.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project will investigate the
mechanical behavior of a new family of auxetic chiral composites which have
unique deformation mechanisms and can preserve auxetic effects under large
deformations. Based on an analytical mechanical model, a new family of auxetic
chiral composites will be invented and their deformation mechanisms will be
explored by finite element simulations, micro-polar theory, and mechanical
experiments on multi-material 3D-printed specimens. Simultaneously, due to
significant local rotation, these new micro-architectured materials provide
excellent examples on the application of micro-polar theory and will be used to
advance this important theory in mechanics. The rapid development of additive
manufacturing (3D printing) enables easy and precise control of the geometry and
material composition of micro-architectured hybrid materials, providing
unprecedented opportunities to push the boundary of mechanics. This proposed
research reveals a paradigm for using 3D printing as a tool to advance existing
theories in mechanics and verify new engineering
concepts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The creation of new knowledge on the mechanics of
this new family of auxetic chiral composites is expected to have potential broad
applications in designing lightweight materials for mechanical protection and
energy absorption, biomedical materials and devices to improve public health,
and metamaterials and mechano-adaptive composites. The outreach and engagement
activities are designed to be integrated with the educational activities and
will be largely focused on the engagement and retention of underrepresented
groups by threading seemingly traditional mechanical engineering concepts with
innovation interdisciplinary concepts. This will be accomplished by (1) engaging
participants across all different levels, from graduate and undergraduate
students, elementary and middle school students and teachers to practicing
engineers, (2) strengthening curriculum within and across the disciplines of
mechanics, biomimetics, and additive manufacturing, (3) collaborating with
local, small/middle scale, and high-added value industries to facilitate
knowledge dissemination and technology transfer, and (4) developing K-12
outreach activities to support the newly released Next Generation Science
Standards.