* 1554130
* CAREER:   Action-Minimizing Paths in the Space of Probability Measures
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2022
* Ryan Hynd, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 07/31/2022
* USD 449,942.00

This project involves the study of mathematics underlying systems of equations
that model fluid flow. Applications of such equations include the motion of
plasma in blood flow, oil moving through pipelines, and the formation of gaseous
planets such as Jupiter and Saturn. The aim of the research is to develop
methods that can be used to establish the global existence of solutions to
systems of nonlinear partial differential equations that assert the conservation
of mass and momentum in a variety of physical phenomena. In addition to
involving students in the research, the investigator will pilot a "bridge to
PhD" program intended to increase the number of women and minorities earning PhD
degrees in mathematics at the University of Pennsylvania. The investigator will
also work with educators at Philadelphia's Workshop School to introduce
mathematical modeling into their curriculum and to train teams of students to
compete in the annual Moody's Mega Math Challenge contest for high school
juniors and seniors organized by the Society for Industrial and Applied
Mathematics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The focus of the proposed research is based
on the generalized Euler-Poisson equations, a system of partial differential
equations used to study the behavior of materials modeled as continuous masses.
These equations arise as critical points of an action in the space of
probability measures; the project will investigate sufficient and necessary
conditions for minimizers of this action to exist. Moreover, the investigator
aims is to lay a foundation for a theory of Lagrangian mechanics, calculus of
variations, and control theory in the space of probability measures. To this
end, he will employ methods from fluid mechanics, optimal transport, functional
inequalities, and evolution equations. In collaboration with the University of
Pennsylvania's Center for Teaching and Learning, the investigator will organize
an interactive seminar based on these topics as a way recruit and train
undergraduates to do research. The educational and outreach efforts proposed in
this project will enable the investigator to motivate students at all levels
from diverse backgrounds to use mathematics in tackling some of our most
pressing scientific challenges.