* 1554011
* CAREER:Toward ultra-low energy switching in spintronic devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/01/2016,01/31/2023
* Weigang Wang, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 01/31/2023
* USD 610,003.00

Spintronics makes explicit use of spin, an inherent quantum-mechanical property
of electrons, to achieve novel functionalities. A unique advantage of spintronic
devices is their nonvolatility: the information they store in spin is retained
and remembered even after power is removed from the devices. Nonvolatility is
particularly important for the nascent generation of digital devices in which
transistor dimensions will be reduced to only a few nanometers. At this
nanoscale the power consumption of traditional complementary metal-oxide
semiconductor (CMOS) transistors will be dominated by leakage current; whereas,
for spintronic structures such energy waste can be completely eliminated. An
important draw back for spintronics is the lowest recorded switching energy to
flip electron spins between their up or down states to 1s and 0s in binary
computer instructions, is still more than two orders of magnitude higher than a
CMOS transistor, which severely limits the present applications of spintronic
devices. This CAREER project is focused on exploring novel voltage effects to
greatly reduce the switching energy of spin-based devices. By successfully
demonstrating ultra-low energy switching, this project broadly impacts a wide
range of spintronic devices as well as emergent technologies such as wearable
computers and the Internet of Things, for which zero power consumption in the
standby state is critical and highly desired. The multidisciplinary nature of
the research impacts multiple levels of education, from high school to graduate
students. The education activities build on a proven plan to encourage and
inspire underrepresented minority students in local high schools to pursue STEM
majors in college. Moreover, the PI will leverage this CAREER research to
continue his outreach efforts to improve the general public's understanding of
spintronics through activities such as 'Physics Open House' and 'Physics Phun
Nite'.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award explores energy-efficient
switching mechanisms in spintronic structures. Three different, but
complementary approaches will be studied: (1) switching based on voltage-
controlled interlayer exchange coupling; (2) switching based on voltage-induced
effective field; and (3) switching based on voltage-assisted spin transfer
torque. These three switching scenarios are studied under the context of
voltage-controlled anisotropy and voltage-controlled magnetism. Voltage-
controlled anisotropy is an electronic effect where the magnetic anisotropy
field can be substantially modified, but the saturation magnetization remains
largely the same. Voltage-controlled magnetism is an ionic effect where both the
magnetic anisotropy field and the saturation magnetization can be controlled by
voltage. The dependence of these effects on the Rashba spin-orbit coupling and
Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya Interaction will investigated. Combined with the
experiments that characterize the voltage-induced charge redistribution in
ferromagnets, a complete understanding on different switching mechanisms will be
achieved. Furthermore, these new approaches to dramatically decrease the
switching energy will be directly implemented on high quality magnetic tunnel
junctions with strong perpendicular magnetic anisotropy, which can not only
perform as stand-alone spintronic memories or logic cells, but can serve also as
the essential part of many other spintronic devices, such as lateral spin valves
and spin-Hall memories. The results obtained in this project will transform our
understanding of how magnetoelectric coupling is mediated by both electrons and
ions in ultra-thin magnetic films. Success for this project paves a path to
ultra-low switching energy spintronic devices that could be complementary, or
even superior, to traditional CMOS devices.