* 1554716
* CAREER: Fluctuations, Shape, and Collective Function of Membrane Protein Lattices
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/2016,02/28/2023
* Christoph Haselwandter, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 02/28/2023
* USD 617,167.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Division of Materials Research in
the Mathematical and Physical Sciences Directorate and the Molecular and
Cellular Biosciences Division in the Biological Sciences Directorate co-fund
this CAREER award. It supports theoretical research and education on proteins
and cellular membranes. Proteins are the molecular workhorses of life. A central
paradigm of biology holds that the biological function of proteins follows from
their molecular structure. Cell membranes have traditionally been conceptualized
as passive lipid bilayer envelopes in which dispersed membrane proteins diffuse
randomly, much like icebergs float in the ocean. Membrane protein structure
fully determines how cell membranes control the flow of molecules and signals
between cells and their environment, as well as between different intracellular
compartments, which is essential to all
organisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Following seminal experimental breakthroughs in
the quantitative characterization of cell membrane structure, this model of cell
membranes has been undergoing a radical revision, revealing a complex system of
hierarchical layers of organization and cooperative function of membrane
proteins; many of the key aspects of cell membrane function cannot be understood
by considering only single membrane proteins but, instead, emerge from the
collective properties of protein structure, lipid bilayer-protein interactions,
the supramolecular organization of membrane proteins into protein lattices, and
membrane shape.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The fundamental research goal of this
project is to integrate experimental data on the structure, organization, shape,
and collective function of cell membranes into a physical understanding of cell
membranes across length and time scales leading to a quantitative understanding
of some of the essential biological functions of cell membranes in cooperative
signaling, ion exchange, and regulation of cell shape. The PI will build on
theoretical frameworks and approaches employed previously with great success in
the context of condensed matter physics and materials science. In close
collaboration with experimental groups, the general physical models of cell
membranes conceived in this project will be tested and refined for experimental
model systems of wide biological significance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
interdisciplinary research activities in this project will be closely integrated
with teaching activities at the interface of physics and biology through the
organization of workshops for high school science teachers, and the development
of case studies in biological physics showing at the high school level how
physics can yield quantitative insights into biology. This project will also
provide a range of opportunities for graduate students and postdoctoral scholars
to participate in interdisciplinary research and teaching activities at the
interface of physics and biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Division of Materials Research in the
Mathematical and Physical Sciences Directorate and the Molecular and Cellular
Biosciences Division in the Biological Sciences Directorate co-fund this CAREER
award. It supports theoretical research and education on proteins and cellular
membranes. Cell membranes are one of the fundamental hallmarks of life. For many
of their biological functions, cell membranes rely on the collective properties
of lattices of interacting membrane proteins. The primary research objective of
this project is to build, based on methods from condensed matter physics and
materials science, a novel theoretical framework which captures the physical
mechanisms underlying the fluctuations, shape, and collective function of
membrane protein lattices observed in cell membranes. The principal investigator
and his team will closely collaborate with experimental groups to test and
refine this theoretical framework for both integral and peripheral membrane
proteins, and to thereby discover and describe the general physical principles
underlying key biological functions of cell membranes through two
parts:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(1) Integral membrane proteins are crucial for the
exchange of molecules and signals between cells and their environment. The
function of integral membrane proteins is often regulated by lipid bilayer
mechanical properties and cooperative interactions, as exemplified by
mechanosensitive ion channels and chemoreceptors. Based on these two model
systems, the PI aims to develop a general physical theory which can predict how
bilayer-protein interactions, lipid heterogeneity, and thermal fluctuations
relate to the collective functions of integral membrane protein lattices
observed in cell membranes. This will provide theoretical tools needed to
connect the classic theory of bilayer-protein interactions to in vivo data on
the architecture and collective function of integral membrane protein
lattices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(2) Peripheral membrane proteins allow cells to
regulate membrane shape, which is essential for many cellular processes. It
remains largely unknown how peripheral membrane proteins interact to produce
large-scale transitions in membrane shape. Recent experiments on the N-BAR
protein endophilin have revealed a structural switch in lipid bilayer-endophilin
interactions which generates distinct membrane shapes. Based on these
experiments, the PI plans to establish a general theory which captures the
physical mechanisms underlying endophilin-induced lipid bilayer deformations,
and the architecture and shape of endophilin lattices. This activity is aimed to
provide the foundation for a quantitative understanding of how bilayer-protein
interactions are regulated to produce transitions in membrane shape during
endocytosis and other fundamental biological processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
interdisciplinary research carried out in this project will inform a range of
interdisciplinary education and outreach activities, which will develop novel
teaching approaches and materials integrating physics and biology at the level
of high school, undergraduate, and graduate education.