* 1554117
* CAREER: INTEGRATED WATER, ENERGY, AND EMISSIONS DECISION MAKING FOR A LOW CARBON FUTURE WITH COAL-FIRED POWER PLANTS
* ENG,CBET
* 03/15/2016,04/30/2020
* Meagan Mauter, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 04/30/2020
* USD 500,000.00

1554117&lt;br/&gt;Mauter&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cost-effectively reducing the
human health and environmental externalities of electricity generation is a
defining sustainability challenge of the 21st century. Solutions to this complex
problem will necessarily span multiple spatial scales, time scales, and
disciplines. Integrated decision models can aid researchers, engineering
practitioners, and policy makers in moving away from short-term fixes toward
holistic sustainability solutions. The proposed research develops an integrated
decision model for coal-fired power plants that investigates the effects of
market conditions, regulatory policy, power plant emission control processes,
and materials performance on the cost of sustainable electricity
generation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The most significant barriers to performing
integrated assessment of coal-fired power plants are uncertainties in: 1) the
cost and efficacy of wastewater treatment technologies for compliance with
proposed effluent limitation guidelines issued by the EPA; 2) the interaction
effects between air and water emission control technologies during phased
implementation of emission regulations at coal-fired power plants; 3) the
viability of alternative wastewater treatment processes that circumvent
auxiliary power consumption by using waste heat from coal-fired power plants
processes; and, 4) the role that new membrane materials might play in enabling
these alternative water treatment processes in the future. The proposed work
will fill these fundamental knowledge gaps and integrate the findings into an
aqueous emissions control decision model that guides policy, directs compliance
pathways, motivates technology development, and enables the reliable prediction
of future emissions. The most significant barrier to stakeholders using
integrated decision-making tools to inform compliance pathways at coal-fired
power plants is that these academically-derived tools rarely evolve with
stakeholder needs. The proposed stakeholder engagement process, beginning with a
research prioritization workshop, continuing through yearly meetings, and
culminating in a simple and adaptive decision tool, will increase the
probability that this model is widely adopted. Additional outreach and
educational tasks are integrated into the model development process and span the
K-12, undergraduate, and doctoral research communities. The principal
investigator (PI) will engage high-school students in documenting aqueous
emissions from Ohio River Valley coal-fired power plants. The PI will also
develop a formal mentorship program for undergraduate researchers and doctoral
student mentors in the PI's laboratory that will promote targeted goal setting,
improve skill development, and enhance retention of undergraduate researchers in
STEM fields.