* 1554508
* CAREER: Fundamental Understanding of Self-Assembly by Peptide-Polymer Conjugates in Creating Functional Biomaterials from Multiscale Simulations
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2016,12/31/2018
* Hung Nguyen, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 12/31/2018
* USD 155,078.00

Proposal: 1554508&lt;br/&gt;PI: Nguyen, Hung D.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dynamic
nanomaterials that can change their shape and structure in response to
environmental stimuli hold promise to revolutionize medicine and biotechnology.
However, the current discovery process of such smart materials is slow and often
serendipitous due to the enormously large design space and lack of systematic
knowledge as well as predictive models. Indeed, a quantitative understanding of
their self-assembly and disassembly processes, and how the solution condition
and chemical structure govern their morphological transition, has remained
elusive. To tackle these challenges and harness the full potential of smart
materials, the PIs will build an integrated platform of computer-aided design
using peptide-polymer conjugates by performing molecular simulations in
collaboration with experimentalists in facilitating rapid development of novel
stimuli-responsive nanomaterials for different biomedical applications in cancer
and gene therapy. The proposed research will provide timely and invaluable tools
and knowledge to move the community towards expedited discovery of smart
materials that help improve lives. Specifically, the valuable insights gained
from the simulation studies could lead to the development of a cancer-specific
diagnostic agent and targeted gene delivery system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
specific objectives of the proposed CAREER research program are: 1) elucidate
the sequence-structure-property relationships in solution for de novo design of
PEG-conjugated peptide amphiphiles as delivery vehicles of drugs or bioimaging
agents; 2) examine the crowding effects of the blood serum and in vivo
conditions on stimuli-responsive self-assembly by peptide amphiphiles; 3)
understand the relationship between peptide-polymer conjugate sequence and
structure of siRNA complexes and mechanisms of siRNA complexation by different
conjugates for gene delivery; and 4) investigate the mechanisms of intracellular
trafficking of siRNA complexes and siRNA disassembly by peptide-polymer
conjugates. By integrating multi-scale modeling techniques, the proposed
platform will innovate and accelerate the materials discovery process in two
transformative ways. First, the development of new models and simulations tools
will push the boundary of multi-scale modeling and pave the way for computer-
aided design of novel biomaterials. Second, the integrated in silico and in
vitro and in vivo studies of sequence-structure-properties relationships and
assembly/disassembly processes will generate novel, systematic knowledge that
will be applied to design novel stimuli-responsive delivery vehicles for
improved pharmaco-kinetic properties. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To broaden the
impact of the planned research, the PI will integrate research into the
undergraduate curricula by developing a new course on biomaterial design and
offering research opportunities for undergraduate students. Furthermore, the PI
will launch a summer research program for high school students to perform simple
simulations in his laboratory for one week and will play an active role in
training middle and high school teachers to integrate engineering concepts and
hands-on experiential learning methodologies into their science curriculum.