* 1554891
* CAREER: Geometrical Frustration in Spin Orbit Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 02/01/2016,01/31/2022
* Joseph Checkelsky, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Tom Oder
* 01/31/2022
* USD 550,000.00

Non-Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;The behavior of electrons in solids can often
be understood in analogy with that of free electrons, but with the electronic
mass replaced by an effective mass determined by the detailed atomic and
structural properties of the solid. Deviations from this simple behavior due to
interactions between electrons or additional degrees of freedom of the
individual electrons are at the heart of some of the most fundamentally
important electronic phenomena. Examples range from superconductivity to
magnetism and include material behavior of broad technological relevance. This
CAREER project studies electronic materials that realize new types of
unconventional behavior by combining two typically disparate phenomena: strong
coupling of the spin and orbital degrees of freedom of individual electrons and
low connectivity (frustrated) crystalline lattices that enhance interactions
between electrons. The project experimentally explores this combination via
synthesis, characterization, and analysis of such materials towards new
interacting states to forge the building blocks of the next generation of
electronics. The role of materials synthesis in this research dovetails with its
educational efforts to improve the status of education in crystal growth in the
United States. This involves both crystal growth training at the principal
investigator's institution for a wide range of students and researchers and
exchange activities with internationally recognized centers for crystal growth.
These educational efforts also include K-12 collaborations with science
enrichment activities that feature direct interaction between elementary school
students and educators with the principle investigator and the research team.
These efforts are designed to educate, engage, and inspire these students for
future careers in science and technology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER project studies electronic materials that
combine strong spin-orbit coupling and geometrical frustration. The project
develops such electronic materials tailored to realize tunable spin-orbit
strength via elemental composition and geometrical frustration by using low
connectivity lattices. Probing the interplay of spin-orbit and frustration is
expected to elucidate the manner in which these effects act in concert; this
activity aims at developing this understanding towards the ultimate goal of a
new paradigm for interacting electronic states. New topological, magnetic, and
electronic properties of these systems are evaluated as drivers for
functionalities in the next generation of quantum electronics. The methods used
are materials synthesis, electrical and magnetic characterization, and
collaborative efforts using optical spectroscopy, theory, neutron scattering,
and microwave techniques. The combination of materials science and physics in
both the research and educational aspects of the project aims to overcome the
cultural barrier that is perceived to exist between these fields in the United
States. The research itself is enabled by the interplay of these two fields. The
education goals are targeted activities in crystal growth education and training
at the principle investigator's institution for a wide range of students and
researchers and more broadly to the greater scientific community through science
outreach projects with elementary school students and international exchanges.
This is directly targeted at improving the research and education infrastructure
for solid state physics and science in general in the United States.