* 1554837
* CAREER: The common attentional and dynamical properties of decision making
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2022
* Ian Krajbich, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 08/31/2022
* USD 722,305.00

Over the last decade there has been much interest in how people make decisions,
fueled in large part by data from novel neuroscience techniques. However, these
advancements in data collection have not yet been matched by advancements in our
understanding of the cognitive processes that guide decision-making. This
project seeks to bridge that gap by generating mathematical models of the
underlying choice processes that can then be tested using a variety of data,
such as eye movements during the evaluation of the options, hand movements
during the execution of the choice, and the overall time that it takes to make a
decision. Unlike prior research in decision-making, this project aims to develop
models that can be applied and tested across different types of choices. This
will yield unique insights into the principles that guide all choices, as well
as potentially identify what makes some types of choices unique. The research
will also investigate how individual differences in attention, preference, and
learning strategies, as well as environmental factors such as time pressure,
influence the choice process. This work will advance our basic understanding of
the mind and help us to quantitatively predict the effects of new institutions,
policies, and behavioral interventions. The educational and outreach projects
will expose people of all ages to the exciting work being done in decision
science and will ensure continuing public interest and pursuit of careers in
STEM, through research internships, summer institutes, workshops, and courses
aimed at increasing student interest in this work, as well as televised programs
featuring prominent decision neuroscientists, and public lectures from the PI,
intended to reach a broader segment of the public. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This
project is an integrated research, education, and outreach program focused on
dynamical modeling of the interactions between attention and choice in human
decision making. The program features an innovative computational approach to
studying the features that are common (and unique) to different types of
decisions, creating links between previously disjoint domains, and shedding new
light onto the general principles underlying human behavior. The overall
objectives of this project are to study the attention-guided comparison process
in single and multi-dimensional choice problems and differences in this process
between individuals; to determine what processes guide learning and how they
differ across individuals; to investigate how these processes change in social
settings and whether people learn from others? choice processes; and to develop
and test models of how people assign value to objects in their environment.