* 1554139
* CAREER: Slip-Clutch of Biological Machines: The Kinetochore-Microtubule Interface
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/01/2016,09/30/2022
* Sophie Dumont, University of California-San Francisco
* Standard Grant
* Wendy C. Crone
* 09/30/2022
* USD 500,000.00

Living cells and tissues have the ability to generate directed forces and to
remodel themselves. Both abilities are at the core of what defines life. How can
a cell maintain its mechanical integrity while being dynamic, flexible and
remodeling itself in space and time? We now know a lot about the mechanics of
individual molecules. Our understanding of how molecules work together to create
force in a cell is much weaker. Biological systems are dynamic, sculpting
themselves into new shapes by internal forces to accommodate their roles in a
human or animal body; description of such structures defies current traditional
mechanical frameworks. This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project
focuses on the mechanics of the kinetochore--the macromolecular machine that
segregates chromosomes at cell division. Errors in its function can lead to
disease (such as cancer) and birth defects. The project will develop new methods
to measure the 'slip-clutch' forces that permit the molecules to slide and to
generate forces at the correct times in order to properly separate the new
daughter cells during cell division.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aim of this CAREER
award is to develop and use state-of-the-art tools to control mechanical force
inside cells and probe how force regulates the slip-clutch of biological
interfaces with the cytoskeleton - the cell's roadways and pillars. We focus on
the slip-clutch interface that moves chromosomes at cell division, that of the
kinetochore linking chromosomes to dynamic spindle microtubule tips. The
kinetochore-microtubule interface resides deep inside cells, and thus tugging on
it to probe its mechanics is particularly challenging. To probe its slip-clutch,
we will use a novel and unique combination of tools: we will use laser ablation
to control forces and probe material properties and grip strength (clutch),
protein photomarking to probe dynamics (slip), and molecular tools to probe
mechanisms regulating the interface's slip and clutch behaviors. Together, these
will enable us to test the hypothesis that independent force-based mechanisms
regulate the slip and the clutch.