* 1554554
* CAREER: Investigating the Causes and Consequences of Flat-Slab Subduction in Lithosphere Evolution
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2016,02/28/2023
* Lijun Liu, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 02/28/2023
* USD 497,413.00

How plate tectonics have shaped the Earth's surface geology (such as mountain
building, basin formation, landscape evolution, volcanic activities and
earthquakes) remains a fundamental question in geosciences. Key to this question
is the uncertain variation in the style and dynamics of subduction, a process
when cold oceanic plates recycle into the Earth's warm interior. In this
proposal, the PI plans to study the causes and consequences of flat-slab
subduction (i.e., down-going plates travel sub-horizontally beneath the
lithosphere before sinking into the mantle) that has found to be greatly
affecting the evolution of continents. This problem has been traditionally
difficult to understand due to the many complexities and unknowns involved.
Fortunately, the recent progress in geophysical data acquisition and high
performance computing make it possible to tackle this important geodynamic
problem by building sophisticated physical models using various techniques of
data assimilation. Using the PI's previous experience on constructing both
forward and inverse data-oriented models (similar to how weather prediction
works), the investigator will explore the subduction history in South America,
North America and East Asia, where multiple flat-slab epochs have occurred,
resulting in the unique geology surrounding the Pacific Ocean. Results from this
project will help to better understand not only basic earth evolution but also
formation of natural hazards and resources. This project also aims at enhancing
communication and education of geodynamic research to both researchers and
students. By designing an online interactive geodynamics forum, the PI hopes to
promote geodynamic research to the broad Earth science community, and to help
interested users to learn geodynamic modeling. The PI plans to develop this
geodynamics group into a community hub for doing cross-disciplinary and
collaborative research. With multiple research-based flipped-classroom
activities, the PI also&lt;br/&gt;aims to build a modern education culture, with
a key focus on nurturing high quality geoscientists for the new century.
Finally, this proposal will support and train two PhD students and several
undergraduates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is widely accepted that subduction
processes, especially flat-slab subduction, strongly influence the geological
evolution of continents and mantle dynamics. However, both the causes and
consequences of flat-slab subduction remain elusive. This is largely due to the
difficulty to realistically simulate the complex behavior of subduction and its
interaction with the overriding continents. In this proposal, the PI plan's to
improve our understanding on the physical mechanisms and tectonic consequences
of flat-slab subduction by combining advanced data-oriented physical models with
geological and geophysical constraints. In practice, he will combine well-
established subduction modeling tools (both forward and adjoint methods) with
data constraints from multiple disciplines. This comprehensive modeling effort
will be applied to three different geographic locations (South America, North
America, and East Asia) where flat subduction occurred in the past or is still
going on now, and where several different physical mechanisms for slab
flattening (subduction of various buoyancy features, fast plate motions, and
hydrodynamic suction from the thick overriding plate) could be evaluated. The
multidisciplinary nature of this work will make the results highly relevant to
many other research fields.