* 1554005
* CAREER: A Novel and Fast Open-Source Code for Global Simulation of Stratified Convection and Magnetohydrodynamics of the Sun
* CSE,OAC
* 05/15/2016,10/31/2019
* Chunlei Liang, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Alan Sussman
* 10/31/2019
* USD 507,159.00

Non-technical: &lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to create a unique
capability for predicting density-stratified magnetohydrodynamics of the Sun.
This research is expected to lay a foundation for developing methods for
predicting extreme space weather, e.g. the event of a "super solar flare"
followed by an extreme geomagnetic storm. Scientific results of this research
can help resolve several contradictory predictions from previous studies of the
solar convection zone. The Principal Investigator (PI) will develop and
disseminate a powerful open-source software package to the space weather and
solar physics communities. The success of predicting severe space weather events
has significant societal and economic impacts. PI will design high-order
accurate computational algorithms suitable for exascale simulations that can
perform a billion billion calculations per second. This software will run on
massively parallel distributed-memory computers to predict coupled global and
local dynamics of the sun. PI will reach out to K-12 students and demonstrate
that science of the sun and high-performance computing are exciting and
important to society. Furthermore, PI will leverage outreach efforts with the
High Altitude Observatory of the National Center for Atmospheric Research and
other research centers. This project, thus, serves the national interest as
stated by NSF's mission: to promote the progress of science and to advance the
national welfare.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical: &lt;br/&gt;The goal of this
research program is to develop a novel, fully compressible model and an open-
source community code for global simulations of the solar convection zone that
includes the top near surface shear layer of the Sun. Current leading global
simulations use an elastic approximation whose computational domains extend from
the base of the solar convection zone and must stop at about 0.96 solar radius,
stopping short of the top near surface shear layer where Mach number could reach
unity. This research program will create a powerful open-source community code
CHORUS++ to simulate magnetohydrodynamics of the solar convection zone. CHORUS
stands for Compressible High-ORder Unstructured-grid Spectral difference code
which has been co-developed by the PI for hydrodynamics of the solar convection
zone. CHORUS++ will be equipped with variable mesh resolution capability to
focus on targeted regions of interests. A fast local time-stepping algorithm
will be designed and equipped for CHORUS++ for long-period time integration on
massively parallel computers. These technical accomplishments can accelerate the
original CHORUS code by a factor over 100. The PI will conduct a series of
global simulations of magnetohydrodynamics of the solar convection zone with
unprecedented resolutions for predicting the differential rotation, meridional
circulation, giant cells, and super-granulation of the sun.