* 1554632
* CAREER: Extreme Toughening of HCP Metallic Alloys via Nanospaced Stacking Faults
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/01/2016,02/28/2021
* Suveen Mathaudhu, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 02/28/2021
* USD 500,000.00

Magnesium, titanium and cobalt are included in a particular class of metals with
hexagonal structure at the microscopic level. A barrier to their widespread
application has been the inability, based on the hexagonal structure, to design
materials that have both high strength and high formability; these more often
than not are mutually exclusive. The basic research supported in this Faculty
Early Career Development (CAREER) award will discover and unravel the underlying
mechanisms responsible for the formation of novel toughening features within the
hexagonal structure, and enable processing methods to realize strategic metallic
materials with unprecedented strength and formability. By engineering metallic
alloys that are stronger and tougher, the lightweighting strategies critical for
developing vehicles and transportation systems that reduce our dependency on
fossil fuels and decrease pollution can be realized. More so, the knowledge can
be extended to make advancements in other industries, such as aerospace and
healthcare, thus promoting further technological advancement and economic
growth. This research will be inherently multidisciplinary in nature and provide
research and education opportunities for the many students from underrepresented
groups at University of California Riverside.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While planar
boundaries such as nanotwins have shown the ability to concurrently strengthen
and retain ductility in nanocrystalline metals with body center cubic and face
center cubic crystal structures, they have not proven feasible in hexagonal
close-packed materials based on the difficulty in twinning as the grain size
decreases. Literature clues and preliminary observations by the PI have shown
that nano-spaced stacking faults may afford synergistic strengthening and
ductility for hexagonal close-packed materials, but there are no experimental
studies that systematically investigate the intrinsic ability for these
materials to form such features, nor the factors that lead to their formation,
spacing and density. Thus, the objective of the research supported by this award
is to explore and unravel the effects of grain size, texture, stacking fault
energies and deformation conditions on the fault nucleation and growth kinetics
that govern size, spacing and density. Next, the magnitude and mechanisms of
mechanical property improvements achievable will be investigated. Lastly, new
theoretical constructs will be developed to explain the formation, strengthening
and ductility observed in these novel materials.