* 1554892
* CAREER: Morphodynamics of Mixed-Energy Tidal Inlets: Sediment Bypassing Processes
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2016,02/28/2023
* Maitane Olabarrieta Lizaso, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Baris Uz
* 02/28/2023
* USD 694,185.00

Human populations are strongly concentrated along the coasts, and, consequently,
coastal ecosystems are some of the most impacted and altered environments
worldwide. Due to increasing sea levels, storm intensities, and human
activities, there is an imperative need to better understand coastal dynamics of
flow, sediment transport, and changes in the shape of the coastline and the
bottom (morphodynamics). In the past, there have been some attempts to better
understand and predict coastline evolution of sandy beach areas. However, the
morphodynamic response of estuary mouths and adjacent beaches to external forces
(e.g. waves, tides, river outflows) has received less attention. Nonetheless,
inlets play a key role in the wide variety of ecological, economic, and social
services associated with estuaries, adjacent beaches, and back-barrier lagoons.
The main research goal in this project is to improve the understanding of the
processes that lead to sediment movement from the up-drift to down-drift sides
of inlets (bypassing). The investigator will analyze the main processes driving
the shoreward movement of sand bars over the ebb-tidal delta, how the
interactions between tidal and littoral currents affect the alongshore and
cross-shore sediment transport, and the morphodynamic effects of infragravity
waves. The project will also integrate hands-on experiences to enhance the
teaching of coastal morphodynamics. Lessons and educational material will be
produced targeting secondary science teachers, and graduate students will be
trained and engaged in applying a constructivist approach to learning at the
high school level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Morphodynamics of mixed-energy inlets
are still not fully understood due to the complex feedbacks between the highly
temporally and spatially varying morphology, waves, tides, river flow, and
mixing conditions. One of the key processes in inlet morphodynamics is sediment
bypassing. It affects the sediment budget of the inlet and the sand supply to
the inner bay, ebb-tidal delta, and adjacent beaches. The most accepted
conceptual models of inlet bypassing could benefit from two improvements. First,
swash bars over the ebb-tidal delta may not be transported onshore due,
primarily, to wave swash. Rather, they should be primarily transported by
surfzone currents. Additionally, littoral currents contribute to inlet bypassing
not only in wave-dominated inlets, but also in mixed-energy inlets. How tidal
and littoral currents interact and affect sediment transport along and across
the inlet deserves additional studies. Infragravity waves might also play a
primary role in inlet sediment transport processes. This project will combine in
situ and remote field observations and numerical modeling at Matanzas Inlet (FL)
to analyze, test and integrate these processes to improve our knowledge of
sediment transport processes in mixed-energy inlets. Findings generated from
this study will help us better understand the dynamics of these coastal systems
and will contribute to the improvement of coastal management tools and
procedures. Research and education will be fostered through the involvement of
the graduate students in the PI's research group in the educational activities.
In collaboration with the Center for Precollegiate Education and Training at the
University of Florida, the team will develop and implement four 5E lessons
geared towards high-school students and secondary science teachers. This
collaboration will provide the graduate students with the opportunity to be
trained in the application of the 5E instructional method at the high-school
level. A curricular module for a Summer Institute course directed towards
secondary science teachers will also be developed as part of this project. The
direct interaction with teachers through this collaborative initiative will
promote the inclusion of key concepts of coastal morphodynamics (beach,
estuaries, and inlets) into the K-12 science curriculum.