* 1554880
* CAREER: Physics of Chromatin: Micromechanics of Active Chromatin Dynamics in Interphase
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2022
* Alexandra Zidovska, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 08/31/2022
* USD 800,000.00

The DNA molecule in our cells is wrapped in a structure known as chromatin.
Understanding how chromatin changes in time presents a fundamental question and
is currently a frontier in both polymer physics as well as cell biology. To a
physicist, chromatin is an exquisite example of a confined polymer that is
subject to the basic laws of physics. To a biologist, chromatin controls gene
expression, and physically packages DNA in a way that facilitates its
replication and segregation. This project will lead to a mechanistic picture of
active chromatin dynamics in live cells by integrating quantitative experimental
approaches and theory from different areas of physics. As a part of this
research program, the PI will develop a science outreach component targeting
high school girls from underrepresented groups. In addition, this research
program will provide training opportunities for undergraduate and graduate
students, who will be trained in advanced optical microscopy techniques, small
angle X-ray scattering, image processing, data analysis and polymer physics and
statistical mechanics approaches pertinent to active systems far from
equilibrium.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The sequence of the human genome has been
known for two decades, but its dynamic organization in three dimensions remains
elusive. Methods like fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) or chromosome
conformation capture (HiC) provided insights into how the chromatin is organized
inside the cell nucleus. Methods like chromatin immunoprecipitation combined
with sequencing (ChIP-Seq) helped us to map specific molecular players to the
specific genomic loci within the context of specifics functions, usually
transcriptional regulation. While FISH and HiC methods give us a 3D picture of
the genome organization, it is a static picture, i.e. a snapshot of the human
genome in a given time; they do not inform on the dynamic reorganization of the
genome inside the nucleus. Similarly, Chip-Seq provides us with a snapshot of
detailed 1D localization information of proteins of interest. The missing link
in our current understanding is the connection between the 1D genomic
information and the 3D topology of the cell nucleus in real time. The overall
goal of this research program is to generate this missing link, i.e. to develop
a real-time imaging of spatiotemporal dynamics of the human genome and
understand the underlying physical laws. This research focuses on elucidating
physics underlying nonequilibrium soft matter. Specifically, it presents
development of an experimental and intellectual framework for understanding the
dynamic behavior of chromatin in live cells. Chromatin presents an active
polymer living in a confinement of the cell nucleus that is very different from
the soft matter traditionally studied. It undergoes dynamic rearrangements,
dissipates energy and exhibits self-organization far from thermodynamic
equilibrium. Understanding of the mechanism/s beyond the active dynamics and
elucidating the physical laws that such dynamics follows, will teach us new
physics and its role in nuclear physiology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
being jointly supported by the Physics of Living Systems program in the Division
of Physics and the Cellular Cluster in the Division of Molecular and Cellular
Biosciences.