* 1554283
* CAREER: Inorganic-organic hybrid microreactors for fundamental study of cellulose hydrolysis by solid acids
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2023
* Michael Timko, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 08/31/2023
* USD 548,000.00

Abstract - Timko, 1554283&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Lignocellulosic biomass, the
world's most abundant source of renewable carbon, has promise as a carbon
neutral energy source that can reduce the need for petroleum-based
transportation fuels, chemicals, and materials. Despite progress and promise in
the development of many different biofuel technologies, none have proven
economically viable. The aim of this project is to make production of fuels and
chemicals from biomass resources economically viable. The poor economics of
biomass conversion to fuels and chemicals is due largely to biomass resistance
to chemical and biological attack. Three primary platforms have been suggested
for overcoming biomass recalcitrance: bio-oil (produced via pyrolysis or
liquefaction), synthesis gas (produced by gasification), and sugars (produced by
pretreatment and enzyme hydrolysis). This proposal is focused on the sugars
platform. Biomass resistance to chemical and biological attack makes recovery of
monosaccharides expensive and energy intensive. The focus of this work is on
recovery of monosaccharides from biomass because this step represents the key
technological bottleneck of the sugars platform.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
overarching research objective is to understand the fundamental mechanisms
underlying cellulose deconstruction by solid acid catalysts. The approach
consists of constructing polymer-brush modified inorganic particles (silica and
zeolites) as catalytic microreactors with: 1) well defined external acidity that
can be accessed by insoluble substrates, 2) cellulose
targeting/binding/solubilization capability to provide interactions between
insoluble substrates and external surfaces of solid acids, and 3) internal pore
structure and acidity that can be accessed by small molecule soluble substrates.
Specific questions to be addressed include: 1) what is the structure/property-
function relationship that governs the catalyst-biomass interaction? 2) what is
the relationship between solid acid strength and cellulose hydrolysis activity?
and 3) what is the balance between external acidity for cellulose chain breaking
and internal acidity for hydrolysis of soluble fragments? The project will
evaluate the hypothesis that solid acid catalysis is mediated by binding
interactions and strong acidity. In the research component of this work, the
underlying mechanism will be examined to: 1) understand the role of catalyst-
cellulose binding and the relationship between cellulose adhesion, catalyst
surface composition, and catalyst surface energy; 2) quantify the role of
acidity and answer the question of how acidic the surface needs to be to
catalyze hydrolysis; 3) differentiate between external acidic sites required to
convert insoluble substrates and internal acidic sites capable of converting
soluble carbohydrates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research objectives will be
integrated with educational and outreach aims to use data-to-music tools to
attract students from under-represented backgrounds to careers in STEM fields
and to appeal to a broader range of learning styles at the undergraduate level
than are typical in the engineering curriculum. In terms of education, the use
of music to teach difficult concepts to college engineering students could
improve training for students that use learning styles that are not typical in
engineering curricula. This has potential to improve retention of a broader
range of undergraduate students in STEM fields. The outreach component will
provide K-12 students with an engaging STEM experience that empowers rather than
alienates. Specifically, research data will be converted into sounds and re-
modulated into music, a process that mimics the practice of sampling that drives
hip hop music composition.