* 1554555
* CAREER: Enabling Morphology Control in Polymer Thin Films via Solvent Vapor Annealing
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2022
* Julie Albert, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 06/30/2022
* USD 500,000.00

Abstract - Albert - 1554555&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Among the next generation of
technologies are ones aimed at designing medical diagnostic devices that are
more accurate and portable; electronic devices that are faster, smaller, and
capable of storing more information; and energy sources that are cleaner without
sacrificing capacity or power. Polymers with tunable nano- and micro-structured
morphologies can address the challenges associated with accomplishing these
goals, and solvent vapor annealing (SVA) is becoming an increasingly important
technique for controlling polymer morphology. The goal of this proposal is to
show that thermodynamic equilibrium principles can enable a priori selection of
SVA conditions to guide experiments aimed at achieving a specific self-assembled
morphology in a polymer system of interest.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
thermodynamic framework and high-throughput experimental methods should
facilitate rapid discovery of next generation polymer materials, improve the
accessibility of designer polymers, and enable morphology control in polymer
films to address technology challenges in the health, energy, and environment
sectors. Thermodynamic equilibrium principles will be used to enable a priori
selection of SVA conditions to guide experiments aimed at achieving a specific
self-assembled morphology in a polymer system of interest. The PI plans studies
aimed at predicting polymer phase behavior during SVA. She will apply
thermodynamic principles to describe and predict the phase behavior of block
copolymers in this process. These thermodynamic equilibrium principles are
proposed to enable a priori selection of SVA conditions to guide experiments
aimed at achieving specific self-assembled morphologies in polymer systems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aim of this project is to come up with an efficient
manufacturing method for the production of tailor made polymer thin films, which
could greatly benefit industry. Educationally, the proposed work should provide
many opportunities for undergraduate students to carry out independent research
projects and inspire some of them to pursue graduate studies. Activities carried
out with the Society of Women Engineers (SWE) will contribute to increasing the
representation of women in engineering undergraduate classes, doctoral programs,
and leadership positions in industry, government, and academia. Specifically,
undergraduate researchers enrolled for Independent Study have to develop
research-related outreach workshops. The student-designed workshops will be
integrated with existing outreach programs at Tulane such as the Girls in STEM
at Tulane program, which targets 5th through 7th graders.