* 1554626
* CAREER: Smart Protection for DC Power Systems: Distributed and Proactive Approach
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/01/2016,12/31/2021
* Jae-Do Park, University of Colorado at Denver
* Standard Grant
* Aranya Chakrabortty
* 12/31/2021
* USD 515,000.00

The goal of this CAREER project is to provide intelligent solutions for the
protection of DC power systems, which is one of the major barriers that prevent
the wide usage of DC power systems. DC power systems have received renewed
attention due to a number of advantages they offer such as easy renewable energy
resource integration, high-efficiency long distance transmission, and simpler
interface with power electronics converters. Applications including microgrids
with distributed generators, bulk power transmission, and low-voltage
distribution systems have been investigated. Compared to the control aspects of
DC systems that have made sizable progress, system protection has always been a
challenge. The research in this project will address protection issues for DC
power systems, which will contribute to strengthen this important aspect of DC
power systems and can have impact in various applications. The outcomes of this
research will be disseminated through presentations and publications and can be
readily utilized in conjunction with other aspects of distributed and/or
sustainable energy applications using DC power to generate synergistic effects
on overall system reliability improvement. Furthermore, this CAREER project will
academically and financially support graduate students and nurture them to
prepare them as part of the next generation of multidisciplinary researchers and
engineers. The project will also provide ample research opportunities to
undergraduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While the advantages of DC power
systems are great, the protection aspects of these systems have posed many
challenges such as effectively breaking a DC arc, autonomously locating a fault
within a microgrid, DC protective equipment, and certainly the lack of
standards, guidelines and experience. Although protection technology for AC
systems has a long history and maturity, it is difficult to directly apply these
to DC systems because of the non-alternating nature and fast dynamics of DC
power. Hence, the protection of DC power systems needs to take a fundamentally
different approach than that of existing AC technologies. Furthermore, complex
modern power systems need more intelligence for their operation. In this CAREER
project, a distributed and proactive approach will be taken as the project aims
to provide a protection framework with swift fault current interruption,
accurate fault location, and distributed decision-making based on various system
parameters. The protection framework development will contain integrated
components for fast responses and compound decisions based on multi-dimensional
intelligence. The successful execution of this CAREER project will contribute to
the implementation of modern power systems that take advantage of DC power. The
activities will result in multidisciplinary research as well as educational
impacts, and will provide interesting and useful applications of advanced
artificial intelligence, control and communication technologies to the power and
energy system area.