* 1554293
* CAREER: High-Frequency Power Electronics for Wireless Power Transfer Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/01/2016,01/31/2019
* Khurram Afridi, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Anil Pahwa
* 01/31/2019
* USD 500,000.00

Wireless power transfer (WPT) has the potential to address critical energy
issues and improve human quality of life by enabling autonomous charging in
applications ranging from electric vehicles (EVs) and robotics to portable
electronics and biomedical implants. For example, efficient, small, cost-
effective, and safe WPT can drastically reduce the need for expensive and bulky
on-board batteries, extend range, and accelerate EV penetration. With road
transportation accounting for 22% of the nation's total energy consumption, and
EVs having roughly twice the well-to-wheel efficiency of gasoline vehicles, even
a 10% EV penetration (versus 0.1% currently) can reduce total U.S. energy
consumption by over 1%. Likewise, effective WPT can enable artificial heart
pumps without abdominal-wall-penetrating electric cords, avoiding discomfort and
potential infections for the 5.1 million people in the U.S. suffering from heart
failure. Furthermore, WPT could eliminate the need for cardiac pacemaker battery
replacement surgeries for nearly 40,000 people each year. However, for WPT
systems to be widely adopted, considerable improvements are needed in their
performance, cost, and safety. This integrated research and education career
development proposal aims to make fundamental advancements in high frequency
(1-100 MHz) power electronics technologies, and leverage exciting WPT
applications to ignite the imagination of future engineers. The program's
broader educational goals include the training of graduate research students and
undergraduates participating through the University of Colorado's (CU) Discovery
Learning Apprenticeship Program. Incorporating the research findings into the CU
Boulder curriculum and disseminating the findings more broadly through a free
online course will enhance the education of students at CU Boulder, community
colleges, and elsewhere. The special outreach program for K-12 students,
involving them in the development of educational videos, will expose them to the
role of power electronics and WPT in improving energy efficiency and quality of
life and attract them to pursue STEM careers.

To achieve the goal of WPT systems with efficiencies, sizes, and safety
comparable to their wired counterparts, the research objectives of this CAREER
proposal are to: (i) generalize the new step-superposition (S2) analysis
technique introduced by the PI, and use it to better model and optimize high-
order resonant converters with multiple inverters and/or rectifiers; (ii)
innovate and employ high-order resonant converter topologies with appropriately
controlled multiple inverters and rectifiers in inductive and capacitive WPT
systems to compensate for changes in coupling and achieve higher efficiency and
reduced size, then validate these advantages through a series of experimental
prototypes; and (iii) demonstrate feasibility of near-field focusing and
enhanced safety through distributed WPT architectures by measuring the reduction
in fringing fields in prototypes with different coupler geometries and
configurations. This effort enables important innovations and fundamental
advances. The step-superposition analysis technique developed here will enable
accurate modeling and optimization of high-order resonant converters for WPT
applications, as well as other power electronic and complex system applications.
Having demonstrated high-order multi-inverter/rectifier resonant converters to
provide efficiency benefits in grid-interfaced power electronics, the PI's
research will introduce advanced variants that effectively compensate for
variations in coupling in WPT systems, while operating at fixed frequency within
ISM (i.e., industrial, scientific and medical) frequency bands. The research
will also yield a better understanding of near-field phased-array field focusing
through distributed couplers designed for field cancellation, and enable
dramatic advances in power transfer densities and safety.