* 1554482
* CAREER: Fundamental Security-Performance Tradeoffs in Power Grids
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/01/2016,09/30/2022
* Ali Tajer, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Ale Lukaszew
* 09/30/2022
* USD 500,000.00

The electric power industry is undergoing profound transformations due to the
advances in information technology, stronger interoperability between the
physical and cyber layers of the power grid, and deregulations in the energy
market. Driven by such transformations, power grids are rapidly growing in
scale, complexity, and interconnectivity, evolving towards distributed networks
of interconnected platforms. Such highly distributed structures expose the power
grid to critical security vulnerabilities, such that malicious attackers bent on
subverting grid operations can severely disrupt energy generation, transmission,
and distribution. The overarching goal of this proposal is to develop a
decision-theoretic approach that includes security as an integral part of design
mechanisms in power grids, rendering inherently secure
operations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The key motivation underpinning this research
is that current monitoring, protection, and control functions in power grid are
designed without regard for inherent security, and security vulnerabilities are
addressed as they are discovered. Therefore, while being effective against
naturally occurring faults and attacks with known structures, they lack the
versatility to counter highly structured and unknown cyber attacks. This
research produces a decision-theoretic framework that integrates security
assurance as a constraint in designing and optimizing monitoring and control
modules while adopting realistic models for adversaries, and incorporating
generation, transmission, and operational constraints. This framework
facilitates analyzing the tradeoffs among three key measures involved in
designing any operation in monitoring and control modules, namely: (i) security
guarantees, (ii) quality the operation (through assigning appropriate
performance measures that match the goals of the operations), and (iii)
amenability to real-time and scalable implementation. These analytical results
guide transformational approaches to secure monitoring and protection in future
energy grids. These approaches are in contrast to the existing designs in which
operations are optimized for attack-free settings, and are augmented by
additional modules to enhance their resiliency against known classes of cyber
attacks. The methods used to address these problems include mathematical
statistics, statistical signal processing, optimization theory, and power
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The educational component of this research is
composed of several parts aimed at students ranging from the high school to
graduate level, and from several demographics. In collaboration with the
Engineering Ambassadors program at Rensselaer, this research program develops
interactive presentations for high-school students about modern notions of cyber
security, which involve undergraduate students as assistants in delivering these
presentations, who will be also involved in research. Other educational
components include designing curricular materials for graduate courses on the
applications of modern data science in power grids.