* 1554105
* CAREER:Coordination of neural activity during memory formation in humans
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/2016,01/31/2022
* Ueli Rutishauser, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Fritz
* 01/31/2022
* USD 628,507.00

Memory disorders affect millions of Americans today. Despite decades of work, we
have little ability to prevent, improve or treat such memory disorders. With the
support of the National Science Foundation, Dr. Ueli Rutishauser and colleagues
are investigating how humans form, store, and retrieve memories. The research
supported by this CAREER award is to observe the electrical activity of brain
cells in the hippocampus, an area essential for the formation of new memories.
This research is performed with human patients who are undergoing surgery to
treat epilepsy. To localize seizures, these patients are implanted with small
wires in different parts of their brain, which allows researchers to investigate
the human nervous system at the cellular level. Using this technique, we will
investigate how human brain cells change when new memories are formed.
Specifically, we will test whether the formation of new memories is dependent on
a brain rhythm called the "theta oscillation", and if disruptions of this rhythm
lead to poor memory. Critically, theta oscillations can be changed by electrical
stimulation, which offers a potential technique to improve memory. Through
education, teaching, and mentoring, this CAREER award will enable new
researchers and organizations to take advantage of the extremely valuable
opportunities for basic research on the human nervous system presented by
intracranial electrophysiology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research objective of
this CAREER award is to investigate the neural mechanisms of human declarative
memory at the level of individual neurons and circuits. We work with patients
implanted with micro-wire electrodes who volunteer to participate in this
research. The objective is to understand how the activity of networks of neurons
is coordinated such that their collective action results in plasticity and long-
term memories. We test the hypothesis that hippocampal theta oscillations
mediate this process by combining human single-neuron recordings, behavioral
testing, electrical stimulation, and computational modelling. This approach will
allow us to assess the role and necessity of oscillations for the formation of
human memories and thereby demonstrate the role of a specific oscillation in
human cognition. We study i) how the activity of two distinct functional types
of hippocampal neurons that we identified (visual and memory selective) are
modulated by the theta rhythm; ii) how modulation of theta oscillations by
shifts in spatial attention impacts individual neurons; and iii) whether there
is a causal link between theta oscillations and memory strength. This study
could provide, for the first time, a link between the cellular mechanisms of
plasticity, oscillations, and human memory. The educational objective is to
closely involve students in all aspects of the research, and to incorporate
research results into classes, workshops and a K-12 outreach program. The
resulting methods, tools, and datasets will be publicly released.