* 1554623
* CAREER: Engineering Polymeric Nanomaterials for Programming Innate Immunity
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2024
* John Wilson, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 08/31/2024
* USD 599,596.00

1554623&lt;br/&gt;Wilson, John T. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;From cancer, to
diabetes, to chronic infections, the immune system plays an important role in
nearly every disease. Accordingly, harnessing the power and specificity of the
immune system has enormous - and still largely untapped - potential to improve
human health and wellbeing. However, there remains an unmet need for
technologies that enable precise and predictable "programming" of the correct
type of immune response necessary to yield a desired outcome. The goal of this
CAREER Award is to develop new synthetic materials for "encoding" immunological
messages and tightly regulating their delivery to the organs, cells, and
pathways of the immune system. In this project, the PI will engineer pathogen-
mimicking polymer nanoparticles for connecting multiple immunological cues and
controlling their delivery to the appropriate pathways of immune cells. This
research will address a fundamental need for new tools to control, understand,
and harness the immune system, which has significant ramifications in vaccine
development, cancer immunotherapy, and treatment of autoimmune disorders.
Additionally, the PI will develop an educational outreach program that creates
hands-on, inquiry-based lessons to catalyze active engagement in STEM areas by
underprivileged students, while increasing awareness about vaccines, the immune
system, and the importance of interdisciplinary science.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Cells of the innate immune system sense invading pathogens or
pathologic tissue using pattern recognition receptors (PRRs) that are localized
on the cell surface, in endosomal compartments, and in the cytosol. There is
significant crosstalk between these pathways, and the integration of signals
emanating from these receptors triggers and shapes the phenotype and magnitude
of an immune response. Therefore, regulating the delivery of immunologic cues to
multiple receptors localized throughout a cell is fundamental to controlling
immunity. Yet, there is a lack of synthetic tools that can properly encode these
physicochemically diverse cues to confer a desired immunological
outcome.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this CAREER Award is to engineer
a versatile nanoparticle-based platform for tightly regulating the delivery of
molecularly defined activators of innate immune sensing pathways. The overall
hypothesis is that polymer vesicles (i.e., polymersomes) engineered with
precisely tunable pH-responsive and endosome-destabilizing activity will enable
the coordinated delivery of multiple defined cues that trigger surface,
endosomal, and cytosolic PRRs. The hypothesis will be tested and the objectives
accomplished through the following specific aims: 1) engineer polymersomes with
precisely tunable pH-responsive disassembly, release, and endosome destabilizing
properties; 2) investigate the effect of polymersome properties on the activity
of PRR agonists delivered alone or in combination; 3) demonstrate that
polymersomes loaded with multiple PRR agonists can be used to program the
magnitude and phenotype of an immune response. The proposed research will lead
to the following impactful scientific and technological outcomes: 1) the
development of materials that will expand the repertoire of druggable targets
for immunomodulation; 2) fundamental knowledge of how materials can be designed
to coordinate signaling events originating from diverse receptors localized
throughout the cell; and 3) elucidation of new material-dependent synergies
between PRRs that can be exploited to enhance and shape immune responses to
vaccines. By integrating the synthesis of novel and rationally designed
materials with fundamental studies elucidating new structure-activity
relationships, the proposed research will have intellectual merit within the
biomaterials, biopharmaceutical, and immunology
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To enhance the broader impacts of this CAREER
Award, an integrated research, education, and outreach program will be developed
to 1) train high school, undergraduate, and graduate students in bioengineering
research; 2) create and broadly disseminate hands-on, inquiry-based educational
science lessons for middle and high school classrooms; 3) catalyze active and
authentic engagement in STEM subjects by underrepresented and/or underprivileged
middle and high school students; 4) increase awareness about vaccines, the
immune system, and the importance of interdisciplinary teams in solving grand
challenges in health care. In collaboration with the School for Science and Math
at Vanderbilt (SSMV) and the Vanderbilt Student Volunteers for Science (VSVS), a
'students teaching students' initiative will be launched to develop an
inexpensive, hands-on, mobile lesson kit for middle and high school students in
Nashville public schools and rural Tennessee communities.