* 1554254
* CAREER: Promotion and Prevention of Flame Acceleration and Deflagration-to-Detonation Transition: from Fundamental Study to Practical Consideration
* ENG,CBET
* 02/15/2016,09/30/2022
* V'yacheslav Akkerman, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Harsha Chelliah
* 09/30/2022
* USD 500,910.00

1554254 - Akkerman&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The issues with flame acceleration from
subsonic (deflagration) to supersonic (detonation) are extremely important in
terms of combustion applications and fire safety. This phenomenon is the so-
called deflagration-to-detonation transition (DDT). From the practical
consideration, the DDT influences countless disasters such as explosions in
power plants and mining accidents that claim hundreds of lives every year. On
the other hand, the DDT can be employed, in the energetically cheapest manner,
in advanced technologies such as micro-combustors and pulse-detonation engines
of the next-generation hypersonic aircrafts. From the fundamental viewpoint, the
DDT is an intriguing phenomenon with applications ranging from combustion and
inertial confined fusion to Thermonuclear Supernovae. This project will
characterize the mechanisms promoting, controlling or preventing the DDT
process. Specifically, a possibility to replace a hazardous detonation in
energy-efficient manufacturing with a safer alternative combustion regime will
be verified. Additionally, a novel predictive tool for fire safety and DDT risk
assessment will be developed. The latter is exceptionally important for West
Virginia, the Principal Investigator's region where the state economy is
significantly based on the coal and shale gas mining industry. The research
component of this project will be integrated with an extensive educational
module promoting awareness of advanced combustion research in schools and
colleges. In particular, the educational module will include an on-campus annual
training program organized in a partnership with the NASA-sponsored West
Virginia Space Grant Consortium. The educational module will be also translated
into the Concept Warehouse - an NSF-sponsored web-based instructional
tool.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research component will include computational
endeavors and analytical efforts. It will be devoted to the interplay between
several factors influencing the processes of flame acceleration and detonation
triggering such as mechanistic and thermal boundary conditions of a burner,
combustion instabilities, turbulence, and combustible or inert dust impurities.
Specifically, the influence of the local variations of the fuel properties on
the global flame propagation scenario will be scrutinized, and the properties of
a newly-found, near-sonic quasi-steady deflagration regime will be identified.
It will be determined if this regime is controlled by viscous effects, and if it
can be an alternative to a detonation. Finally, the evolution of a methane-air-
dusty fire in a coal mine will be quantified. It will be identified how the fire
evolution depends on the type, size, concentration and distribution of the
combustible or inert dust, the fuel parameters and the geometry of a mining
passage. This will provide the knowledgebase for the novel preventive fire
safety strategies.