* 1554748
* CAREER: Surface Interactions in Dissimilar Material Joining
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/01/2016,10/31/2016
* Jingjing Li, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Steve Schmid
* 10/31/2016
* USD 500,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award supports fundamental
research on two thermo-mechanical joining methods for dissimilar metals, namely
magnetic pulse welding and friction stir blind riveting. Joining methods for
dissimilar metals are in increasing demand as manufacturers are seeking creative
new structures or components with tailored properties for lightweight vehicles,
energy production, consumer devices, or next-generation medical and electrical
products. However, dissimilar metals cannot be joined using traditional fusion-
based welding methods. This research will provide much needed understanding to
enable wide applications of these two joining processes for dissimilar metals.
Additionally, this award supports activities to engage students in research;
raise students' interest in science, technology, and engineering; and promote
advanced manufacturing to a broader population.

The research objectives are: (1) to correlate local mechanical properties
(modulus, hardness, and toughness) across the joining interface with joint
performance (tensile strength and failure modes); (2) to test the hypothesis
that tensile strength of both magnetic pulse welding and friction stir blind
riveting joints increases as the thickness of intermetallic compound or
amorphous layer increases up to a few tens of micrometers, and then decreases as
the thickness increases further; and (3) to establish the relationships between
process parameters, microstructure, and joint performance properties. To achieve
the first objective, joining samples will be prepared using the two joining
processes under various process conditions. Local mechanical properties will be
quantified through micro-cantilever, micro-hardness, and in situ scanning
electron microscope testing. Joint performance will be measured through macro
quasi-static tensile tests. To achieve the second objective, intermetallic
compound or amorphous layers of different thickness values will be produced by
adjusting process parameters, and the thickness will be measured by analyzing
scanning electron microscope or transmission electron microscope images of the
interfaces. A relationship between the layer thickness and tensile strength will
be established. To achieve the third objective, a set of governing equations
from kinetic modeling of diffusion or intermetallic compound growth will be
coupled with finite element simulation to predict the local phase and
microconstituent volume fractions, which together with the contact conditions
under different process parameters will be used to predict the joint
performance.