* 1554752
* CAREER: Harnessing the reactivity of neutral aminyl radicals for complex heterocycle synthesis
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2021
* Jennifer Stockdill, Wayne State University
* Continuing Grant
* George Richter-Addo
* 04/30/2021
* USD 649,999.00

Through this CAREER Award the Chemical Synthesis Program in the Chemistry
Division is supporting the research program of Professor Jennifer L. Stockdill
of Wayne State University. Professor Stockdill is investigating reactions to
form unusual chemical structures. This project provides a new method to prepare
ring structures with carbon and nitrogen atoms (heterocycles), including
molecules with a diverse set of biological actions such as vasorelaxant,
cytotoxic, and neurologic activity. In the educational component of her project,
Professor Stockdill is developing an outreach program centered on advancing
women and minorities in science. Through her research program, graduate and
undergraduate students receive hands-on training in research. The outreach
activities teach basic organic chemistry concepts to middle school girls,
instilling in them an enthusiasm for scientific discovery, whether they
ultimately pursue a career in science or not. Additionally, Professor Stockdill
collaborates with Alchemie to develop new activities that aid in learning
challenging organic chemistry concepts, and she creates new active learning
modules for existing undergraduate and graduate courses.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor Stockdill is investigating novel cyclization
reactions employing neutral aminyl radicals. These reactive entities have
potential for the rapid assembly of complex molecules that may be useful for a
range of subsequent applications. Neutral aminyl radicals have not previously
been widely applied in synthetic sequences because of their unpredictable
reactivity. Dr. Stockdill is testing a hypothesis regarding the necessary
properties of the complimentary radical acceptors, as well as developing methods
for aminyl radical generation that avoid the use of toxic reagents. This project
provides access to a variety of both known and novel heterocyclic molecules with
a diverse set of bioactivities. This research also provides new understanding of
the reactivity of neutral aminyl radicals, enabling the rapid assembly of
polycyclic heterocycles. The development of new reaction methods that can be
employed predictably by chemists contributes broadly to improving the scope of
chemical space available for screening libraries. Ultimately, access to new
molecules may enable the identification of molecular structures that probe
fundamental biological functions and potentially serve as lead targets in
pharmaceutical applications. Undergraduate and graduate student are trained in
organic chemistry and the scientific method in the Stockdill laboratory. Dr.
Stockdill also creates a network of female scientists through the development of
a Graduate Women in Science (GWIS) group, so that women can find the support
they need to be successful in graduate school and throughout their careers in
science.