* 1554856
* CAREER: Role of Ternary Alloying Elements in Eutectic Solidification
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2016,09/30/2022
* Amber Genau, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Madison
* 09/30/2022
* USD 447,023.00

Non-Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The process of microstructure
formation during solidification in multi-component metal alloys is of great
interest from both a fundamental scientific and an applied point of view. One
particular class of materials, called eutectics, includes everything from cast
iron to lead-free solder to self-assembling composites. New experimental data is
necessary to develop theories and models that can accurately predict the
behavior of these complicated materials, enabling their use in advanced
applications. A variety of carefully controlled experimental conditions will be
used to investigate the behavior of selected three-component eutectic systems.
State-of-the-art and novel techniques for solidification will be used to
investigate the relationships between processing parameters, structural details
and material properties. The work also includes a well-rounded program for the
recruitment and professional development of graduate, undergraduate, and high
school students in the field of materials science and engineering. This work
includes the organization of a Materials Camp program for area high school
students. The PI will work with UAB's Center for Community OutReach Development
(CORD) to expand the diversity of the applicant pool as well as to improve
curriculum and assessment tools for the program, which will be shared with other
Materials Camps across the country. Finally, the PI will use her international
experience to develop global competency in undergraduate STEM students through
redeveloped history courses taught both on campus and
abroad.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As part of the larger class of multi-component,
multi-phase materials, eutectics structures are of both fundamental and applied
interest. While binary eutectics with non-faceted interfaces are relatively well
understood, theories describing the structure and behavior of more complicated
eutectics - those with three or more phases and/or with faceted interfaces - are
not well developed. These complex eutectics have received renewed interest in
recent years for their potential as in-situ composites and self-assembling
metamaterials, but better control of microstructure development is needed to
realize these advanced applications. A variety of carefully controlled
experimental conditions will be used to investigate the behavior of selected
ternary eutectic systems, both regular and irregular. State-of-the-art
techniques for directional solidification, along with a novel method of equiaxed
solidification, will be used to investigate the relationships between
anisotropy, crystal mismatch, non-equilibrium pattern formation, alignment of
interphase boundaries, prevailing orientation relationships, and the evolution
of crystallographic texture. In addition, the role of ternary elements on
eutectic spacing and interface stability will be elucidated through in situ and
post processing observation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal includes a well-
rounded program for the recruitment and professional development of graduate,
undergraduate, and high school students in the field of materials science and
engineering, building on the PI's established track record in these areas.
Graduate and undergraduate student researchers from UAB's diverse student body
will carry out the research, developing experimental, analytical, and
communication skills that will prepare them for future careers in industry and
academia. These students will assist the PI in organizing and running a summer
Materials Camp program for area high school students. The PI will work with
UAB's Center for Community OutReach Development (CORD) to expand the diversity
of the applicant pool as well as to improve curriculum and assessment tools for
the program, which will be shared with other ASM Materials Camps across the
country. Finally, the PI will use her international experience to develop global
competency of undergraduate STEM students through redeveloped history courses
taught on and off campus.