* 1554171
* CAREER: Computational toolbox for improved security of power systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/01/2016,02/28/2021
* Konstantin Turitsyn, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 02/28/2021
* USD 500,000.00

The power grid is undergoing probably the most transformative transition in the
last 50 years. Introduction of clean, but intermittent (sporadic) renewable
generation introduces an unprecedented level of uncertainty in power system
operation. At the same time, the society becomes more and more dependent on
reliable supply of power and more sensitive to power outages. Maintaining power
system security i.e. its ability to withstand most probable disturbances is an
extremely challenging computational problem. Millions of scenarios have to be
fast screened by operators and contingency plans prepared for the most dangerous
of them. The key objective of this project is to develop a new generation of
computational techniques that would allow fast identification of safe operating
conditions that ensure system resiliency. This goal is achieved by targeted
advancement and adaptation of the modern optimization and nonlinear analysis
techniques to specific challenges faced by the power industry. The latter
include but are not limited to: estimation of the reserve levels necessary for
operation in the presence of intermittent wind power, identification of the most
dangerous line failure scenarios, design of the most effective remedial action
plans. The research activities will be tightly interwoven with educational and
outreach efforts. Undergraduate and high-school students from underrepresented
minorities will be engaged in the group research and educational activities. A
set of simple power-grid inspired puzzles will be developed that will help
explaining the kids and the broad audience the technical trade-offs and
decisions that the power industry faces today. Finally, a new EdX introductory
class on power systems with interactive problems will be developed to help in
educating the future engineering workforce for power industry.

The technical approach of the research part of the project is based on the idea
of constructing safe operation regions in parameter space where the solution is
guaranteed to exist and satisfy operational constraints. These "certificates"
are formally an inner approximation of the feasibility set and can be
constructed via a variety of techniques with the most general relying on Sum-of-
Squares approaches. The project will explore possible representations of the
mathematical problems appearing in the context of power system operations and
security assessment. Specific problems that will be naturally addressed with the
developed mathematical tools include computation of do-not-exceed limits,
screening of N-1 and N-2 contingencies for AC power flow model, verification of
the remedial actions, assessment of voltage stability margins in the presence of
distributed reactive power control. A hierarchy of certificates will be
constructed covering the conservativeness - complexity trade-off curve and their
effectiveness demonstrated on standard IEEE testcases. The implementations of
the codes will be linked to the mostpopular academic analysis packages and
release under open source license in public domain.