* 1554800
* CAREER: Synthetically Controlled Plasmon-Multiexciton Interaction in Semiconductor-Metal Hybrid Nanostructures
* MPS,CHE
* 02/01/2016,01/31/2023
* Jing Zhao, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* John Papanikolas
* 01/31/2023
* USD 808,404.00

The Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry (MSN) Program in the
Division of Chemistry at the NSF is funding Professor Jing Zhao of the
University of Connecticut (UCONN) to develop synthetic methods to improve the
emitting properties of nanostructures based on metallic and semi-conductor
nanoparticles for applications in lasers. When excited by light, nanosized metal
and semiconductor crystals exhibit unique optical properties. By combining these
two types of particles in one hybrid structure, increased light emission is
expected. The hybrid nanomaterials can potentially be used in nanolasers and as
the photon source in communication systems. New courses are being developed for
undergraduate and graduate students focusing on optical nanomaterials and their
applications in many different technologies. The research is also being
integrated into outreach activities for high school students participating in a
UCONN chemistry summer workshop, where the synthesis and optical
characterization of metal and semiconductor nanocrystals are being undertaken.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this research, a novel synthetic method is being
developed to fabricate a one-to-one metal-semiconductor hybrid nanostructure
with control of its spatial relationship. Geometric and optical factors that
modulate the plasmon-exciton interaction in the hybrid nanostructures are
identified so that the hybrid materials can be effectively designed and
fabricated for desired applications. A correlated structure-property approach at
the single particle level is used to understand how the geometry of the
nanostructures determines their plasmon resonance and exciton/multiexciton
emission efficiencies. This work focuses on the plasmonic effect on the
multiexciton emission efficiency of single semiconductor nanocrystals and its
dependence on interparticle distance, excitation conditions and geometry of the
nanostructures. The research includes: (i) producing new synthetic strategies to
fabricate one-to-one, metal-semiconductor hybrid nanostructures; (ii) revealing
the relationship between the geometry of the hybrid nanoparticles and their
optical properties at a single particle level; and (iii) elucidating the plasmon
enhancement mechanism of the multiexciton emission efficiency of single
semiconductor nanocrystals. The knowledge and nanomaterials obtained from the
research is applied in the design and fabrication of optoelectronic devices to
improve their performance. In collaboration with the UCONN Early College
Experience program, short courses and laboratory demonstrations for high school
teachers and students are also being developed. Moreover, female and
underrepresented minorities are encouraged to participate in the research
program.