* 1554021
* CAREER: Bound state in the continuum lasers.
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/01/2016,05/31/2019
* Boubacar Kante, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 05/31/2019
* USD 500,000.00

Abstract title: Bound State in the Continuum
Lasers&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nontechnical description: The goal of this CAREER
project is to investigate and develop for the first time a novel type of laser
that exploits novel confinement method for light inspired by early theoretical
works in quantum mechanics. The method can "plug leaky light cavities". Instead
of limiting cavity losses the usual way by reducing the size and number of
passages through which light can escape, the cavity's design produces
destructive interferences that, when light is allowed to escape, the multiple
waves that do so through different passages end up canceling each other.
Discovering new principles that enable novel optical properties is crucial for
the progress of photonics, the science of light. Applications of these systems
include novel light sources for communication, sensing and imaging. This
fundamental and experimental work will study the creation of those sources using
engineered and nanostructured materials. The novel sources satisfy many
requirements of photonics devices including small footprint, low power
consumption and enhanced light-matter interaction. The project is integrated
with rigorous educational and outreach activities, including training
specialists in nanophotonics, classroom and laboratory training for students,
outreach activities (annual winter workshop) towards underrepresented
communities from high-school to graduate levels with emphasis on veterans and
African-Americans.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical description: Photonics sources
and lasers have fundamental applications in science and technology. The
discovery and implementation of new physical principle allowing unprecedented
optical properties is paramount to the progress of photonic systems. The
proposed research will investigate the physics of Bound State in the Continuum
(BIC), initially believed to be a mathematical curiosity in quantum mechanics.
BIC devices, especially sources, can be designed and implemented by engineering
the decay channels of light in photonics systems using symmetry considerations.
BIC offer a new paradigm in building unprecedented photonic cavities, sources
and systems with unique optical responses. Applications of these systems include
novel light sources with intriguing polarization singularities, surface lasers,
sensing, and chip scale communications. BIC lasers satisfy many requirements for
optical sources including scalability and low-threshold. The project objectives
will be accomplished by combining expertise in design, fabrication, and
characterization of unconventional cavities. The research will investigate BIC
lasers and their new physics. The multidisciplinary project bridges the fields
of laser physics, nanophotonics, nanofabrication and characterization. BIC
lasers open new avenues in the study of light-matter interaction as they are
intrinsically connected to topological charges and represent natural vector beam
sources which are highly sought after in the fields of optical trapping,
biological sensing, and quantum information.