* 1554123
* CAREER: Locally Adaptive Nonparametric Estimation for the Modern Age - New Insights, Extensions, and Inference Tools
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2021
* Ryan Tibshirani, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2021
* USD 400,000.00

Nonparametric modeling---which means, roughly, flexible modeling of smooth
trends without specific assumptions about their form or shape---finds diverse
applications in many areas such as epidemiology, astrophysics, finance, and
artificial intelligence. It is also a field ripe for modern statistical
development, since nonparametric models are in a sense even more appealing in
the "big data" era, as it is precisely in data-rich settings that the increased
flexibility of these models will begin to show real rewards in terms of
statistical accuracy. The proposed work will develop nonparametric methods (and
affiliated software) that will be useful to data scientists who model smooth,
nonlinear trends in areas like those mentioned above, as well as many others. A
specific scientific emphasis will be the forecasting of influenza and dengue
fever. Such forecasts will help policy makers design and implement more
effective countermeasures towards these diseases. The proposal puts forward two
main ideas for educational training, closely related to the research aims to be
pursued. The first is a set of short videos on nonparametric smoothing, intended
as supplements to an undergraduate level course called Advanced Methods for Data
Analysis. They will be integrated with an interactive quiz system, and will be
made freely available (on YouTube) so that others outside the class may watch
too. The second idea is a statistical computation training group, for PhD
students from Statistics and Computer Science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;"Locally
adaptive" nonparametric methods offer more fine-grained flexibility than
traditional nonparametric methods, in that they can simultaneously represent
different amounts of smoothness at different parts of the function domain.
Currently, locally adaptive nonparametric methods are not often used in big,
modern data sets, likely because of their computational inefficiency, and the
general inavailability of locally adaptive methods in many modern problem
settings. The proposed work seeks to change this, and to push the state of the
art in modern locally adaptive nonparametric estimation. The research aims are
to: deepen the theoretical understanding of existing locally adaptive methods
for univariate problems; efficiently scale these methods and extend these
theories to problems where data are collected in high dimensions and over
graphs; and develop inferential tools for all of these locally adaptive
procedures. The specific contributions will be balanced between the theoretical
(statistical theories that describe the underpinnings of the methods in
question) and computational (practical algorithms that describe implementation
of these methods at scale) perspectives. A final more applied research aim is to
use the proposed methods to improve and extend a forecasting system for major
epidemics such as influenza and dengue fever.