* 1554954
* CAREER: Nanophotonic Radiative Decay Rate Engineering for Stable Blue Organic Phosphorescence
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2022
* Deirdre O'Carroll, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Lane
* 05/31/2022
* USD 490,380.00

Non-technical Description: Display and lighting technologies that use organic
light-emitting materials are emerging as energy-efficient, versatile
alternatives to liquid-crystal displays and inorganic light-emitting diode
(LED)-based lighting. However, high-efficiency blue phosphorescent organic
light-emitting devices exhibit operational lifetimes that are 20 to 45 times
shorter than green and red organic phosphorescent devices, which limit their
commercial use. This project addresses this important technology challenge
through fundamental materials science research and employs photonic
nanostructures to increase the stability of high-efficiency, blue organic light-
emitting materials. In addition, the project involves the public in an
interactive public experiment, built by undergraduate and K-12 students, to test
the lifetime of light-emitting materials and to stimulate interest in these
materials and to enable the findings of the research project to be communicated
to audiences beyond the academic community. Graduate and undergraduate
researchers working on the research project have opportunities to take part in
international research experiences to expand their research skills, foster
international scientific collaborations and gain global perspectives of the
technical challenges faced by developing countries.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: High-efficiency organic light-
emitting devices use either phosphorescent molecules or molecules that exhibit
thermally-activated delayed fluorescence to allow radiative recombination from
triplet excitons. However, there are stability problems associated with high-
efficiency, blue organic triplet-emitting materials primarily due to triplet-
triplet and triplet-polaron annihilation, which can occur faster than radiative
decay times of triplet exciton emitters at high luminance. The research
component of this CAREER award aims to increase the photostability and
electroluminescence stability of blue organic triplet emitters by making use of
radiative decay rate enhancements caused by the Purcell Effect arising from
near-field (i.e., 5-50 nm) interactions between emitters and the local
electromagnetic fields of nanophotonic structures. Faster radiative decay rates
allow triplet emission to compete with triplet quenching non-radiative pathways
and, thereby, improve the stability of the emitting material. Size- and shape-
controlled dielectric (e.g., silica, zinc oxide) and passivated plasmonic
(silver and aluminum) nanophotonic structures prepared from a range of
nanofabrication techniques are employed.