* 1554871
* CAREER: Testing a unified theory of perception and memory in the medial temporal lobe
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2021
* Rosemary Cowell, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Fritz
* 12/31/2021
* USD 607,588.00

Memory is critical to our everyday existence, enabling us to recognize an
acquaintance's face, remember where we have parked our car, or recall an event
from last week in vivid detail. And yet, it is fragile: memory performance can
decline noticeably with age and deteriorates even more dramatically in
individuals with damage to the medial temporal lobes of the brain. Until
recently, theories of memory assumed that the medial temporal lobes are
dedicated solely to memory function. However, recent evidence suggests that
these brain regions are important for other cognitive tasks, including imagining
the future and visually discriminating between two highly similar objects.
Therefore, a critical gap in current knowledge is a theory of how memory
interacts with high-level visual perception and why both of these cognitive
functions depend upon the medial temporal lobes. With the support of this NSF
CAREER award, Dr. Rosie Cowell will develop such a theory and test it with
empirical studies. By applying the theory to both amnesia caused by brain damage
and the more moderate memory loss caused by normal aging, this project will
investigate whether these two forms of memory loss can be explained by the same
mechanisms. In addition, the project will benefit society more broadly by (1)
providing a uniquely integrated research training regime in which graduate
students receive direct experience with both theory-building and hypothesis-
testing, and (2) broadening participation in STEM fields via hands-on science
workshops for female students from high-schools that serve under-represented
groups, and via public outreach in the local Massachusetts
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To develop a unifying theory of memory and high-
level perception, the proposed research will employ behavioral studies,
functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) and computational modeling. The
studies will examine the effect of perceptual interference on memory in two
cognitively-impaired populations: individuals with medial temporal lobe (MTL)
damage and heathy, older adults. The central hypothesis of this proposal is that
the MTL houses conjunctive representations of objects and events that are
critical for both memory and perception. The conjunctions are critical for
perception because they allow differentiation between two similar objects or
events, and critical for memory because they shield against a constant stream of
perceptual interference that would otherwise cause dramatic forgetting of an
object or event. It is assumed that both MTL damage and normal aging compromise
the conjunctive representations, forcing a person to rely upon the fragmental,
feature-based representations that remain in sensory cortex. Feature-based
representations are inadequate for differentiating similar items (leading to
perceptual impairments) and highly susceptible to perceptual interference
(leading to memory problems). The planned studies are expected to reveal that
MTL structures contribute to any cognitive task, mnemonic or perceptual,
whenever the task solution requires complex, conjunctive representations of
stimuli. This representational approach to understanding cognition will be fully
exploited by developing a formal, neuro-computationally plausible model that
links neural representations to cognitive performance with an explicit
mechanism.