* 1554189
* CAREER: Scalable Maskless Patterning of Nanostructures Using High-Speed Scanning Probe Arrays
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2016,09/30/2021
* Liang Pan, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Chou
* 09/30/2021
* USD 500,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) grant will investigate a novel
process to perform nanoscale patterning at high speed and low cost. Nanoscale
patterning is the key process of defining critical dimensions and geometries
mainly used to manufacture important semiconductor products such as
microprocessors and data storage devices. Many studies have shown that nanoscale
patterning has the potential to revolutionize the functions of a broad range of
products that we use in our daily lives. However tools for mass production of
these devices usually cost tens of millions of U.S. dollars each and are
affordable only to the established semiconductor industry. This award supports
fundamental research to provide needed knowledge for the development of a new
low-cost process for nanoscale patterning, which will enable mass production of
new kinds of nanotechnology-enabled products for a wide variety of applications
in energy, healthcare, civil, defense and security. Nominally called "pattern-
on-the-fly", the method involves scanning an array of electrical or optical
probes at high speed to form nanostructures of various geometries on a
substrate. The results of this research will provide economical access to
untapped tiny length scales in many applications with significant impacts on
U.S. economy and society. This research involves several disciplines including
manufacturing, optics, chemistry, and materials science. This award will create
a multi-disciplinary environment to help broaden participation of
underrepresented groups in research and positively impact engineering
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nanoscale fabrication using scanning probes has
proliferated with diverse techniques and varying degrees of maturity. The
capability of scanning probe arrays at high speed can transform the unique
strength of scanning probe-based techniques into a scalable nanomanufacturing
technology. However, several fundamental and technical barriers are yet to be
overcome to achieve this transformation, including circumventing the optical
diffraction limit, fast scanning of probe arrays and operating of probes at high
power. Some of the barriers are also common to other nanoscale patterning
processes as they need to overcome their throughput bottlenecks by utilizing a
massive number of parallel patterning devices at high speed and high power. This
research is to fill the knowledge gap on the mechanisms of nanoscale pattern
generation using high-speed probe arrays. The optical coupling principle uses
mismatched surface plasmons and lightning-rod effects to achieve efficient
energy concentration at nanoscale. The research team will perform integrated
numerical and experimental studies to understand the microscopic mechanisms
driven by strong energy input at nanoscale, design and implement the high-speed
scanning of probe arrays for high throughput and fine resolution patterning, and
demonstrate the feasibility and compatibility of this new process for targeted
applications.