* 1554503
* CAREER: Integrated Research and Education on Hot Carrier Effects in Plasmonics
* ENG,ECCS
* 01/15/2016,01/31/2020
* Jeremy Munday, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 01/31/2020
* USD 500,000.00

Abstract &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award is jointly funded by the
Electronics, Photonics, and Magnetic Devices Program (EPMD) in the Division of
Electrical, Communications and Cyber Systems (ECCS) and by the Electronic and
Photonic Materials Program (EPM) in the Division of Materials Research
(DMR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NonTechnical: Nearly all modern technology, from
cell phones and cameras to medical sensors, involves the interaction of light
with electronic circuitry in order to perform specific functions. When light is
absorbed in such a device, it can create electrons with more energy than needed
to execute the desired function, so-called hot-electrons, which generally
dissipate this energy as heat, resulting in power loss and device inefficiency.
The first goal of this project is to advance the understanding of these hot-
electrons, which will enable devices with unprecedented functionality and
performance that can be applied to problems of global importance, e.g. solar
energy generation, wireless communication, etc. The second goal of this project
is to integrate the research into education by creating a suite of online
learning tools for widespread dissemination of ideas and techniques in
alternative energy. In conjunction with these online resources, this program
will provide educational support to a wide range of audiences including the
general community through public outreach and the mentoring of graduate,
undergraduate and high school students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical: Ohmic
loss is one of the major hindrances to high efficiency plasmonic devices due to
energy dissipation of excited charge carriers within the metal. A similar
effect, known as thermalization, also limits photovoltaic efficiency in solar
energy devices. It is thus important to understand and mitigate these various
loss mechanisms in next-generation optoelectronic devices. Through this program
the PI will investigate the optoelectronic properties of fabricated structures
capable of generating and extracting these carriers before heat dissipation
occurs. These studies will encompass light absorption, carrier generation and
collection, as well as material and surface interface engineering to modify
energy barrier heights, leading to a new understanding of how hot electronic
processes work in plasmonic nanostructures. This knowledge will be applied to a
novel class of plasmonic devices based on hot carriers, which enable
simultaneous control of optical and electronic properties.