* 1554033
* CAREER: Transformation Elastodynamics and its Application to Wave Control in Solids
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/01/2016,01/31/2022
* Ankit Srivastava, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Harry Dankowicz
* 01/31/2022
* USD 500,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project supports fundamental
research needed to realize mechanisms of control of waves in solids. Information
and energy in the world travel from one point to another in the form of waves.
Examples include electromagnetic waves such as light and radio waves, sound
waves in air and water, and elastic waves in solids. The ability to control the
flow of these waves, therefore, indirectly leads to the ability to control the
information and energy which these waves represent. Strong material design
mechanisms have recently been developed to control the flow of electromagnetic
and acoustic waves. However, controlling waves in solids has proven to be more
difficult, and resolving associated challenges is the main focus of this
project. This research will have beneficial impact on several U.S. economic,
security, and energy interests. It will lead to improvements in the design of
vibration sensors, transducers, and imaging devices with applications to various
industries such as aerospace, automobile, civil infrastructure. It will lead to
novel earthquake mitigation techniques for civil structures and vibration
mitigation techniques for sensitive industry equipment. Through the various
outreach efforts proposed here, this research will help in broadening the
participation of the general public in the highly multi-disciplinary subject of
waves and their control.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Transformation methods have
emerged as effective tools for the control of electromagnetic and acoustic
waves. However, analogous successes have not been achieved for elastodynamics
(waves in solids). This research aims to fill the knowledge gap by investigating
a coupled constitutive form (Willis form) as the basis upon which the principles
and applications of transformation elastodynamics can be built. Furthermore,
this research aims to provide fundamental limits and bounds on the performance
of any transformation device through the application of causality principle and
scattering theory. The PI will conduct theoretical studies into elastodynamic
homogenization, performance bounds of transformation-elastodynamic devices and
will assess performance gains through the application of classes of Euclidean
and non-Euclidean transformations. Level-set based parallel computational
algorithms will be also developed for inverse design of transformation-based
devices. Three-dimensional printed models of transformation-elastodynamic
devices, at both the unit cell and the device levels, will be fabricated and
tested through ultrasonic wave measurements for experimental verification.