* 1554830
* CAREER:  Stereoselective and Rate-enhanced H-bonding Catalysts for Ring-Opening Polymerization
* MPS,CHE
* 03/15/2016,02/28/2023
* Matthew Kiesewetter, University of Rhode Island
* Continuing Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 02/28/2023
* USD 668,293.00

Given the tremendous burden of polymer production on natural resources and the
vast amount of the US economy derived as a result of manufacturing and selling
these materials, the development of efficient processes for polymer synthesis is
of great societal importance. In this research supported by the Macromolecular,
Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program of the Division of Chemistry, Prof.
Kiesewetter of the Rhode Island University conducts aims to develop more
efficient catalysts that function under mild reaction conditions and enable
better control of the polymer structures. Graduate and undergraduate students
who conduct this research receive training in catalyst development as well as
polymer synthesis and characterization. In addition, a series of polymer science
based workshops are being established for Rhode Island educators, including high
school teachers, post-secondary lecturers, and community college professors.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research aims to develop rate enhanced catalysts and
stereoselective catalysts for ring-opening polymerization. For these aims, the
Kiesewetter group investigates the catalytic properties of dual H-bond donors, a
largely unexplored class of catalysts. Specifically, his group designs and
synthesizes achiral and chiral bisthioureas, as well as develops a mechanistic
understanding of their catalytic properties through a multifaceted approach
involving spectroscopic studies, chemical kinetics and thermodynamic studies.