* 1554236
* CAREER:SusChEM: Design and Discovery of Polymers with Pendant Rings for Membrane Gas Separations
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2016,02/28/2022
* Haiqing Lin, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 02/28/2022
* USD 500,000.00

CAREER 1554236-Lin&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Membrane technology has emerged as an
important gas separation technology due to simplicity of operation, compactness,
modularity, and high energy efficiency. However, the available membranes for
important applications such as CO2/CH4 and C3H6/C3H8 separations are restricted
by their deteriorated separation performance when made into industrial thin
films operating in the presence of strongly plasticizing components of CO2 and
heavy hydrocarbons. These polymers may have superior pure-gas separation
performance in thick films of 20 Âµm or more. However, in the thin films of ~100
nm for industrial composite membranes, these polymers show gas permeability
rapidly decreasing with time (i.e., aging). The CO2 and hydrocarbons swell the
polymer matrix (i.e., plasticization), leading to weaker size sieving ability
and reduced gas selectivity. This project will address these issues by
developing a molecular-based mechanistic understanding of the relationship
between the polymer structure and thin film properties including permeability,
selectivity, aging and plasticization. The integrated educational activities are
expected to achieve the following benefits: (a) an educational module for
teachers and their students in middle school and high school in the Buffalo
Public Schools (a district with a large fraction of students whose background is
underrepresented in STEM fields) on membrane technology to solve global climate
change; (b) an ongoing polymer workshop to promote the interdisciplinary
collaboration on the Buffalo campus and in the Western New York area; (c)
improvement in the core courses of Heat and Mass Transfer and Materials
Characterization to stimulate students? interests in membrane research; and (d)
interdisciplinary training opportunities in polymer synthesis, characterization,
membrane separation and modeling for students at the undergraduate and graduate
level. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research project will elucidate the effect of
polymer pendant rings and crosslinking in the advanced polymeric materials on
membrane gas separation properties, including gas permeability and selectivity,
thin film stability against aging, and stability against hydrocarbon induced
plasticization. These bulky pendent rings disrupt the polymer chain packing,
leading to high free volume and permeability, and they are also expected to slow
the chain motion, reducing densification or physical aging. The size of the
rings will be conveniently tuned during the chemical synthesis, and substituents
will be introduced to rationally design the structure. A bottom-up design of
crosslinking networks will be generated, which are expected to be resistant to
plasticization. A modified free volume model will be used to elucidate the
effect of aging and plasticization on membrane separation properties. This
interdisciplinary research program integrating materials discovery, synthesis,
characterization, modeling and applications will enrich the fundamental
understanding of polymer structure/property correlation for membrane gas
separation. It is anticipated that the technical approach and materials design
guidelines derived from this project will be directly applied to the development
of industrial membranes for energy-efficient gas separation. This CAREER project
is also expected to enhance students? awareness of materials design and
discovery to solve important practical problems.