* 1554179
* CAREER: Preventing Evolutionary Failure in Synthetic Biology
* ENG,CBET
* 05/15/2016,12/31/2021
* Jeffrey Barrick, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 12/31/2021
* USD 522,750.00

1554179&lt;br/&gt;Barrick, Jeffrey E.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Synthetic biology
applies engineering principles to create living systems with predictable and
useful behaviors from collections of standardized genetic parts. However, living
systems - unlike mechanical devices - inevitably evolve when their DNA sequences
accumulate copying errors, often resulting in "broken" cells that no longer
function as they were programmed. This project will address this problem by
better characterizing how engineered cells evolve and using this information to
design DNA sequences and host cells that are reinforced against unwanted
evolution. Decreasing the incidence of evolutionary failures in bioengineering
will have broad benefits: increasing the complexity of DNA-based devices that
can be constructed and used for the sustainable production of biofuels and
drugs; limiting the potential dangers of unpredictable evolution when
genetically modified organisms are used in future applications outside of the
laboratory; and inspiring a new generation of students to pursue careers in
science and technology by improving the chances that their first synthetic
biology projects are successful.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For efforts ranging in
scale from constructing small genetic circuits and metabolic pathways to
international research consortia rebuilding entire microbial genomes, stopping -
or at least slowing - evolution would greatly improve the efficiency of
biological engineering. This research will: (i) create software to predict
evolutionary weaknesses (failure modes) in the DNA sequences encoding devices so
that they can be avoided at the design stage, (ii) develop high-throughput
experimental techniques based on next-generation DNA sequencing to more fully
characterize these failure modes and improve these predictions, and (iii) use
directed evolution and genome editing to create variants of organisms that are
common chassis for synthetic biology with reduced mutation rates. These research
activities are integrated with education by supporting an undergraduate
International Genetically Engineered Machine (iGEM) team at the University of
Texas at Austin and their graduate student mentors. They will standardize
methods for measuring the evolutionary reliability of biological devices and
improve the stability of popular genetic parts in the Registry of Standard
Biological Parts, a resource used worldwide in education and research. Hispanic
students and women will specifically be involved in the iGEM team so that this
project directly contributes to the development of a diverse STEM
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award by the Biotechnology and Biochemical
Engineering Program of the CBET Division is co-funded by the Systems and
Synthetic Biology Program of the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences.