* 1554181
* Collaborative Research: Evolutionary genomics of plant-fungal symbiosis: coevolution of Pinaceae and their ectomycorrhizal fungi in the genus Suillus
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2016,02/28/2022
* Rytas Vilgalys, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Balakrishnan
* 02/28/2022
* USD 500,154.00

Bolete mushrooms (Suillus) are easily recognized fungi that live in close
association (symbiosis) with pine tree in forests around the world, and they
provide critical roles in the functioning of ecosystems. These ectomycorrhizal
fungi provide their plant hosts with resources and protection from pathogens,
and in exchange, the mushrooms receive plant-derived sugars. This research will
enhance understanding of how these plants and fungi have co-evolved, and this
will broadly inform the general area of plant-microbe interactions. The project
will increase collaboration among a large network of fungal ecologists and
systematists who study biology and ecology of these fungi. Through field
collection, knowledge exchange, and participation in scientific workshops,
professional networks will be built for scientists from a wide range of academic
and industry settings, with attention to underrepresented groups. The research
project is geared toward outreach to the general public through partnership with
local mushroom clubs and amateur mycologists that will involve lectures,
workshops, and participation in field sampling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The co-
evolutionary history of Suillus-Pinaceae has not been well studied, which has
prevented the full integration of genomics to understand molecular mechanisms of
EMF-plant co-evolution. This proposed research will produce a robust and
comprehensive molecular phylogeny for the genus Suillus using phylogenomics
techniques novel to the field of mycology. Complementary broad sequencing of
pine genomes will also provide useful data in which to advance genomics of pines
both within and outside of this project. Additional research products will
include the generation of least five more genomes for Suillus (only two are
currently available) and transcriptomes for multiple members of Suillus and the
pines from EMF-colonized roots. Collectively, these molecular resources would be
relevant across multiple disciplines: metabolic and signaling networks that
participate in co-evolution and host specificity as well as fungal-host
recognition, communication, and nutrient acquisition and exchanges. These
products will be important for the fields of mycology, botany, ecology, and
evolutionary biology.