* 1554149
* CAREER: Innovation in Turbulence Research and the Scientific Computing Curriculum
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2021
* John Gibson, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 07/31/2021
* USD 500,000.00

PI: Gibson, John F.&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1554149&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed research is focused on the computational and theoretical investigation
of the fundamental turbulent flow phenomena that lead to the generation and
sustainment of turbulence. The proposed approach to this problem is a rigorous
mathematical treatment for laminar-to-turbulence transition and then an
extension of these concepts to fully turbulent flows. The results of this
research could have an impact on engineering and technology applications where
turbulence is important, and this means most of the flows that surround us and
most of the flows in the process industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent research
has shown that exact coherent structures in the form of unstable equilibria,
traveling waves, and periodic orbits can be computed precisely for moderately
turbulent shear flows, by treating well-resolved numerical simulations of the
Navier-Stokes equations as very high-dimensional dynamical systems. These
invariant solutions capture the form and behavior of coherent structures
observed in experiment and simulation since the 1950s, and they suggest an
approach for leveraging ideas from dynamical systems theory to exploit the
inherent low-dimensionality of self-organized structures in turbulent shear
flows. The goals of the proposed research are to develop these ideas into a
rigorous understanding of the structure and dynamics of turbulence at moderate
Reynolds numbers, and to extend successes of this approach to high Reynolds
numbers. Specific objectives of the proposed research are: (1) to develop a
comprehensive database of exact coherent structures for pressure-driven channel
flow, from moderate to high Reynolds numbers, and (2) to rigorously derive
quantitatively accurate and predictive reduced-order models of turbulent shear
flow based on the dynamics of these structures. Successful achievement of these
objectives will form the basis for a precise spatiotemporal understanding of
momentum and vorticity transport and turbulent energy production in wall-bounded
shear flows, and will demonstrate the utility of exact coherent structures and
high-dimensional dynamical systems theory in analyzing turbulence. There are
also plans to modernize the computational mathematics curriculum in New
Hampshire and bring the teaching of Julia (the hybrid computing language to be
used in the proposed research) into the classroom.