* 1554907
* CAREER: Computational tools for the analysis of large stochastic networks
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Maria Cameron, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 08/31/2021
* USD 400,000.00

The contemporary development of communications, information technologies and
powerful computing resources has made networks a popular tool for data
organization, representation and interpretation. Networks allow us to create
mathematically tractable models that preserve important features of the
underlying systems and avoid problems associated with high dimensionality and
complex geometry. In particular, networks have demonstrated a strong promise as
a modeling and analysis tool of complex physical processes such as protein
folding, self-assembly of clusters of interacting particles, and walks of
molecular motors. The development of computational methods for analysis and
construction of complex networks has a potential to advance the understanding of
crystal growth and lead to industrial self-assembly based design of structures
consisting of interacting particles. The proposed work will help in the
scientific development of undergraduate, graduate and post-doctoral students as
well as help in the enhancement of the curriculum at the PI's home institution.
The project will also make originally developed software through a website for
public use. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research program is concerned
with the development of computational tools for analysis and construction of
stochastic networks with exponentially small pairwise transition rates. The
parameter in the formula for the pairwise transition rates is the absolute
temperature in the physical context which is usually small relative to important
energetic barriers present in the system under consideration. Typically,
networks coming from modeling complex physical systems are large (e.g. a million
states), sparse and unstructured, and their pairwise transition rates vary by
tens of orders of magnitude. As a result, their analysis is difficult due to
their complexity and severe issues associated with the floating point
arithmetic. The goal of the research program is the development of computational
methods for the following four problems: (1) asymptotic analysis of large
stochastic networks (in particular, finding asymptotic estimates for the
eigenvalues and eigenvectors, extracting quasi-invariant and metastable subsets
of states, and building coarse-grained models); (2) finite temperature
continuation of specific eigenpairs describing particular transition processes
of interest in the considered network; (3) building stochastic networks
representing aggregation processes of interacting particles; and (4)finding the
quasi-potential, the function quantifying the dynamics of time-irreversible
systems driven by small thermal noise and allowing to convert continuous non-
gradient systems with multiple attractors to stochastic networks. The analytical
components of the proposed research lie in the interface of the Large Deviation
theory and the graph theory. The numerical components involve network
algorithms, numerical linear algebra, optimization methods, methods for finding
saddle points, Monte-Carlo methods, and solvers for the Hamilton-Jacobi type
equations.