* 1554059
* EAGER NSF STEM Teacher Leader Initiative: STEM Teacher Ambassador Program
* EHR,HRD
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2019
* Robert Doucette, National Science Teaching Association
* Standard Grant
* Nafeesa Owens
* 09/30/2019
* USD 300,000.00

The National Science Teachers Association (NSTA) will collaborate with the
National Council of Teachers of Mathematics (NCTM) on a two-year study and
implementation project designed to increase the involvement of primary and
secondary school teachers in policy leadership. Teachers who are previous
recipients of Presidential Awards for Excellence in Mathematics and Science
Teaching (PAEMST) will be recruited for this project. PAEMST is a White House
program established by statute in 1983 to honor superior teaching and
accomplishment at the K-12 level. It is administered by the National Science
Foundation (NSF) on behalf of the White House Office of Science and Technology
Policy.

The paramount goal of this NSTA project will be establishment of a nationwide
corps of science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) teacher
ambassadors who will speak for and about the critical importance of STEM
education for our Nation's workforce development, economic growth and wealth
creation for all segments of society. Teacher ambassadors will work with local
and state business leaders, civic organizations, school districts and other
like-minded community members to bridge the gap between policymakers and
educators. Teachers will have more in-depth look at how decision makers make
policy, and how as STEM ambassadors they share information with others on the
importance of STEM education.

The NSTA project will begin in the first year with a select pilot group of ten
previous PAEMST recipients (five science and five math teachers) based on
applications from PAEMST winners in the 50 states and four U.S. jurisdictions.
Applications will be screened by a selection committee identified by NSTA and
NCTM. They will receive intensive training in communications, media, and policy
and will establish leadership connections in their home states' science or math
teacher association chapters. Beginning with year two of the project (and for
all succeeding years) ten additional teachers will be added to this emerging
national corps. Teacher ambassadors will represent the broad demographic in
American teaching (gender, culture, socio-economic status; and urban, suburban,
and rural location). Teacher ambassadors will receive ongoing training and
connections to important resources from both NSTA and NCTM.