* 1554887
* CAREER: Flow, Failure, fluctuations and the Topology of Vascular Networks
* MPS,PHY
* 03/01/2016,02/28/2022
* Eleni Katifori, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 02/28/2022
* USD 884,076.00

Experimental data both in plants and animals indicate that the vasculature
permeating a wide array of tissues and organs, such as plant leaves and the
brain, is hierarchically organized and dominated by nested cycles. The PI will
investigate the physical principles behind the emergence of such hierarchically
organized, reticulate circulatory systems. Complex multicellular life would be
inconceivable without the evolution of space filling circulatory systems to
distribute nutrients and collect waste. Vascular systems are ubiquitous and they
have some common features, but also distinctive differences. Taming that
complexity can provide intuition about ecological adaptations in plants to deal
with intermittent or long term drought. The work will also offer a profound
understanding on how subtle modifications in human vasculature are associated
with diseases such as hypertension and how events like stroke affect the
circulation in the brain. The PI will work with education experts at her
institution to integrate a research approach into a classroom setting at the
introductory course level and expose undergraduates very early on to authentic
research experiences. In addition, in partnership with the Biology department,
she will design and implement a pilot program to create a handheld device
application for use by the general public that allows users to scan barcodes and
access information about plants specimens at the botanical gardens on
campus.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will investigate the physical principles
behind the emergence of such hierarchically organized, reticulate circulatory
systems. The work will focus on three key thrusts (a) How do the loopy,
hierarchical vascular structures across different taxa and kingdoms compare with
each other and how specific is the detailed architecture of a vascular system to
an organ or a species? (b) Why did these hierarchically nested structures emerge
independently several times in both plants and animals? (c) How is hierarchical
nestedness maintained in animal vascular systems where vascular remodeling
predicts heavy pruning of the vascular structures? The PI's work will be
primarily theoretical and computational, but motivated and driven by
experimental data, acquired by collaborating teams (animal data) and
undergraduates (plant data) under the PI's supervision. Active participation of
undergraduate students in research is the core element of the PI's educational
plan.