* 1554841
* CAREER: Morphology and Property Correlations of Chemically Doped 1D Conjugated Polymer Aggregates
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2023
* Song Guo, University of Southern Mississippi
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 06/30/2023
* USD 497,884.00

This project is jointly funded by the Polymers Program in the Division of
Materials Research and the Experimental Program to Stimulate Competitive
Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research objective of this CAREER project is
to gain fundamental knowledge of the correlation between morphology at the
nanoscale and optoelectronic properties of chemically doped one-dimensional
conducting polymer aggregates. The planned research and educational activities
have broad impacts by tackling current national needs in both materials and
human workforce development. The knowledge gained in the project will promote
rational design of more efficient organic materials for electronic applications,
as well as more efficient processing and fabrication techniques for future
organic electronic devices. With the current world organic electronics market
size expected to grow significantly in the next decade, enhancements on just a
fraction of the organic electronic materials could have an impact on US and
global economy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This program also provides a platform for
participating students to gain expertise from interdisciplinary fields including
materials science, chemistry, and surface science. Hands-on activities involving
polymer science and nanoscience will be offered to K-8 students for early
exposure to scientific topics. High-school polymer nanoscience workshops will
provide students hands-on experience on preparing and characterizing functional
nanostructures. Extra efforts will be devoted to recruiting and involving
underrepresented and economically disadvantaged K-12, undergraduate, and
graduate students into these outreach activities. Successful execution of these
integrated research and education activities will enhance diversity in US
scientific research and inspire more K-12 and undergraduate students to pursue
STEM careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The systematic local morphology-property
correlation of non-doped and doped 1D conjugated polymer aggregates gained by
AFM-based methods is the primary goal of this project. To achieve this goal,
monolayer and multi-layer conjugated polymer nanowhiskers are chosen as the
model systems in this program because most of the polymer molecules within
monolayer nanowhiskers are surface molecules that can be directly investigated
by surface characterization tools. Multi-layer nanowhiskers will be subsequently
studied in a "layer-by-layer" manner on the basis of what was learned from
monolayer nanowhiskers. Local morphology-property relationship for doped and
non-doped conjugated polymer nanowhiskers will be analyzed using AFM and its
advanced modes. The doping reaction in solution will be systematically studied
by UV-vis spectroscopy to reveal the influences of many parameters, particularly
the aggregation forms, on the chemical doping reaction kinetics. The charge
transport in and between 1D conjugated polymer aggregates will also be
interrogated at nanometer scale. This program is expected to reveal structure
and property fluctuations at nano- to micrometer scales that are otherwise
hidden in ensemble measurements. The conductivity studies within and between
nanowhiskers will elucidate the interrelated roles of defect sites,
ordered/disordered domains, connection points, and chemical doping on the charge
transport of conjugated polymer materials. The results of the chemical doping
reaction kinetic dependence on the reaction conditions, especially conjugate
polymer microscopic aggregation forms, will supply practical solution-based
applications with crucial macroscopic doping reaction kinetics information that
is largely missing so far. The comprehensive understanding of the chemical
doping of conjugated polymers accumulated in this program will enable
researchers in this field to seek suitable strategies based on concrete organic
doping knowledge rather than through empirical trials.