* 1554775
* Terahertz Compressive Imaging with Tunable Metamaterial Absorbers
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2015,04/30/2016
* Willie Padilla, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Hao Ling
* 04/30/2016
* USD 67,078.00

Terahertz Compressive Imaging with Tunable Metamaterial
Absorbers&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: &lt;br/&gt;The goal of the proposed
research is to demonstrate single pixel compressive and coded aperture imaging
at terahertz (THz) frequencies utilizing metamaterial absorbers as spatial light
modulators. It will showcase fully functional single pixel multiplexed terahertz
imaging systems not achieved before. Imaging systems will based on various
implementations of coded aperture imaging theory including compressive and
Hadamard approaches. The PI will explore promising technologies for use in
dynamic spatial light modulators though active control of the metamaterial
response and which are already part of current research expertise. Dynamic
spatial light modulators will consist of pixelated arrays of metamaterial
structures that are individually addressable.&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact:
&lt;br/&gt;The development of imaging in the terahertz regime has far reaching
impact in diverse areas such as biomedical imaging for cancer detection and high
resolution spectroscopy of cells, DNA and proteins, to all weather guidance
systems and personnel screening. However existing imaging approaches have
limited sensitivity due to the lack of efficient sources and detectors in the
terahertz frequency range. Moreover detectors are typically single pixel
detectors that require scanning to obtain a 2D image or focal plane arrays which
suffer reduced performance. Beyond facilitating technological breakthroughs and
intellectual property generation, the project will establish a research and
teaching laboratory at Boston College in the areas of metamaterials, terahertz
science and technology, and coded aperture imaging. This interdisciplinary
research project will permit members of the laboratory to actively contribute to
the burgeoning field of metamaterials for terahertz sensing and communications
and compressive imaging. These projects provide an excellent opportunity for
undergraduate and graduate students at Boston College to learn about the
unconventional, complex, and emergent physical properties that metamaterials
hold for future technological applications needed to fill voids in the terahertz
regime. It will train the future generation of science and engineering majors in
valuable and versatile experimental techniques including extremely broadband
frequency domain spectroscopy and THz spectroscopy and imaging, and
fabricational methods for development of micron and nano-scale artificial
electromagnetic materials, as well as computer simulation techniques utilizing
the finite element method, and the construction of imaging systems. The PIs
strong commitment to undergraduate research, involvement with the McNair
Scholarship program, a graduate school preparation program for underrepresented
(low income and first generation) undergraduates, will further permit
recruitment of undergraduate and graduate students from the underrepresented
portion of the Boston College population.