* 1554924
* CAREER: Unraveling the Cluster Chemistry of Chalcogenide Semiconductor Nanoparticles
* MPS,CHE
* 01/15/2016,12/31/2022
* Yolanda Vasquez, Oklahoma State University
* Continuing Grant
* George Janini
* 12/31/2022
* USD 675,000.00

With this award, the Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry (MSN)
Program in the Division of Chemistry is funding Professor Yolanda Vasquez at
Oklahoma State University to generate fundamental knowledge on the synthesis of
particles at the size of a billionth of a meter that contain the elements
sulfur, selenium, and tellurium - collectively known as the chalcogens. These
nanostructures have many uses including in television and cell phone displays
and for sensitive biomedical imaging. Strategies to improve control of the newly
developed structures and chemical compositions are sought. The new chemical
combinations and structures are critical to achieving optimal performance in
existing and new technological applications. The educational program prepares
both graduate and undergraduate students for interdisciplinary research careers
in nanoscience. Graduate and undergraduate students at the nanotechnology summer
camp held on the OSU campus serve as student mentors to middle schoolers. Hands-
on activities are geared towards children ages 10-12 with the goal of promoting
early awareness and interest in science fields. A special topics undergraduate
course supports the growing student interest in interdisciplinary research at
OSU. Through research and outreach activities, Dr. Vasquez aims to broaden the
participation of a diverse student population from K-12 through graduate school.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Binary chalcogenides are some of the most well-studied
nanomaterials due to their applications in light emitting diodes, bio-labels,
and catalysts, as well as in materials used in electro-optical and medical
devices. Synthetic strategies with control over the composition, size, and
morphology have been achieved thus, control over the resulting properties has
been exploited. The composition, size, shape, and the crystalline phase of the
nanoparticles are interdependent and the underlying synthetic mechanisms derived
from these parameters are not always clear. Control over these variables at the
molecular level continues to be one of the main challenges in the field. In this
NSF CAREER award, Dr. Vasquez seeks to generate fundamental knowledge on the
role of intermediates, such as chalcogen ionic clusters, and their effect on the
composition, size, shape, and structure of the resulting nanoparticles in
solution. Additionally, the robustness of the chalcogen lattice makes post-
synthetic modification of the composition of the nanomaterials possible through
anion and cation exchange reactions. The research group aims to broaden the
participation of underrepresented groups in science through the implementation
of a nanotechnology summer camp for children ages 10-12. A special topics
undergraduate course supports the growing student interest in interdisciplinary
research at OSU.