* 1554834
* CAREER:   An integrative genomic and biodemographic analysis of prehistoric human-environment interactions in an island ecosystem, with bioinformatics capacity development
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2023
* George Perry, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 07/31/2023
* USD 465,123.00

This CAREER project will apply new biological and computer science methods to
study recent changes in the population sizes of humans, domesticated
agricultural species, and endangered native animals all living in the same
habitat. The results will help us understand how human population growth affects
natural populations of wild species, and the complex interactions among people,
domesticated animals, and the environment. The study will advance science
through the development of new genomic methods and computational "big data"
analyses (bioinformatics) for analyzing genomic data. These methods will
initially be applied to a study of people, their cattle, and two endangered
lemur species in Madagascar, which is an ideal site because humans first arrived
to the island relatively recently (several thousand years ago). Research on
human-environment interactions in other regions of the world, including North
America where human-environment interaction started earlier, will also benefit
from these methods. The educational component of the project will involve the
annual delivery of bioinformatics training workshops to diverse audiences;
participating students will develop biological and computer science skills that
separately and together will have wide scientific and industrial training
applicability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scientific aims of this proposal include
reconstructing high-resolution demographic histories for Malagasy people, their
commensal domesticated cattle, and two widely-distributed endemic lemur species,
all with temporal resolution relevant to the recent timeline of human history on
the island. These results, made possible by the application of novel population
genomic methods developed by the principal investigator, will be compared to
each other and to available paleoclimate data to develop an integrated empirical
model of the history of anthropogenic effects on Madagascar's biodiversity.
Madagascar is an important island for studying the processes and consequences of
human-environment interaction. The people of Madagascar have an interesting
history because of their relatively recent arrival to the island, their mixed
Austronesian and African ancestry, and because of their relationship to one of
the world's most biologically diverse, endemic and threatened ecologies. This
work will empirically transform our understanding of the history of
anthropogenic effects on Madagascar's biodiversity and establish an integrative
research framework for application to other regions of the world where Holocene
resource use intensification and human-environment interaction are likewise
topics of major interest. A centerpiece of the educational component of this
project is the annual delivery of interactive-style bioinformatics training
workshops that build on the integration of biological and computational science
that is central to the research. The most advanced workshop will be integrated
with the project's scientific aims through ?hackathon?-style development of
computational tools for analyses of the genomic data generated in this study.
Joint funding for this project is provided by the National Science Foundation's
Office of International Science and Engineering (OISE).