* 1554572
* RUI: Neurobehavioral Analysis of the Regulation of Courtship Initiation in Drosophila Melanogaster
* BIO,IOS
* 04/15/2016,03/31/2020
* Rachael French, San Jose State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 03/31/2020
* USD 428,789.00

One of the goals of neuroscience is to understand how genes direct the
development of the nervous system, and how sensory input from the environment
interacts with the nervous system to result in behavior. Male fruit flies of the
genus Drosophila carry out a complex and stereotyped courtship ritual that
provides an excellent model in which to study these processes. The correct
performance of this ritual is critical for success in mating and reproduction.
Mutations affecting the courtship ritual typically result in slow courtship, or
failure to court entirely. However, we have identified a gene (Tre1) that, when
mutated, causes unusually rapid performance of the ritual. This result is
unique, and suggests a previously unknown function in mating behavior: delay of
courtship. This research project aims to answer two questions: first, why would
a gene exist whose function appears to be to reduce the speed of mating, which
would seem to put males at a disadvantage relative to males that mate more
quickly? Second, in what cells does the Tre1 gene function, and what are these
cells doing during courtship behavior? In addition, to increase the exposure of
women and underrepresented minority students to basic scientific research, an
integral component of this project is to establish a summer mentorship program
that brings high school biology teachers from local minority-serving high
schools, together with their students, to the lab to design and implement
behavioral genetics experiments for their classrooms.

Drosophila males engage in a stereotyped courtship ritual in order to gain the
favor of females. Previous research has shown that the typical result of failure
to perform any of the steps correctly and in the correct order results in
greatly reduced opportunities to mate. In addition, the behavioral sex
determination gene fruitless (fru) has been shown to be necessary and sufficient
to direct all steps of courtship behavior. Loss of the male-specific fru
transcripts (fruM) typically leads to increased latency to court, inappropriate
mate choice, or failure to court at all. We identified a GAL4-transgene that is
inserted into the coding sequence of the Tre1 GPCR gene (Tre1-GAL4). When this
GAL4 line is used to drive expression of either an RNAi targeting fruM or the
feminizing transgene UAS-traF, it results in male flies that initiate courtship
and achieve copulation much more quickly than control animals. This phenotype is
recapitulated in males mutant for Tre1, which indicates that the Tre1 GPCR is
required for normal courtship behavior. The expression pattern of Tre1-GAL4 is
limited, with expression in regions consistent with olfactory reception and
processing in both the peripheral and central nervous system. The activities
described in this proposal identify positively the Tre1-GAL4 cells, investigate
the function of those cells in courtship initiation, test the hypothesis that
the Tre1-GAL4 cells are involved in mate choice, and further investigate the
role of Tre1 itself in courtship initiation.