* 1554821
* CAREER: New Techniques for Statistical Learning and Multivariate Analysis
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2022
* Genevera Allen, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 06/30/2022
* USD 400,000.00

New technologies in many scientific sectors have led to data sets of increasing
complexity and size, where the ability to measure and store these vast troves of
data has far outpaced the ability to analyze the data to make reproducible
scientific discoveries. Examples include genomics and proteomics, neuroimaging,
and neural recordings data. Analyzing this big biomedical data is critical to
discovering disease biomarkers, making advances in personalized medicine, and
understanding the basic workings of complex biological systems. In this work, we
seek to develop and study novel statistical learning and multivariate analysis
techniques that directly address unresolved problems critical for making
discoveries from big scientific data. Additionally, we will use statistical
learning techniques to improve introductory statistics education by developing
an online personalized learning system for assignment and content delivery.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More specifically, this work will focus on using
algorithms for large-scale sparse optimization to inspire and develop a new
framework for statistical learning that will prove to have superior empirical
and theoretical performance for high-dimensional and highly correlated data.
Such data is common in genomics and neuroimaging; the new techniques will be
used to identify potential genomic drug targets, to model genetic and brain
networks, and for brain decoding from neuroimaging and neural recordings data.
We will also use Kronecker product covariances to develop new multivariate
analysis models for coupled matrix and tensor data. These techniques will be
used to find joint patterns in integrative genomics data and find patterns of
brain activity indicative of behavioral or clinical covariates. Overall, this
work will develop several critically needed statistical techniques to understand
large and complex data, have direct impacts in genomics and brain science where
the techniques will be applied in collaboration with scientists, and lead to
improvements in introductory statistics education. This award is co-funded by
the Directorate for Mathematical and Physical Sciences (MPS) Division of
Mathematical Sciences (DMS) and the Directorate for Biological Sciences (BIO)
Divisions of Integrative Organismal Systems (IOS) and Emerging Frontiers (EF).