* 1554063
* CAREER: A New Model Order Reduction Framework for the Control of Advanced Propulsion and Energy Storage Systems for Electrified Vehicles
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/01/2016,01/31/2022
* Marcello Canova, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Harry Dankowicz
* 01/31/2022
* USD 539,050.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project will investigate a novel
framework that systematically transfers the accuracy and fidelity of physics-
based models into low-order models suitable for control design of automotive
propulsion systems. Automotive propulsion technologies have become considerably
complex as manufacturers strive to improve fuel economy, emissions, safety and
the driver experience. Such complexity requires the adoption of advanced control
and estimation algorithms. The project will provide the necessary tools to
control engineers who need to employ high-fidelity, physics-based models, albeit
with considerably reduced complexity. The research will be directly applied to
the estimation of thermal imbalances in Li-ion battery packs for high-
performance electric vehicles, and to the estimation and control of surge
dynamics in downsized boosted engines, two key technologies for current and
future automotive powertrains. The automotive industry will participate to the
research by providing insights and facilitating technology transfer. Research,
education and outreach will be integrated through the Buckeye Current electric
motorcycle team at The Ohio State University, inspired by e-mobility, e-racing
and sustainable transportation. Integration will be also pursued through the
enrichment of existing courses, creation of web-based teaching tools and student
internship programs, and by collaborating with the Teaching Engineering to K-8
(TEK8) programs to attract young talents from underrepresented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The state of the art for model-based control design
relies almost exclusively on low-fidelity models based on empirical approaches
and on approximations of the physical system, which ultimately leads a loss of
accuracy. This research introduces a transformative framework that analytically
generates control-oriented models from the conservation laws for thermal, fluid
and chemical systems in nonlinear Partial Differential Equations (PDEs) form. A
projection-based Model Order Reduction (MOR) will be applied to generate Reduced
Order Models (ROM) whose parameters are directly derived from physical constants
through analytical relations, dramatically reducing the need for calibration.
The projection will enforce specific properties "a priori" in the resulting ROM,
namely stability, observability and controllability. Case studies will be
conducted on the estimation of thermal imbalances in Li-ion battery packs for
high-performance electric vehicles, and the estimation and control of surge
dynamics in downsized boosted engines.