* 1554480
* RAPID: Collaborative Research: Employees' Response to OPM Data Breaches: Decision Making in the Context of Anxiety and Fatigue
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2017
* Rui Chen, Ball State University
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 08/31/2017
* USD 100,001.00

Nontechnical Description&lt;br/&gt;According to recent reports in the press, the
Office of Personnel Management (OPM) was hit hard in two recent cyber-attacks
(OPM 2015). In April 2015, OPM discovered that personal data (e.g., Social
Security Numbers, full name, and birth date) of 4.2 million current and former
Federal government employees had been stolen (referred to as personnel records
incident hereafter). Later in June 2015, OPM discovered that around 21.5 million
employees - current and former Federal employees and contractors - were affected
as their personal information such as Social Security Numbers, fingerprints, and
background investigation records were compromised (referred to as background
investigation records incident hereafter). Unlike other information, sensitive
data such as the background investigation records, which include personal
histories, relationships, and biometrics, reveal employees' personal lives are
difficult to be re-issued. Typical protection such as a few months of credit
monitoring may be insufficient in protecting victims from determined attackers.
To date, little is known about how and why people decide and act in the
aftermath of breaches involving their personal data. In particular, the role of
data breach fatigue, manifested by insensitivity to data breaches and low
estimate of fraud loss, in affecting people's decisions and actions is unknown.
The existing research has also been silent on employees' decision making and
reactions in response to data breaches. To fill this research gap, in this
proposal, we plan to conduct a study that reveals the key decision factors,
response actions, and the potential effect of data breach fatigue in the context
of anxiety over the possible outcomes of the breach. Findings of the study will
help in understanding employee reactions towards data breaches. New knowledge
will help industry and policy makers develop intervention strategies that avert
the effect of breach fatigue&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Description&lt;br/&gt;This proposal will explore the crucial issues that
influence employees' responses in the context of the recent two OPM data breach
incidents. This proposed research will compare these two different incidents and
their impacts on different types of victims, employees who receive notification
of the personnel records incident (now), employees who receive notification of
both incidents (future), and employees who only receive notification of the
background investigation records incident (future). We will also survey
employees who have not received any notification, as a control group. In
addition to self-reported data through surveys, we shall extend this study by
capturing organic Twitter messages related to the two breach incidents in the
respective time periods in 2015 to study how people coped with breach incidents.
Utilizing natural language processing, we intend to (1) explore patterns of
discourses associated with the data breach fatigue, (2) extract coping
mechanisms from the discourses, and (3) compare coping mechanisms of employees,
identified from the survey and those derived from the data mining.