* 1554918
* CAREER: Tuning Photoredox Properties of Carbazolic Porous Organic Frameworks for Visible-Light-Mediated Catalysis
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/2016,07/31/2020
* Jian Zhang, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Continuing Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 07/31/2020
* USD 527,154.00

Non-technical Abstract With support from the Solid State and Materials Chemistry
program in the Division of Materials Research, the research team proposes to
develop a new class of organic porous material?carbazolic porous organic
frameworks (Cz-POFs). The unique combination of extended pi-conjugation, three-
dimensional polycarbazole networks, and tailorable electronic and optical
properties of Cz-POFs enables their significant potential applications in solar
energy harvesting, conversion, and utilization. These basic research efforts are
integrated with a series of educational activities including the training and
mentoring of graduate and undergraduate students in materials research, the
creation of accessible, adaptable, and inexpensive model kits of porous
materials to support multiple outreach activities and to convey a basic
understanding of materials chemistry to audiences of different ages and
knowledge levels, and the establishment of a Chemistry Ambassador program at the
University of Nebraska-Lincoln to improve awareness of and public appreciation
for the role of materials chemistry in everyday lives.

Technical Abstract The proposed research addresses critical knowledge gaps for
establishing Cz-POFs as a new generation of photoactive materials for solar-
energy harvesting, conversion, and utilization. The research team have
demonstrated that, compared to their linear counterparts, prototypic Cz-POFs
exhibit large surface area, enhanced mesoporosity, and high stability, which,
along with strong reductive ability and recyclability, make them well suited for
many optoelectronic applications. The specific aims of this research are
centered on developing synthetic approaches (1) to further increase the
oxidative ability of Cz-POFs through theory-guided chemical modification, (2) to
develop donor-acceptor Cz-POFs with enhanced photoredox properties by adjusting
intramolecular D-A interactions, and (3) to enhance photoredox catalytic
activities of Cz-POFs. This research provides a better understanding of
synthetic factors that control the electronic and optical properties,
photoinduced energy and electron transfer, and photoredox catalytic activities
associated with Cz-POFs and other pi-conjugated polymer networks in general.
This research also contributes to the use of POFs for photochemical production
of clean organic fuels from carbon dioxide as well as solar water splitting.
Further, the building of a comprehensive online database Porous Organic
Framework Resource facilitates interdisciplinary research on porous materials.