* 1554515
* CAREER: Silicon-Based Electronic Arrays for Coherent Generation and Detection of Picosecond Pulses
* ENG,ECCS
* 01/15/2016,05/31/2018
* Aydin Babakhani, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 05/31/2018
* USD 500,000.00

The PI will build a research program to develop novel integrated circuits and
antennas that can generate high-power pulses with frequencies up to one
terahertz (THz), several hundred times higher than the frequency of today's
cellular networks. By exploiting the advantages of THz radiation, the proposed
research program can transform wireless communications, imaging, and
spectroscopic systems. THz communications systems will offer greater bandwidth
and will also track mobile receivers with better fault tolerance than competing
technologies with similar range and bandwidth, such as free space optical
communication. THz imaging systems can not only bolster homeland's security by
accurate detection of hidden objects and explosives, but also can prevent tens
of thousands of lives lost in car accidents every year by increasing the
accuracy of collision avoidance automotive radars. THz spectroscopy systems can
identify the species of gas molecules with high specificity and detect trace
quantities of those molecules with high sensitivity. The PI's long-term
educational goal is to inspire students at all levels to pursue careers in STEM
disciplines. Working with the Rice University Office of STEM Engagement to
provide research experience and internship opportunities for high-school
teachers from Houston Independent School District, the PI will assist teachers
with the development of their physics curriculum. The PI will work with the Rice
Center for Excellence &amp; Equity to engage underrepresented minority students
in research and to provide summer internship opportunities for them.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of the proposed research program is to
develop novel integrated circuits and antennas that can generate, radiate,
detect, and steer coherent high-power pulses with frequencies up to 1THz. With
today's silicon processes, it is possible to build a complex integrated circuit
with on-chip antennas operating in frequencies up to 500GHz. However, most of
the existing solutions are narrow-band and based on continuous-wave signal
generation. To push the performance limits of high-speed wireless
communications, three-dimensional radar imaging, and THz spectroscopy, broadband
sources and detectors are required. The basic research carried out under this
program is expected to advance the state-of-the-art in broadband time-domain
signal generation and detection. The PI will demonstrate the intellectual merit
of the proposed program through the following contributions: (1) demonstrating
picosecond impulse radiating arrays, (2) demonstrating picosecond impulse
sampling arrays, (3) developing accurate and reliable measurement systems to
characterize picosecond sources and detectors, (4) producing high-resolution
three-dimensional radar images