* 1554820
* Conference: Topological and Quantitative Aspects of Symplectic Manifolds; Columbia University and Barnard College, March 17-20, 2016
* MPS,DMS
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2016
* Mohammed Abouzaid, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 12/31/2016
* USD 24,300.00

The purpose of this grant is to support roughly 27 junior participants,
primarily graduate students and postdoctoral fellows, at the conference
"Topological and quantitative aspects of symplectic manifolds" to be held at
Columbia University and Barnard College on March 17-20, 2016. The conference
will be organized by Mohammed Abouzaid, Ailsa Keating, Robert Lipshitz, Walter
Neumann, and Lisa Traynor. The conference will feature 16-20 talks and roughly
80 participants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Symplectic geometry and contact geometry
are the abstract setting of classical mechanics. Symplectic geometry was
originally developed to study the Hamiltonian formulation of classical
mechanics, with a particular focus on celestial mechanics. More recently, it has
turned out that symplectic and contact geometry are key to fundamental questions
in theoretical high energy physics, as a key component in string theory and with
close relations to gauge theory. Roughly speaking, a symplectic manifold is a
smooth space in which there is a well-defined notion of area - but not
necessarily a well-defined notion of distance. One key question is how to tell
if two symplectic manifolds are the same, and to list all symplectic manifolds
with certain properties. Another important topic is the notion of size in
symplectic manifolds, given that there is no intrinsic notion of distance. This
problem is particularly subtle - it turns out, for instance, that an infinite
cylinder may not be symplectically bigger than a finite one - and again is
reflected in strange theoretical phenomena in physics. Another important topic
in symplectic geometry - and most of mathematics - is symmetry: what symmetries
can symplectic spaces have? Is it possible to classify all highly-symmetric
symplectic spaces? A last theme is using smooth symplectic spaces to study
singular spaces: smooth spaces are easier to analyze, but understanding what
properties of singularities they reflect is subtle. This conference will bring
together roughly 80 researchers on these topics, with a particular emphasis on
recent developments and work by younger researchers, to exchange ideas and
results on these basic research topics. The ultimate goal, naturally, is to
promote the progress of science. A secondary goal is to highlight the many
contributions of women to the field, to provide mentoring and support for women
researchers who are just getting started and so promote diversity among
mathematics researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The conference web page, with
information about speakers and registration,
is&lt;br/&gt;http://math.columbia.edu/mcduff70