* 1554056
* CAREER: Stabilization of Mining and Energy Related Byproducts using Bio-Mediated Soil Improvement
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/15/2016,04/30/2022
* Brina Montoya, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Giovanna Biscontin
* 04/30/2022
* USD 500,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) grant will develop sustainable
methods to stabilize mining and energy related byproduct materials using natural
biological processes. Mining for material and energy needs generates large
volumes of byproduct material, such as ore tailings, coal ash, and oil sand
tailings, and these materials must be stored for hundreds to thousands of years.
Often it is the management of the generated byproducts that is one of the most
difficult challenges for the industry. Safely storing these byproduct materials
is a necessity to keep society and the environment safe. When these containment
systems fail, they have the potential to be a catastrophic disaster. This CAREER
grant will use biologically mediated methods to stabilize the byproduct
materials to prevent the failure of the containment systems and the spread of
the byproduct materials. The bio-mediated soil improvement methods will harness
the bio-geochemistry of the materials to improve the mechanical stability of the
byproduct materials as well as immobilize any trace elements within the
materials. The grant will also focus on explaining to the public the treatment
process and benefits of bio-mediated soil improvement in order for it to become
a viable ground improvement alternative. The objective of the educational plan
is to educate various audiences, including K-12 students, university students,
the general public, and the state legislature, on sustainability in geo-systems,
specifically the storage of mining and energy related byproduct materials. The
recruitment and retention of female engineers in academia will also be a focus
of the educational plan.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall objective of this
CAREER grant is to develop biologically mediated treatment methods to improve
the performance of mining and energy related byproduct material. Byproduct
storage systems have inherent engineering concerns, specifically: 1) failure of
the stored material due to inadequate shear strength, 2) spreading of the stored
material due to erosion from wind or surface water, and 3) leaching of toxic
trace elements into nearby surface and ground water sources. This CAREER grant
will address these concerns by using bio-mediated improvement methods.
Ureolytic-driven microbial induced carbonate precipitation (MICP) methods will
be used to improve the shear strength and structural stability of the stored
byproducts, reduce the potential of erosion due to wind and surface water, and
immobilize trace elements that may potentially leach into nearby water sources.
The improvement in shear strength will be evaluated under drained and undrained
simple shear loading conditions, and the reduction in erosion will be assessed
using impinging jets. The ability to immobilize trace elements within the
byproduct material will be evaluated using experimental and chemical equilibrium
modeling techniques. In addition, alternative biological metabolic pathways,
such as iron and sulfate reduction, will be explored that may result in improved
bio-mineralization stabilization techniques. Since the storage life of the
byproduct material is orders of magnitude longer than typical engineering
projects, the permanence of the treatment techniques will also be assessed. The
results of this CAREER grant will advance the understanding of bio-mediated soil
improvement. In particular, the influence of microbial metabolic processes and
the physical and chemical aspects of the geo-materials on the resulting material
behavior will be investigated. This improved understanding will provide guidance
for the storage of mining and energy related byproduct materials, using a novel
bio-mediated approach. The results will also advance bio-mediated soil
improvement technology to be applicable for many other geo-environments,
including contaminated soils, liquefiable intermediate soils, and anoxic
sediments. This CAREER grant will also provide insight into the longevity of
bio-mediated improvement, which will be important for all bio-mediated soil
improvement field implementation applications.