* 1554908
* CAREER: Mantle Seismic Structure Beneath North America and Evolving Seismcity in the Raton Basin
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2022
* Brandon Schmandt, University of New Mexico
* Continuing Grant
* Margaret Benoit
* 06/30/2022
* USD 525,838.00

CAREER: Mantle seismic structure beneath North America and evolving seismicity
in the Raton Basin&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will support two lines of
research. The first takes advantage of recent and ongoing community-driven
collection of broadband seismic data systematically covering more than half of
North America. The second focuses on earthquake activity in the Raton Basin,
which is on the New Mexico-Colorado border and an area of natural gas production
and wastewater injection. Both lines of research include educational
opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students as well as outreach
activities to improve the representation of Earth science and particularly
geophysics in middle schools around Albuquerque. The goals of the first line of
research will be achieved by seismic investigation of mantle structure and its
implications for thermal and chemical convection processes beneath North
America, with particular consideration of potential evidence for or against a
substantial geochemical reservoir of water in an unusual layer about 400?700 km
deep referred to as the mantle transition zone. The properties of this layer
could provide new insights into limits on the evolution of surface water over
Earth?s history and occurrence of partial melting as a result of ongoing
convection. The second line of research will involve collection and analysis of
seismic data in the Raton Basin over the duration of this project in order to
test how spatial and temporal patterns and mechanisms of earthquakes respond to
varying wastewater injection rates, increasing cumulative injected volume, and
small natural transient stresses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project?s two main
research goals are: 1) to test the hypothesis that the mantle transition zone
beneath North America is a major geochemical reservoir of water and 2) constrain
the time dependent response of Raton Basin seismicity to wastewater injection.
Both lines of research are integrated with the educational goal of increasing
participation in geoscience research among the diverse population of New Mexico
students at levels ranging from middle school to graduate school. The first line
of research will use a suite of interdependent analyses of EarthScope seismic
data including mapping of continuous and laterally sporadic interfaces, mapping
variations in the sharpness and amplitude of interfaces, and constraining the
influence of 3-D velocity structure on interface imaging. Quantitative
assessment of the hydrated transition hypothesis will be conducted through
collaborations with mineral physicists and geodynamicists. The second line of
research involves extended observation and analysis of seismicity in the Raton
Basin, which has hosted an increase in seismicity correlated with increased
wastewater injection. This component will enable higher resolution and longer-
term observations of feedbacks between seismogenic deformation and wastewater
injection. Annual class research projects and undergraduate interns will
primarily conduct data collection and analysis to constrain temporal variations
in the distribution of active faults, source mechanisms, magnitude distribution,
and susceptibility to external triggering. Place-based education efforts at the
middle school level, where many students first encounter the geosciences, will
use Raton Basin and EarthScope data to enhance exposure to geoscience research
and awareness of geoscience career opportunities among underrepresented
populations.