* 1555121
* CAREER: Experimental Particle Astrophysics with High Energy Neutrinos in IceCube
* MPS,PHY
* 02/15/2016,07/31/2022
* Joanna Kiryluk, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* William Wester
* 07/31/2022
* USD 894,612.00

Neutrinos are unique cosmic messengers that complement cosmic rays and gamma
rays in the on-going quest to identify and understand the most powerful cosmic
accelerators in the Universe. This award will support research that will yield
new insights in the diffuse astrophysical electron and tau neutrino energy
spectrum and its characteristics delineated by hemisphere. Anisotropy, if it is
found, will provide evidence for a galactic and an extragalactic origin of the
recently discovered astrophysical neutrinos. The energy spectrum will confirm or
refute the characteristics predicted by theoretical models on the possible
sources of the high-energy diffuse neutrino flux and may also probe
non-'Standard Model' physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By integrating forefront
research with education and outreach, the PI seeks to broaden the career
prospects for SBU physics students and to expand and diversify the pool of
students in STEM fields. She will continue her productive collaboration with the
successful SBU Women in Science and Engineering (WISE) program, designed to
increase the number and fraction women in STEM fields, in education and
outreach. A novel instrumentation component for WISE undergraduate students,
designed to narrow the gender-gap in instrumentation-oriented experiences, will
incorporate innovations in micro-controllers and 'cloud-computing' in Sudden
Ionospheric Disturbance (solar flare) monitoring stations for educational use at
SBU and local schools in high-need districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
program will utilize electron and tau neutrino detection in IceCube targeting
the energy and flavor characteristics of the recently discovered diffuse flux of
highly energetic neutrinos. The data will yield sensitivity to the flavor
composition of the diffuse neutrino flux. As part of this research program, the
atmospheric neutrino flux will be measured into the high-energy region that is
sensitive to the thus-far unobserved prompt component and a novel method will be
used to measure the neutrino-nucleon cross section covering the thus-far
inaccessible TeV - PeV neutrino energy range.