* 1555550
* Pilot Study: Creating a Special Collection of NSF-Funded Learning Resources to Support Core Ideas in High School Biology
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2015,02/28/2018
* Mary Marlino, University Corporation For Atmospheric Res
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 02/28/2018
* USD 299,862.00

This project will develop, implement, and research a special digital collection
to supplement the teaching of core ideas in high school biology. The collection
will focus on concepts that underpin the majority of curricula currently in use
in the United States. The collection will also serve as a model for a
comprehensive source dedicated to disseminating information about NSF-supported
learning resources for targeted audiences of teachers and learners. The project
focus is on high school biology because: 1) The contemporary research base on
teaching and learning calls for all students to be deeply engaged in authentic
science practices. In many schools teachers are actively seeking online
resources to meet this need. 2) Biology has near universal enrollment by
students. Consequently, teachers are seeking online supplemental resources to
differentiate their instruction to meet the diverse learning needs of students.
3) Through existing partnerships, this special collection can be integrated into
a digital high school biology curriculum and its impact on teachers and learners
can be studied. States and school districts increasingly are asking teachers to
use open education resources on an institutional scale, driven by the desire to
control costs, the need for more personalized learning experiences, and the need
to adapt curricula to meet the demands of new math and science standards. A
comprehensive online source of NSF-supported educational materials will address
this national need by providing teachers, learners, parents, and the public with
open access to high-quality, research-based STEM materials. The immediate
broader impact will be access to 300 high-quality biology resources by Denver
Public School teachers and 800 students, many of whom are from non-dominant
backgrounds. It will provide a scalable model for public access to NSF-funded
educational materials in other STEM domains and can serve as a foundation for
future development of special collections. Longer term impacts will be more
accessible, high-quality educational collections available to educators,
learners, and the general public.

Work will proceed along two tracks: in the development track, the collection of
resources will be built using existing infrastructure tools for collection
development, curation, and maintenance. In the research track, studies will be
conducted to address scaling the collection and improving use for multiple
audiences. The development track will: (1) Develop policies and resource
selection criteria; (2) Identify NSF-supported materials and evaluate their
appropriateness for inclusion; (3) Populate the collection and describe
resources; (4) Configure and operate existing technical infrastructure for
collection development and dissemination; and (5) Disseminate the collection to
multiple open education repositories and directly to teachers and students. The
research track will generate design guidelines and know-how for scaling this
model collection to larger online sources capable of serving multiple audiences
and communities. Project activities will: (1) Identify factors that contribute
to repository value for broader audiences, including factors to be considered
when instrumenting digital collections to support data-intensive research; and
(2) Generate new knowledge on user behavior of STEM teachers and students, and
examine the relationship between collection development policies, resource
selection criteria, descriptions, and usage.