* 1555356
* CAREER: Morphological Control of Crystalline Materials Using Deformations of Elastomeric Substrates and Fluid Flow for the Bottom-up Fabrication of Hybrid Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/2016,02/28/2022
* Stephen Morin, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 02/28/2022
* USD 649,474.00

Non-technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;The combination of hard materials (ceramics or
semiconductors) and soft materials (polymers) into a single construct enables
technologies (e.g., soft electronics and low-cost sensors) with new forms and
functions that promise to broadly impact areas such as health care, consumer
electronics, and public safety; however, combining materials with such disparate
properties (thermal, mechanical, chemical, etc.) directly into hybrid structures
is challenging. In this project the research team investigates dynamic solution-
and surface-chemical processes that provide new methods for the controlled
synthesis of crystalline materials and their direct integration with soft
materials yielding hybrid structures with useful properties (e.g., optical,
electrical, etc.). In complimentary activities, the principal investigator uses
the methods and outcomes of the research activities in the creation of new
educational curriculum and outreach activities that strengthen the tradition of
innovation and the participation of underrepresented groups (especially Native
American youths) in materials science in Nebraska.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;With the support of the Solid State and
Materials Chemistry program in the Division of Materials Research and the EPSCoR
program, this project seeks to generate new approaches to controlling crystal
growth that enable the direct fabrication of hybrid structures which combine
soft materials with complex, three-dimensional, inorganic materials. Such
seamless integration of components with exceedingly different properties
(thermal and mechanical) cannot be achieved using traditional microfabrication.
This project includes the following specific goals: (i) Utilize mechanical
deformations of chemically functionalized soft polymers to actively control the
synthesis, assembly, and 2D organization of hard materials enabling the
fabrication of hybrid structures with reconfigurable properties. (ii) Synthesize
hierarchical, 3D crystal morphologies and hybrid materials using the effects of
flowing liquids in soft reactors. The approaches to controlling crystal growth
under investigation emphasize dynamic manipulation of physical variables surface
chemistry and fluid flow that go beyond those available in systems which use
rigid materials or static conditions. Specifically, the deformation of
elastomeric substrates provides a convenient way to reversibly change surface
chemistry and manipulate the spatial organization of crystals; the flow of
liquids in reactors can simultaneously tune the chemical and fluid-mechanical
environments of crystals. These research activities contribute significantly to
the realization of new, additive approaches to the direct production of
functional, hybrid materials with applications in existing and emerging
technologies including, microelectronics, energy, and soft, stretchable, and
flexible electronics and sensors.