* 1555905
* Phylogeny and diversification of the ants, wasps and bees (Hymenoptera Aculeata) using targeted enrichment of ultra-conserved elements
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2016,02/28/2022
* Sean Brady, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Balakrishnan
* 02/28/2022
* USD 850,600.00

One universal feature of life on earth is that the rate at which new species are
formed varies widely across organisms. Features such as changes in life history,
may be one explanation for the big differences among these rates. In insects,
changes in diet, sociality, and mode of parasitism have been investigated for
their impact on species formation. However, very few groups of insects include
species that have all of these life history traits, making it difficult to
compare their individual impacts. The ants, wasps and bees (Aculeata) represent
one such group; their numerous species exhibit a diversity of life histories.
The researchers will use new methods of genome sequencing to uncover the
evolutionary relationships among the 65,000 described species of ants, wasps and
bees. This research will provide important insights into differences in rates of
speciation for a large group of organisms with sophisticated social systems
(including ants, hornets, yellow jackets, honey bees and bumblebees) and the
economically important group of pollinating insects (bees). This project will
contribute significantly to the development of scientific expertise and improved
infrastructure in the United States. It will provide training opportunities for
undergraduate students, graduate students, and post-doctoral researchers in
sophisticated methods of DNA sequencing, bioinformatics, computer programming,
and phylogenetic analysis. Protocols and data will be made publically available.
The project will develop a traveling public exhibit on the biodiversity,
evolutionary history, and importance of our most important agricultural
pollinators (bees).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team will take advantage
of new technological innovations in DNA sequencing to generate massive data sets
for resolving the relationships of the Aculeata. Using highly conserved regions
of the genome (ultraconserved elements) they will enrich genomic libraries for
genes of interest. These enriched libraries will then be subjected to sequencing
using the latest sequencing technologies. Using bioinformatics tools, the data
sets will be assembled, aligned, and analyzed to reconstruct the evolutionary
relationships among aculeate taxa and determine where and when shifts in
diversification took place.