* 1555058
* RAPID: Investigation of Natural Selection and Host-microbiome-virome Interactions in an Unprecedented and Ongoing Marine Epidemic
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2016,02/28/2019
* Melissa Pespeni, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Standard Grant
* Theodore Morgan
* 02/28/2019
* USD 196,476.00

Large infectious disease outbreaks allow for relatively faster evolutionary
changes in the host, the infectious pathogen, and the community of
microorganisms living within the host (the microbiome). While these interactions
are poorly understood, they're extremely important in predicting and controlling
future outbreaks. The largest recorded marine epidemic ever recorded is
currently ongoing in intertidal ecosystems along the west coast of North
America. Sea star wasting disease (SSWD) is effecting sea star populations from
South Eastern Alaska to Baja California, Mexico and local extinctions are a
serious concern. Large-scale epidemics such as these are expected to become more
common as the global environment and species' population distributions change.
This current disease event provides a unique opportunity to better understand
how hosts, the hosts' microbiome, and the disease causing pathogen change
throughout an epidemic. The research proposed here will lead to a deeper
understanding of these disease events from an evolutionary and ecological
perspective by characterizing changes in host and pathogen due to natural
selection following epidemics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to
understand the impact of the microbiome and virome on host disease status and
progression at the individual, population, and community levels. The work will
contribute to the understanding of an organism as a sum of its inhabitants and
will dissect the role of the microbial community in physiological and
evolutionary responses to disease. Disease may often be due to a disruption in
the balance of an organisms' complex community of microorganisms. Thus, the
evolution of disease is not the coevolution of two players (host and pathogen),
but rather the coevolution of all members of the host's community. The ongoing
Sea Star Wasting Disease event provides a unique opportunity to investigate how
this evolution plays out in a widespread epidemic. Specifically, the proposed
research aims to (1) identify the targets of natural selection in host and virus
populations and (2) investigate molecular mechanisms in the host, virus, and
microbiome that underline resistance in hosts and virulence in virus in order to
identify the tipping point between asymptomatic and symptomatic hosts. This will
be accomplished using a novel sequencing technique that simultaneously collects
sequence data from the transcripts of the eukaryotic host, bacterial community,
and viral community. This approach allows for identification of the major
players in the interaction as well as their functional roles. The understanding
of this complicated coevolution will impact the fields of disease ecology and
evolution as well as affect the way wildlife and human diseases are understood
and, hopefully, prevented or controlled.