* 1555796
* Workshops on Tracking Quality of Experience in the Internet
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2018
* David Clark, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 07/31/2018
* USD 49,393.00

This award will support the first of two anticipated workshops on tracking
Quality of Experience (QoE) in the Internet. The workshops will bring together
top researchers in academia and industry, as well as government representatives,
to discuss ongoing work on the topic, and opportunities and potential frameworks
for collaboration across the different disciplines. The intended outcome is a
research agenda leading to better methods to measure and analyze the state of
QoE in the current Internet and identify and localize the causes of QoE
impairments. Considering the diversity of topics to consider, the organizers
will ensure through announcements in a range of venues and targeted email that
different research areas and perspectives are adequately represented.

The term "Quality of Experience (QoE)" describes a user's subjective assessment
of his or her experience using some application. Network engineers have in the
past focused on Quality of Service: performance metrics such as throughput,
delay and jitter, packet loss, and the like. But different performance as
measured by QoS parameters only matters if it affects the consequential
experience of users, as they attempt to use one or another application over the
net. QoE impairments, which might include rebuffering for streaming video or
excessive round trip latency for real time speech, are what really matter to the
user. The goal of the workshops is to understand the state of research with
respect to QoE, and specifically to contemplate a community agenda to integrate
ongoing threads of QoE research into a collaboration, in order to measure and
analyze the state of QoE in the current Internet and identify and localize the
causes of QoE impairments.

These meetings will bring together researchers in different areas critical to
understanding QoE in the Internet - from network measurements, to experimental
designs and human factors - and provide opportunities for cross-area research
and collaboration. The outcome of the workshop will begin to define relevant
measurements of broadband quality and help network providers to better
understand where impairments are arising in the global Internet. These
consequences should in turn lead to a better Internet experience for the typical
user of the Internet. As well, the discussions at the workshop are intended to
suggest new research collaboration for the network, systems and human computer
interaction communities.