* 1555173
* CAREER: Standing, Lying, and Sitting: Restructuring Intermolecular Forces in Molecular Monolayers and Freshman Chemistry
* MPS,CHE
* 01/15/2016,07/31/2021
* Shelley Claridge, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 07/31/2021
* USD 752,919.00

Professor Shelley Claridge of Purdue University is supported through a CAREER
award by the Supramolecular, Macromolecular and Nanochemistry Program of the
Chemistry Division to develop bioinspired surface chemistry that tailors
electronic properties and solubility of technologically important layered
materials. Graphene and other layered materials have the potential to improve
applications ranging from high-efficiency solar cells to precision biosensors.
Controlling surface chemistry represents a useful means of affecting properties
such as conductivity and solubility to help reach these aims. However, in
practice this control has been difficult to achieve. Professor Claridge's group
takes a bioinspired approach to solving both problems using one of nature's
chosen building blocks for controlling interface chemistry: fat molecules
(lipids). The educational component of this program uses campus dining
facilities as context-rich learning environments for first-year general
chemistry students and the campus community. The proposed research uses an
unconventional self-assembly strategy based on lipids reoriented into a
'sitting' geometry. This strategy provides precise spatial control over layered
material surface chemistry from sub-nanometer to micron scales, enabling
nanoscale patterning, device and biological applications. The project
establishes a framework for designing new amphiphilic surface chemistries based
on independent modifications of each piece of the amphiphile. The new surface
chemistry simultaneously controls ligand-substrate electronic coupling and
ligand-solvent interactions important for material solubility and
processability. For semiconductor nanocrystals, rigorous control of ligand
chemistry has proven to be a key enabler in technological applications;
establishing similar control over layered material surface chemistry is expected
to provide similar benefits. The educational component of the project makes
creative use of campus dining facilities as a shared learning environment for
students to improve their understanding of intermolecular forces important in
proteins, lipids, and carbohydrates, and assesses their understanding using a
published instrument based on structure-drawing problems.