* 1555001
* CAREER: Developing Advanced Morphological Control of Nanowires to Encode Photonic and Optoelectronic Functionality
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2022
* James Cahoon, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Lane
* 08/31/2022
* USD 550,000.00

Nontechnical Description: Semiconductor nanowires have been widely explored for
their potential electronic and photonic applications, and the properties of the
wires are largely dictated by the ability to modulate their composition during
synthesis. This project aims to explore chemistry-based processes to encode
complex cylindrical silicon wires and to understand the incorporation of
phosphorus, boron, and nitrogen dopant atoms in silicon nanowires during their
growth. The effect of wire synthesis conditions on the concentration and spatial
profiles of these dopant atoms is studied, and the potential for atomically-
abrupt interfaces is evaluated. In addition, the influence of the dopant atoms
on the optical properties and shape of the wires is examined, targeting
optimized growth of spiraling nanowires and controllable creation of luminescent
centers within the wires. The project trains undergraduate and graduate students
in topics that bridge the interface between chemistry, physics, and engineering
- providing breadth of experience in nanomaterials synthesis, microfabrication,
optoelectronic measurements, and modeling. Various programs and demonstrations
in elementary schools and local libraries, annual public science expositions and
summer research for high-school students enable broad dissemination of the
scientific concepts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: Semiconductor
nanowires are often synthesized by metal-catalyzed growth using vapor-liquid-
solid (VLS) and vapor-solid-solid (VSS) growth processes. This project aims to
develop a combined VLS-VSS growth method to encode phosphorus, boron, and
nitrogen dopant atoms in silicon nanowires with single or sub-nanometer spatial
resolution. The incorporation of dopants is used to modulate the optical
properties and morphology of the nanowires. For instance, co-doping is explored
as a novel method to create chiral wires, and the chiro-optical response of
these structures is studied. In addition, the incorporation of nitrogen is used
to introduce defect states with luminescent characteristics. Modulation of boron
and phosphorus is employed to create deep-subwavelength photonic crystal
cavities integrated with p-n junction photodetectors that exhibit wavelength-
selective detection. These efforts expand the set of bottom-up synthetic methods
that can be used to encode photonic and optoelectronic functionality in
nanowires.