* 1555883
* Plant community assembly and disassembly with climate change
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2016,12/31/2022
* David Perkel, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 12/31/2022
* USD 623,352.00

How strongly does climate influence the composition of ecological communities?
If climate is the predominant force structuring communities, climate warming
should predictably result in the loss of cold-adapted species at the expense of
warm-adapted species in local communities. Alternatively, if regional climate
doesn't strongly structure local communities, then species composition may not
change much with climate change. However, an apparent lack of change in the
species composition of local communities experiencing climate warming can also
arise from a limited ability of species to shift their geographic ranges, e.g.,
slow rate of dispersal. Unfortunately, these two possibilities have very
different implications; the first suggests communities may be somewhat resilient
to climate change, while the latter implies community sensitivity, especially as
climate change accelerates. This research will test the importance of community
resilience vs. sensitivity to recent and future climate change, by examining
unique historic data sets of plant species composition collected across regional
climatic gradients in two Pacific Northwest National Parks. The project will
contribute to our understanding of the consequences of climate change and
communicate this information to National Park Service and other resource
managers in the Pacific Northwest. This project will also provide opportunities
for student research and training that will strengthen the scientific
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will make progress on the problem
of predicting change in plant communities with climate change given apparent
stasis, despite the inherent challenges of differentiating drivers with similar
expected outcomes. Specifically, this project will determine how strongly
climate influences plant communities in the mountains of the Pacific Northwest.
Hypotheses on relations of community composition and bioclimatic variables will
be tested using resurvey data sets of plant community composition originally
collected over 30 years ago in two National Parks (North Cascades National Park
and Mount Rainier National Park). This historic data will be combined with newly
developed joint species distribution models and high resolution data on the
landscape features that influence microclimate. Research objectives are to: I.
Assess the importance of macro and microclimatic variables for community
composition; II. Examine community shifts over the last four decades to
determine whether compositional turnover with recent climate change is
consistent with climatic buffering (resilience) vs. lagged species responses
(sensitivity); and III. Conduct a multi-species seed addition experiment across
large-scale and fine-scale climatic gradients to parse out the roles of
recruitment limitation and demographic inertia (factors that contributed to
time-lagged sensitivity) and macro- or microclimatic buffering (factors that
promote resilience to climate change) in the early stages of community assembly.