* 1555789
* SBIR Phase II:  Development of an Intracellular Delivery Platform for Accelerated Drug Discovery Using Genetically Engineered Human Immune Cells
* TIP,TI
* 04/15/2016,03/31/2021
* Harrison Bralower, SQZ Biotechnologies Company
* Standard Grant
* Kaitlin Bratlie
* 03/31/2021
* USD 1,249,996.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project will be the development of technology for the
intracellular delivery of biomolecules directly into cells. This microfluidics-
based platform has the potential to become an enabling technology for
intracellular delivery, which may be used to accelerate drug discovery R&amp;D
by allowing reliable, efficient delivery of diverse material classes without
having to engineer the material or the cell to natively uptake these molecules.
Such capabilities could allow pharmaceutical companies to assess the efficacy of
drug candidates faster than ever before, especially with integration into high-
throughput robotic workflows that are already well-established and efficacious.
The technology could dramatically reduce the time to market for new drugs by
decoupling determination of a candidate's activity from the cell's affinity for
the molecule. It also could facilitate a deeper understanding of biological
processes and pathways. Initial studies with leading drug developers and
academic laboratories towards this goal have been very encouraging, and, in the
future, the platform could potentially enable robust engineering of cell
function for cell-based therapies targeting a diversity of diseases including
influenza, cancer, and even autoimmune disorders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR
Phase II project proposes the continued development of the intracellular
delivery technology to address relevant applications in drug discovery R&amp;D.
New drug discovery is often hampered by the inability of membrane-impermeable
drug candidates to enter the cell cytosol, necessitating exogenous materials for
delivery such as strong electric fields or viral vectors. However, these
materials tend to cause off-target effects or toxicity, presenting a need for a
technology that can facilitate delivery without altering post-treatment cellular
function. The goal of this project is to demonstrate a platform geared towards
market adoption of microfluidic hardware as the standard method for transfection
and intracellular delivery. During Phase II, the platform will be fully-
characterized, validated, and verified in order to produce the consistent,
repeatable results necessary to achieve market entry. In addition, research is
planned to demonstrate the ability of the platform to support drug discovery
R&amp;D by developing the use of the CRISPR/Cas9 gene editing system for use
with this intracellular delivery technology.