* 1555998
* SBIR Phase II:  New Crystallization Modifiers for Low Calorie Fats in Food Products
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/2016,01/31/2018
* Earl Wagener, TETRAMER TECHNOLOGIES, L.L.C.
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 01/31/2018
* USD 686,688.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research Phase II project is to facilitate the commercialization of low fat
replacement EPG technology to help solve some of the largest obesity and related
health issues facing the US while providing a patentable new additive platform
for the $600 billion food industry. With high caloric density foods being the
primary cause for the obesity epidemic, the facilitation of rapid development of
92% lower calorie fat replacers such as EPG will have a powerful impact on the
health of a large portion of society, reducing health care cost for US citizens
and providing a positive economic impact for the US. The highest initial impact
will be the introduction of additive modified EPG fat replacers to the
confectionary segment where the need for decreased caloric content is greatest
due to the absence of compatible low-calorie fats. Locally, the development of
this technology will result in growth of 20 + high technology jobs in South
Carolina. During Phase II, Tetramer will work with undergraduates and high
school students through the NSF Phase II supplemental programs, which have
trained 25 undergraduate students and 9 high school students who have all gone
into STEM careers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of this Phase II
research project are to provide critically needed additive control technology to
allow the dramatically reduced caloric intake (up to 92% ) of esterified
propoxylated glycerol technology (EPG) to be used in many food products that
today contain high calorie natural fats and oils. During Phase I activities,
Tetramer discovered that the new EPG approach to mitigating the growing obesity
epidemic in the US was hampered by the fact that being a new technology EPG
processes differently than high calorie fats such as palm kernel oil or cocoa
butter. This creates a manufacturing mismatch for a significant number of the
products in the projected $2.6 Billion fat replacement market. To date the
commercially available additives do not work, thus requiring a new additive
molecular architecture ?toolbox? to optimize the processing variables. Tetramer
will use it's synthetic organic chemistry and material science expertise to
synthesize and optimize additives that will allow EPG?s to provide 92% lower
calories, while still maintaining the same sensory, physical properties and
processing efficiency as the natural oils they will replace. End use
applications will be developed through collaborations with food industry
leaders.