* 1555387
* CAREER: SusChEM: Metal Complexes with Pendant Proton Relays for Small Molecule Activation
* MPS,CHE
* 02/01/2016,01/31/2021
* Smaranda Marinescu, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 01/31/2021
* USD 693,563.00

CHE-1555387 CAREER: Metal Complexes with Pendant Proton Relays for Small
Molecule Activation; Smaranda C. Marinescu, University of Southern California
(USC)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Energy harvested directly from sunlight is an
attractive source for filling the global need for power with minimal
environmental impact. To avail ourselves of this practically inexhaustible
source, several important problems in solar energy capture, storage, and
distribution need first to be met in order to harness solar radiation to satisfy
global energy demand. One promising method is the use of solar energy to drive
chemical reactions that produce easily stored fuels. Carbon dioxide (CO2), the
undesirable "greenhouse gas" byproduct of burning fossil fuels and other
industrial processes, is potentially an abundant, economic feedstock for solar-
driven catalysis to produce hydrocarbon fuels. With inspiration from natural
photosynthetic biological systems, Dr. Smarandra Marinescu is developing
molecular catalysts for this process. The catalyst architecture is specifically
designed with a hydrogen-bonded framework capable of CO2 activation. The
research goals of this project are to design and synthesize catalyst complexes
of first-row transition metals supported by negatively-charged or neutral
molecular fragments (called ligands) able to supply protons needed in the
chemical reaction, and to use these metal-ligand complexes to enable conversion
of CO2 to CO, the first step in activating the greenhouse gas in the formation
of hydrocarbon chemicals. The research has broader societal impact both in
developing access to solar energy in an efficient and storable way and in
removing the CO2 from the environment, thus turning a harmful waste product into
a useful resource. The project also has broader impact in meeting the CAREER-
specific criterion of integrating research and educational activities, which
involve both students and teachers in the local middle/high schools in energy-
related projects and educational experiences. Dr. Marinescu is also developing
mentoring programs for women at undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral levels
to increase the participation of this underrepresented group in science fields.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With funding from the Chemical Catalysis Program of the
Chemistry Division, Professor Smarandra Marinescu of the Department of Chemistry
at University of Southern California is synthesizing several macrocyclic
aminopyridine complexes and evaluating their catalytic properties for the
reduction of CO2. Preliminary studies indicate that cobalt complexes with
pendant NH groups act as efficient electrocatalysts for the reduction of CO2 to
CO with excellent Faradaic efficiencies. In comparison, the cobalt complexes
with pendant tertiary amines are not as efficient CO2-reduction catalysts,
suggesting that the presence of the pendant NH moiety of the secondary amine is
crucial for catalysis. Stoichiometric studies are performed to detect and
characterize proposed intermediates in the catalytic cycle. The prepared
catalysts are studied structurally, electrochemically and spectroscopically to
understand their chemical reactivity. These fundamental studies further the
fundamental understanding of how hydrogen bonding facilitates the reduction of
CO2 and aid in the development of practical catalysts using inexpensive metals.
Additionally, there are several broader impacts directly tied to improving and
diversifying the pipeline of young scientists interested and engaged in
chemistry. The educational components are integrated with energy and catalysis
applications, and target middle/high school students and teachers. Dr. Marinescu
is also developing mentoring programs for women at undergraduate, graduate, and
postdoctoral levels to increase the participation of this underrepresented group
in STEM fields.