* 1555050
* CAREER: A multidisciplinary approach to the investigation of secondary metabolism in nematodes
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2022
* Rebecca Butcher, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Christine Chow
* 04/30/2022
* USD 722,000.00

With this award, funded by the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the
Chemistry Division, Dr. Rebecca A. Butcher of the University of Florida is
investigating the chemical signals used by different species of nematodes
(roundworms) to control their development. Nematodes are very diverse (over
25,000 characterized species) and can be parasitic, causing widespread disease
in plants and animals (including humans). Despite the huge impact of nematodes,
surprisingly little is known about chemical signaling in members of this
important class of organisms. Investigations into the chemical structures and
biosynthesis of the chemical signals used by nematodes should enable the
development of new chemical tools and strategies to interfere with their life
cycles and survival and thus provide new treatment options. This award also
promotes the development a discovery-based laboratory course for undergraduates
in the isolation of natural products from microorganisms that live inside
plants. In this course, students isolate endophytes from plants, generate
extracts from these endophytes, and screen the extracts for anti-nematode
activities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award aims to characterize the chemical
structures of key small-molecule signals that nematodes use to control their
development. The small-molecule signals from representative nematode species can
be identified using comparative metabolomics between wild-type worms and
biosynthetic mutants. The relevant compounds are then be purified using mass-
guided fractionation, and their structures characterized using NMR spectroscopy.
Comparison of the chemical structures and biosynthetic gene sequences from
different nematode species enables the roles of specific enzymatic domains to be
mapped across nematode evolution. To study the activities of specific enzymatic
domains, this study uses a multidisciplinary approach incorporating tools from
biochemistry, organic chemistry, structural biology, analytical chemistry, and
nematode genetics. The results of this award are expected to shed light on how
nematodes control their life cycles and the development of novel methods to
reduce the survival of parasitic nematodes. The educational portion of this
project increases retention of undergraduate students in science fields by
developing a discovery-based (rather than cookbook style) laboratory course in
natural product identification. The proposed course extends the research
opportunities for undergraduate and high school students and may lead to the
discovery of novel bacterial/fungal metabolites with anti-nematode activities.