* 1555903
* High-Reliable LED Visible Light Communications and Positioning
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2019
* Albert Wang, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Claire Hemingway
* 06/30/2019
* USD 249,296.00

Existing radio-frequency (RF) wireless technology for wireless communication and
navigation has encountered technical challenges, e.g., unsuitable for big data
streaming due to limited frequency bandwidth and limitation on indoor
positioning. Visible light emitted by light-emitting diodes (LED) may be
modulated to realize wireless visible light communication (VLC) and positioning
(VLP). Building on energy-efficiency LED lighting bulbs, VLC/VLP technology may
potentially be a revolutionary alternative to existing RF wireless and
navigation. Dr. Albert Wang of University of California-Riverside will bring 15
American undergraduate students to conduct LED VLC/VLP research in China during
2016 to 2018. The American students will spend two summer months in China, first
in Beijing, at the Institute of Microelectronics of Tsinghua University (TU),
one of the best university-based facilities for advance semiconductor
fabrication, then in Wuhan, China's optical valley, at the School of Optics and
Electronics Information of Huazhong University of Science and Technology (HUST)
to perform VLC/VLP research in pair with local Chinese students. TU and HUST
offer world-class and complementary research strengths and facilities for nano
device fabrication and opto-electronic integration, respectively. The two
Chinese co-investigators Prof. Tianling Ren at TU and Prof. Xuecheng Zou at HUST
are well known scholars in the field who have been collaborating with Dr. Wang
for years, including hosting American REU students before. This US-China IRES
program will expose the American students to the global frontiers of opto-
electronic wireless communications and ranging research. At least 50% of
participants will be expected from the underrepresented minority
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This three-year US-China IRES program will involve
American undergraduate students in developing novel LED-based wireless visible
light communication (VLC) and positioning (VLP) systems. Building upon the on-
going research at the University of California Center for Ubiquitous
Communications by Light (UC-Light), the IRES students will be directed to
conduct the following research tasks in team with their Chinese counterparts:
(1) develop an LED-based VLC testbed systems, (2) design integrated circuit
(ICs) for VLC/VLP systems, (3) develop LED-based real-time tracking systems, (4)
investigate broadband graphene-based optical modulators for VLC systems, and (5)
design electrostatic discharge (ESD) protection for high-reliable LED VLC/VLP
systems. The LED VLC/VLP technologies developed is potentially a revolutionary
alternative to existing RF-based wireless communication and navigation
technologies, addressing its technical limitations. The participating American
students will be trained to be technically competitive and globally enabled for
their future careers.