* 1555336
* CAREER: Electric Field Localization and Enhancement at Optical Frequencies Enabled by Material's Dissipation
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2022
* Jie Yao, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Lane
* 05/31/2022
* USD 539,513.00

Non-technical Description: Most materials absorb light, converting
electromagnetic energy into thermal energy. The energy dissipation has
traditionally been considered as undesirable for many usages of optical
materials and needs to be minimized. The principal investigator approaches this
problem from a new perspective: to make use of the dissipation in optical
materials by converting it into useful functionalities. The project
experimentally investigates the electromagnetic field confinement and
enhancement in nanophotonic structures made of dissipative optical materials and
explores their applications in molecule sensing. In parallel with the research
component of the project, "Thinkingstorm" graduate- and undergraduate-student
competitions on materials development and a lab immersion activity for high
school students are carried out to enhance the education of critical thinking
and problem solving skills. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description:
Dissipative loss contributes directly to the distribution of both magnitude and
phase of the electromagnetic field around a material. Photonic structures made
of strongly absorbing materials may induce field redistribution in similar ways
as plasmonic metal structures. The research component of this CAREER award
explores new roles of imaginary part of material permittivity in controlling the
light-matter interaction, especially at the interface between lossy/lossless
materials. The principal investigator investigates electromagnetic field
enhancement in lossy nanostructures using photochemical near-field imaging
technique and experimentally measures the mode volume of the highly confined
field. Electron energy loss spectroscopy is employed for studying the local
photonic density of states. The understanding of these nanophotonic behaviors
can lead to new forms of surface enhanced Raman spectroscopy. The research on
composite materials over a large tunable range and on versatile dynamic control
of material dissipation provides a solid base for new families of nanophotonic
devices and changes the ways in which researchers control light, process optical
materials, and design photonic structures.