* 1555449
* Building Tomorrow's Leaders:  Bridging workforce development in ERCs to meet demand for a skilled workforce
* ENG,EEC
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2016
* Anthony Boccanfuso, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Carmina Londono
* 08/31/2016
* USD 99,570.00

This project is producing an outcomes-oriented workshop, convened by the
University-Industry Demonstration Partnership (UIDP), which will address the
challenge of meeting the needs for developing a skilled workforce in emerging
areas defined by Engineering Research Centers (ERCs). Since its inception, the
NSF Engineering Research Centers program has supported numerous centers that
perform high quality R&D - which has led to transformative advances that spawn
entirely new technological fields. These thrusts require a skilled workforce at
a variety of educational levels, however, existing (as well as graduated) ERCs
have been challenged to meet the subsequent growth in demand. The workshop is
crafted to assess strategies being employed by current NSF ERCs to meet the
challenge of training individuals to work in these emerging areas and make
recommendations for ways to bolster these efforts.

This workshop is bringing together a strategic set of practitioners and thought
leaders from diverse fields who possess the required skills and complementary
experiences to evaluate current approaches, extract key aspects of successful
programs, and propose new strategies/pilots to meet workforce needs. Effective
methods to identify and quantify emerging/acute needs for a skilled workforce in
ERC technological areas will be compiled and evaluated. Current and proven
domestic and international approaches to meet these demands will be reviewed and
strategies for non-federal and federal cooperation will be proposed. The results
will be disseminated both in a written report and through participation in
relevant professional meetings.