* 1555340
* CAREER: Control of Charge Carrier Dynamics in Complex Thermoelectric Semiconductors
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/2016,02/28/2023
* Eric Toberer, Colorado School of Mines
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 02/28/2023
* USD 625,000.00

Non-Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to reveal and
control charge transport in structurally complex semiconductors to ultimately
yield the next generation of thermoelectric materials. The development of
advanced thermoelectric materials could have a considerable impact on the
nation's energy portfolio through solar thermoelectric generators, cogeneration,
and waste heat recovery. More broadly, this program will lead to a deep
understanding of charge transport in complex semiconductors that impacts other
applications (e.g. transparent conductors, photovoltaic materials, power
electronics). These research efforts will be integrated into the classroom
through data-driven active learning modules. Community college students will be
engaged in solid state materials chemistry and physics through summer research
on this project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;In
thermoelectric materials, the energy-dependence of charge carrier transport
plays a key role in determining the thermopower. Further, the interplay between
solid state chemistry and charge transport in semiconductors is particularly
rich due to the profound effects that even dilute chemical perturbations exert
on electronic properties. There is thus a grand challenge to understand and
control the energy dependence charge transport. In this project, the goal is to
combine recent advances in structural determination and first principles
calculations, in concert with single crystal growth and advanced transport
measurements, to yield deep insight into charge transport through the careful
integration of these measurements. With the support of the Solid State and
Materials Chemistry program, this understanding will reveal the energy-
dependence of charge carrier transport and the associated structural
perturbations which can dramatically alter these properties.