* 1555376
* CAREER: Automating Construction of Polarizable, Flexible, Nonreactive Force-Fields for Metal-Organic Frameworks &amp; Applications to Helium and Solar Water Splitting Gas Purificat
* MPS,DMR
* 04/15/2016,03/31/2022
* Thomas Manz, New Mexico State University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 03/31/2022
* USD 400,223.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports computational and
theoretical research and education in predicting candidate materials for gas
separation. Solar water splitting is a renewable energy source that could be
used to reduce greenhouse gas emissions. In solar water splitting, sunlight
energy is captured by turning water into hydrogen and oxygen gases. Hydrogen is
a clean fuel that generates only water when burned. In this project, the PI and
his team of student researchers will use computational modeling to predict high
performance membrane materials for separating the gaseous products of solar
water splitting. The PI's approach may lead to more efficient and lower cost
hydrogen producing devices for energy
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Membrane materials will also be predicted for
the application to purify helium from naturally occurring gases. Helium is
traditionally purified by liquefying it at extremely cold temperatures, but
enormous energy is required to cool to these temperatures. The PI's team will
develop computational methods to search a recently published database of metal-
organic framework materials to identify molecule sieves having pore sizes and
other characteristics suitable for helium purification. They will further
develop computational methods to model gas separations in membranes made from
these materials. This should reduce energy requirements during helium
purification, by allowing part of the gas purification to be performed at
moderate temperatures. The computational methods developed in this project will
be made publically available in software tools developed by the PI's
group.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Educational activities are an important part of this
project. The PI will train graduate and undergraduate students in computational
materials science methods. Graduate students will perform doctoral dissertation
research extending the capabilities of computational methods. The PI and
graduate students will develop YouTube videos explaining computational materials
science at levels appropriate to K to 12 and undergraduate students and the
general public. They will also prepare training modules to be disseminated
through Nanohub.org and that explain computational materials science techniques
to graduate students and professionals. The PI and graduate students will
perform outreach to middle and high school students by being science fair
judges. Students from under-represented groups will be involved in the project.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports
computational and theoretical research and education in predicting candidate
materials for gas separation. The PI and students will research strategies to
automatically parameterize flexible, polarizable force-fields from quantum
chemistry calculations. These force-fields will be used in classical molecular
dynamics and Monte Carlo simulations of metal-organic frameworks to compute gas
diffusion constants and adsorption isotherms. A database of experimentally known
metal-organic framework crystal structures will be screened to identify metal-
organic framework-based materials suitable for purifying (a) helium from
naturally occurring gas sources and (b) hydrogen gas from solar water splitting.
Cryogenic distillation is currently the primary helium purification method.
Using helium-selective membranes instead for all or portions of this
purification could dramatically reduce energy requirements. Solar water
splitting is an environmentally friendly and renewable hydrogen gas source.
Wireless solar water splitting uses particles immersed in liquid to cogenerate a
hydrogen and oxygen gas mixture with trace water vapor. Wireless solar water
splitting could offer higher gas generation rates per volume than wired solar
water splitting containing distinct anode and cathode compartments. This project
will enable more widespread use of wireless solar water splitting (and wired
solar water splitting with small anode-cathode gap distance) by identifying
suitable metal-oxide framework-based materials for hydrogen-oxygen-water gas
separations. Because constructing mechanically robust membranes from pure metal-
oxide framework crystals is difficult, the PI will aim to predict easier-to-
fabricate mixed matrix membranes containing metal-oxide framework crystals
embedded in mechanically robust polymers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Prior metal-
oxide framework studies showed framework flexibility that sometimes impacts gas
diffusion constants by orders of magnitude. The key scientific challenge is to
develop computationally efficient, automated methods to construct accurate
flexible force-fields. To achieve this, the PI's research team will combine (1)
the Density Derived Electrostatic and Chemical method for computing net atomic
charges and other atomic properties with (2) a modification of Tkatchenko-
Scheffler self-consistent dispersion screening to compute polarizabilities and
dispersion coefficients with (3) a modification of the quick force-field
(QuickFF) method for computing flexibility parameters. By computing system-
specific force-field parameters, this approach should achieve higher accuracy
than generic force-fields. The computational methods developed in this project
will be made publically available in software tools developed by the PI's
group.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Educational activities are an important part of this
project. The PI will train graduate and undergraduate students in computational
materials science methods. Graduate students will perform doctoral dissertation
research extending the capabilities of computational methods. The PI and
graduate students will develop YouTube videos explaining computational materials
science at levels appropriate to K to 12 and undergraduate students and the
general public. They will also prepare training modules to be disseminated
through Nanohub.org and that explain computational materials science techniques
to graduate students and professionals. The PI and graduate students will
perform outreach to middle and high school students by being science fair
judges. Students from under-represented groups will be involved in the project.