* 1555928
* SBIR Phase II:  Megabit-Per-Second Underwater Wireless Communications
* TIP,TI
* 04/15/2016,06/30/2021
* Thomas Riedl, OceanComm Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 06/30/2021
* USD 1,196,179.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is the introduction of
high-speed&lt;br/&gt;wireless modems usable subsea and significant cost
reduction of deep-water operations ?&lt;br/&gt;industry experts estimate savings
of nearly 20% of deep-water operations through the&lt;br/&gt;availability of
subsea WiFi. Today, there is no broadband wireless communication
available&lt;br/&gt;underwater. In the deep ocean, remotely operated vehicles
(ROVs) require a tether for&lt;br/&gt;communication and a support ship for
tether management; sensors and systems must either be&lt;br/&gt;physically
connected, or retrieved from the deep sea to exchange data. An ROV support
ship&lt;br/&gt;costs about $120k/day leading to over $7B spent on ROV support
ships in 2013. The proposed&lt;br/&gt;megabit-per-second technology would allow
ROV manufacturers and operators to cut the&lt;br/&gt;tether on many of their
vehicles. Wireless ROVs can move unencumbered throughout
coverage&lt;br/&gt;area, piloted from anywhere (e.g. from Houston), without
expensive surface vessels. The&lt;br/&gt;proposed wireless modem technology
connects ROVs and machinery to wired infrastructure,&lt;br/&gt;enabling safe
operation of heavy subsea machinery without the possibility of cables or
tethers&lt;br/&gt;getting tangled, causing damage or worse. This project will
create 10 new jobs in the next three&lt;br/&gt;years, with many more to be added
as the production scales.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase 2 project proposes to develop a faster&lt;br/&gt;and more
reliable wireless communication system for the sub-sea industry. Current state
of the&lt;br/&gt;art communication links for the deep ocean are either tethered,
requiring long, bulky, and&lt;br/&gt;expensive cables to connect machinery and
systems, or have extremely low data rates, enabling only &lt;br/&gt;the most
rudimentary of tasks. The proposed underwater wireless
communication&lt;br/&gt;system will provide WiFi-like data rates in the Mbps
(megabits/sec) range ? 100 to 1,000 times&lt;br/&gt;faster than existing
underwater wireless communication technologies - and enable
video&lt;br/&gt;streaming and real-time control of subsea infrastructure,
machinery, and mobile underwater&lt;br/&gt;vehicles. Since radio signals do not
propagate far underwater, the proposed technology uses&lt;br/&gt;sound waves, as
whales and dolphins do, for communication. The speed of sound is
200,000&lt;br/&gt;times slower than the speed of radio propagation, and mobile
acoustic transmitters and&lt;br/&gt;receivers hence suffer from severe Doppler
distortion. The proposed technology dynamically&lt;br/&gt;measures, tracks, and
compensates for this distortion, to enable wireless communication
at&lt;br/&gt;data rates never before possible underwater.