* 1555006
* CAREER: Paradoxical benefits of distraction for motor memory
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2022
* Joo-Hyun Song, Brown University
* Continuing Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 08/31/2022
* USD 646,406.00

A pilot operating an aircraft and a stroke victim recovering the ability to walk
must learn (or learn again) pertinent motor skills. Importantly, these motor
skills are often used in new situations, where attention may be distracted by
other events or objects. For example, during an emergency the pilot must
continue to operate the aircraft while maintaining communications with ground
authorities and other crew members and assessing the state of the aircraft.
Similarly, a stroke patient recovering the ability to walk must attend to cars,
other pedestrians, and obstacles in the path in order to avoid collisions.
Attentional demands may also differ when a motor skill is first learned and when
it is performed at a later time. What if skills learned when there is no
distraction deteriorate when distractions are present at recall, or vice versa?
How might motor learning programs be developed that can train successful
transfer of motor skills to novel situations? With the support of an NSF CAREER
award, Dr. Joo-Hyun Song at Brown University will characterize mechanisms
involved in coping with attentional distractions during motor learning and will
develop a training program to promote robust long-term learning despite a wide
range of distractions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Song will mentor nationally and
locally selected undergraduates in a 10-week summer research program, with
participants recruited through two initiatives designed to prepare qualified
undergraduates from diverse minority backgrounds for M.D. and Ph.D. programs
(the Blueprint Program for Enhancing Neuroscience Diversity through
Undergraduate Research Education Experiences and the Leadership Alliance Summer
Research-Early Identification Program). Dr. Song will also provide a longer-term
nationwide mentoring program for under-represented students identified from
minority-serving institutions (from the end of their freshman year to
graduation). In addition, Dr. Song will collaborate with the Sci-Toons
initiative, a science education program at Brown University's Science Center, to
create and broadcast two multimedia science episodes based on results of her
research and aimed at K-12 students and the general public.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project aims to characterize visuomotor
skills within a wider theoretical framework where the motor skill is modulated
by attention and memory. Dr. Song will investigate 1) which components of
attentional distractors are encoded into motor memory; 2) when the integration
between distraction and motor memory occurs; and 3) how to develop a long-term,
robust motor learning program in which motor memory can be trained to be
adaptable under a variety of situations. The work should provide a basis for a
unified theoretical framework of attention, motor learning, and memory
mechanisms across disciplines including cognitive science, neuroscience, and
biomedical engineering.