* 1555448
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:   History of Aflatoxin and Liver Cancer
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2016,01/31/2017
* David Kaiser, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Wenda K. Bauchspies
* 01/31/2017
* USD 13,750.00

Doctoral Dissertation Research: A History of Aflatoxin and Liver Cancer
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cancer has emerged as a key object
of biomedical research, clinical care, public health, and regulation in the last
half of the 20th century. Aflatoxins are a class of mycotoxins, toxic chemicals
produced by fungi that often grow on crops. Aflatoxins cause up to 172,000 cases
of lethal liver cancer globally per year. This research project will study the
production of knowledge about liver cancer and aflatoxin, as well as its causes
and prevention by tracing the history of aflatoxins since the early 1960s when
it was discovered by veterinarians as being responsible for the widespread death
of poultry. The discovery of aflatoxins lead to studies asking if there was a
causal link between aflatoxin and liver cancer in humans. In the 1970s,
regulators had begun introducing thresholds for aflatoxin in food and feed and
for prescribing standardized tests to determine aflatoxin contamination. Plant
scientists began to study and identify the conditions of aflatoxin development
in crops in order to prevent the occurrence in humans and livestock. This
project will focus on how aflatoxin became a health problem, how different
scientific disciplines, institutions, and research practices have interacted to
produce knowledge about cancer, and how this knowledge shaped regulation and
public health interventions. The findings will be used to guide policy targeting
health safety and agriculture standards.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This
project contributes to the historical literature on science because biomedical
understandings of the relation between aflatoxins and liver cancer has grown
more complex, as scientists have studied the synergistic influences of genes,
hepatitis virus infections, and aflatoxins on the carcinogenesis of liver cancer
with methods of molecular epidemiology and tumor genome sequencing. The results
of the research will be of interest to historians of science and scholars of
development, regulation, and science policy. The research will be done in
archives where scientific records of national and international health
organizations are housed. The project will also complete oral histories to
document how the disciplines of toxicology, epidemiology, veterinary medicine,
and plant sciences have interacted to produce knowledge about cancer and
aflatoxins. The project will explore the relationship of laboratory and field by
studying how regulatory regimes and scientific knowledge have influenced each
other since the early 1960s. In addition the project will map out the research
networks formed by scientists to understand how different scales, disciplines,
and settings of research and regulation interacted to produce knowledge about
cancer and aflatoxins. The project will show how research interactions,
practices and approaches changed as the Cold War ended and genetics gained an
increasing importance in the life sciences. A historical understanding of the
interaction of regulatory regimes and knowledge-making will help to develop more
effective policies.