* 1555361
* CAREER: Programmable Artificial DNA Topology for Biological and Medical Applications
* MPS,DMR
* 02/15/2016,06/30/2019
* Yossi Weizmann, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Nitsa Rosenzweig
* 06/30/2019
* USD 350,516.00

Non-Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;This award by the Biomaterials program in the
Division of Materials Research to University of Chicago supports the
investigation of nucleic acid structures by looking at the relationship between
the topological structure of nucleic acid and its function. This researcher will
construct nano-architectures encoded with different functionalities to probe the
activity of the machinery of the cell. Furthermore, this support will be used
for the development of assays to quantitatively measure the activity of the
enzymes responsible for the modulation of these nucleic acid topologies within
the cell. Detailed analyses of these interactions will offer researchers
information relevant for targeted therapeutics, as well as for unlocking the
role of these enzymes in cell cycle regulation. This project will provide
resources and opportunities for high school, undergraduate, and graduate
students in the fields of molecular biology and chemistry to explore
interdisciplinary studies relating to biological topology and enzyme kinetics.
By collaborating with the surrounding local schools, this investigator will
encourage students from traditionally underrepresented demographics to
participate in scientific exploration through scholastic workshops and summer
research initiatives. As a member of the Seminar Committee, this researcher will
organize weekly public seminars for visiting faculty members, serving the
research community at the University of Chicago and other nearby academic
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;This project
will advance the understanding of nucleic acid topology within the cell, and
will help elucidate how these different 3-D structures interact with
topoisomerases and polymerases for cell regulation and replication. The first
research goal is to develop novel complex molecular topologies using the Four-
Way-Junction and advance their applications in chemical and biological studies.
The simplicity and flexibility of the proposed strategy allows for the
construction of innovative nanostructures with diverse topologies to probe
enzyme kinetics and biological processes. The synthesis of higher-order
topologies encoded with various nucleic acid functionalities, on a cell-relevant
size-scale, will represent a critical step in furthering the understanding of
the relationship between DNA structure and function. The double stranded DNA
knots will be tested as substrates for human topoisomerases, which will allow
them to monitor the enzyme activity in real time. The significance of this lies
in their ability to interrogate the effects on reaction rates of a range of
topoisomerase drugs both in vitro and in vivo. Additionally, by measuring in
real time activity of topoisomerases upon exposure to various small molecule
inhibitors, information regarding the efficacy of certain therapeutics can be
qualitatively measured both in vitro and in vivo. By interfacing with nucleic
acid amplification technologies, the assay can be designed to operate in a wide
variety of conditions in a method consistent with the goals of a high-throughput
system. This project will provide resources and opportunities for high school,
undergraduate, and graduate students in the fields of molecular biology and
chemistry to explore interdisciplinary studies relating to nucleic acid
topology, chemical biology, and enzyme kinetics.