* 1555218
* CAREER: Efficient Synthesis of Biologically Relevant Cyclic and Polycyclic Terpenoid Compounds Using Alkyne Cyclizations
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2022
* Wesley Chalifoux, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Blakemore
* 03/31/2022
* USD 650,000.00

With this CAREER Award, the Synthesis Program supports the research of Professor
Wesley A. Chalifoux of the University of Nevada, Reno. Professor Chalifoux
develops new chemical tools for the efficient synthesis of biologically active
compounds. New methodology developed in this research focuses on the application
of ynones for the efficient construction of complex cyclic compounds. Ynones are
substances in which a carbon-carbon triple bond (an alkyne) is connected to a
carbon oxygen double bond (a carbonyl group). This connection enhances chemical
reactivity in bimolecular addition reactions. New strategies which are developed
in this research have applications in the area of pharmaceutical synthesis and
the field of medicine through the generation of biologically-relevant compound
libraries. As the educational component of this project, Professor Chalifoux
develops an outreach program that focuses on the mentoring of middle and high
school students from low-income, first-generation college families as well as
groups that are underrepresented in science. The project builds connections with
middle and high schools located in the Reno, Nevada area. Visiting high school
students work closely with graduate and undergraduate chemistry students in
science-related activities associated with research projects within the
Chalifoux group. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, cyclization and
cycloaddition reactions of alkynes and alkynones are explored. This research
develops an operationally simple synthetic methodology that converts readily
available alkyne, diyne and diene starting materials into complex cyclic and
polycyclic target molecules. Simple conjugated alkynes and more complex
conjugated and cross-conjugated polyynes are explored as substrates for Diels-
Alder cycloaddition reactions. These are further elaborated in
multicomponent/tandem cyclization reactions that are designed to generate
multiple new carbon-carbon bonds and rings in a single reaction step, with
regio- and stereochemical control. This research has broad applications in the
area of pharmaceutical synthesis and the field of medicine through the rapid
generation of biologically relevant compound libraries. In addition to
activities at the middle and high schools, the CAREER Award supports summer
research activities at the University of Nevada. This improves recruitment of
underrepresented students into Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematical
(STEM) careers and increases retention of students in the sciences.