* 1555332
* EAGER: Millimeter Wave Channel Measurements and Modeling for 5G Wireless Communications
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2017
* Theodore Rappaport, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 08/31/2017
* USD 150,000.00

Today's mobile communications technology will soon become obsolete in the face
of increasing demand for broadband data and wireless access. Since the advent of
cellular and WiFi wireless technologies, wireless communications have used
relatively narrowband radio channels, with relatively low ultra-high frequencies
(UHF), and unsophisticated antennas. This project offers to provide fundamental
knowledge about the radio channels in a much higher frequency range, where
orders of magnitude more data capacity could be delivered to cellphones of the
future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The tremendous pending demand for wireless capacity
is causing regulators around the world to consider opening up new mobile
spectrum in the millimeter wave (mm-wave) frequency bands. To date, little is
known about the small-scale behavior of mm-Wave radio channels, yet academia and
industry require small-scale channel models to create new wireless system
architectures and air interface standards that will use directional antennas for
the first time. In this project, comprehensive 28 GHz small-scale propagation
measurements in an urban setting (Brooklyn, NY) shall uncover key small scale
multipath and signal properties that are currently not known or understood. The
data will allow for the development of analytical and statistical channel models
that are based on directional antennas. Such measurements and models are
critical for the proper engineering analysis and design of future mm-wave
physical layer and link layer protocols by both academia and industry, and the
knowledge from this project could also lead to simulation and emulation products
for fifth generation (5G) wireless product development.