* 1555161
* CAREER: A New Approach to Particle Astrophysics with VERITAS and Multi-wavelength Data
* MPS,PHY
* 02/01/2016,09/30/2022
* Amanda Weinstein, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Darren Grant
* 09/30/2022
* USD 781,903.00

Gamma-rays are the highest energy form of electromagnetic radiation.
Observations of astrophysical gamma-rays serve as probes of physical conditions
and processes in the most extreme environments throughout the Universe, and can
be used to test fundamental physics. The Very Energetic Radiation Imaging
Telescope Array System (VERITAS), located in southern Arizona, is a ground-based
observatory designed to study high-energy gamma-rays. VERITAS has unique
capabilities, providing high sensitivity pointed observations of both galactic
and extragalactic sources. This award supports scientists at Iowa State
University to carry out research with VERITAS. The group will work on new data
analysis techniques to improve the study of spatially-extended sources and to
facilitate the joint analysis of data from multiple observatories. Using these
new analysis techniques the group will conduct a systematic study of Galactic
sources of particle acceleration, and ultimately search for signatures of dark
matter. The group will work with the Iowa State University planetarium
developing multi-wavelength astronomy and high-energy astrophysics shows,
displays, and demonstrations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI has
adapted a maximum likelihood framework for VERITAS data analysis that will be
extended to enable simultaneous fitting of data from multiple instruments. In
addition, the PI will implement a new background estimation method based on this
maximum likelihood framework that will improve the analysis of extended sources.
Together, these developments will help maximize the impact of the VERITAS long-
term science program. The PI will perform a systematic study of Galactic
particle accelerators such as supernova remnants and pulsar wind nebulae, their
interaction with their immediate environment, and the evolution of the particles
they produce, along with more long-range work searching regions of high dark
matter density for the gamma-ray signature of dark matter self-annihilation.