* 1555216
* CAREER:Continental Paleoenvironmental Responses to Carbon Cycle Perturbations During the mid-Cretaceous Greenhouse
* GEO,EAR
* 02/15/2016,09/30/2019
* Marina Suarez, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Continuing Grant
* Dena Smith
* 09/30/2019
* USD 383,860.00

While widely known for the diverse dinosaur faunas of the time, the Cretaceous
Period is important for more than just the creatures that populate the
imagination, museums, and popular culture. Cretaceous climate changes may be the
result of numerous disruptions to the carbon cycle, likely due to volcanism. The
carbon cycle controls climate change. Past carbon cycle changes resulted in
major climate shifts, environmental change, and extinction. By understanding
ancient terrestrial carbon cycle perturbations, we can understand the
consequences to ongoing disruptions to the carbon cycle. This project will
determine if the Cretaceous carbon cycle disruptions resulted in temperature and
precipitation changes on land. To achieve these scientific goals, funds will go
toward supporting community college, undergraduate, graduate and post-doctoral
students as well as creating educational lab activities. As a Career award, the
PI will develop collaborations with other universities, enhance her education
activities and integrate these with a strong research program for professional
development that will provide a solid base for future
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project spans the late Aptian to early
Albian (approximately 115 to 110 million year ago), and specifically targets
carbon isotope excursions associated with ocean anoxic event 1b from 4
localities (Utah, Texas, Spain, and China). The project will generate multiple
climate proxies such as: 1) clumped isotope paleothermometry; 2) major element
geochemistry to quantify weathering intensity and paleoprecipitation; and 3)
carbon isotope data to estimate pCO2. This data will be synthesized to help
identify the full range of climate change triggers, feedbacks, and responses
during Cretaceous carbon cycle perturbations in continental environments.