* 1555224
* CAREER: Self-Protecting Artificial Implants and Invigorating the STEM Education Pipeline with Biomaterials
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2016,09/30/2022
* Andrew Tennyson, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Nitsa Rosenzweig
* 09/30/2022
* USD 500,000.00

Non-technical: &lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award made by the Biomaterials program in
the Division of Materials Research to Clemson University will study the
development of artificial implant materials with modified surfaces. These
coatings are expected to resist deterioration and failure of implant materials
by actively decreasing the circulating oxygen-induced material damage. The human
immune system reacts to an artificial implant, such as a replacement hip or knee
joint, by attacking it and degrading it chemically. Eventually, this implant
could fail and then need to be repaired or replaced, and involves surgeries that
could be too risky for many elderly and infirm patients. The immune system could
still attack an artificial implant even under rigorously sterile conditions and
even with "inert" materials, such as stainless steel. The studies carried out
with this NSF CAREER award would lead to development of artificial implants with
novel coatings that resist failure by actively preventing their chemical
degradation. The proposed research would benefit society significantly by: (1)
extending the functional lifetimes of artificial implants; (2) reducing
morbidity and mortality risks, particularly among elderly and infirm patients;
and (3) decreasing pain and inflammation that occur after implantation. This
investigator plans to integrate the research activities of college students into
this research. Additionally, K-12 teachers will be offered a summer course
designed to help them incorporate biomaterial topics into their K-12 science
classes. This award will address the current shortfall in science, technology,
engineering and mathematics degrees by fostering interest in and successful
completion of these degrees by underserved and underrepresented students. This
award is co-funded by the Physiology, Mechanisms &amp; Biomechanics program in
the Division of Integrative Organismal Systems, and Emerging Frontiers program,
both in the Directorate for Biological Sciences.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical: &lt;br/&gt;Human implantation of an artificial
material into a human triggers the foreign body reaction (FBR), which leads to
adhering of macrophages to the artificial implant materials (AIM) and damaging
them via the release of reactive oxygen species (ROS). Eventually, ROS-induced
AIM damage could cause the implant to fail, necessitating additional surgical
procedures that could result in high morbidity and mortality risks. These
hazards are currently unavoidable, as the FBR occurs under even rigorously
sterile conditions and the accompanying ROS damages in chemically-inert implant
materials such as stainless steel and fluoropolymer plastics. This CAREER award
would enable the development of biocompatible AIMs that resist deterioration and
failure of implants by actively decreasing ROS-induced material damage. The
first aim of the project is to covalently link self-regenerating catalyst
coatings based on N-heterocyclic carbine-ruthenium complexes to artificial
implant materials such as polymers [poly(methyl methacrylate), polyethylene,
polypropylene, etc.] and inorganic materials (hydroxyapatite, titanium, titania,
stainless steel, etc.). In addition to the preparation of large number of
substrates with catalyst coatings, linker systems and surface loadings, these
modified implant materials will be tested against different cell cultures/media
to establish the ability of these immobilized catalysts to reduce reactive
oxygen before and after exposure to cells for up to two weeks. The second aim of
this award is: a) to study damage to implant materials under simulated FBR
conditions in vitro; and b) to visualize and quantify the production of ROS and
inflammatory cytokines of macrophages reacting to catalytically active
substrates. Additionally, this CAREER award would also contribute in reducing
the STEM degree shortfall facing the U.S., particularly among underserved and
underrepresented minority students, by integrating technical college students
into biomaterials research, and teaching biomaterial concepts and topics to K-12
science teachers.