* 1555968
* OPUS: The Diversity and Comparative Biology of Geckos
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Aaron Bauer, Villanova University
* Standard Grant
* Katharina Dittmar
* 08/31/2019
* USD 173,606.00

This research will synthesize all data available about the evolutionary
relationships, paleontology, and diversity of geckos, a group of more than 1600
lizard species with a worldwide distribution in warm-climate areas. The
researcher will use the pattern of relationships among geckos revealed by the
synthesis to interpret the evolution of ecological, behavioral, physiological,
and other traits of geckos. The project will make previously unpublished raw
data available on publicly accessible websites and will result in publication of
a comprehensive book describing the diversity and comparative biology of geckos.
The project will identify avenues of research in evolutionary biology for which
geckos are an ideal model system and will serve to guide the future research of
students and others. This project will contribute to the professional
development of Biology undergraduates and Masters students at a primarily
undergraduate institution by providing opportunities for participation at all
levels of the research underlying this project. It will also interface with a
traveling museum exhibit aimed at the general public, and children in
particular, that uses geckos to promote the understanding and appreciation of
global biodiversity.

Data relating to the genealogical, spatial and temporal relationships within
Gekkota (paleontology, morphology, allozymes, mtDNA, multigene data (Sanger and
Next Generation sequencing, karyology, etc.) will be evaluated, synthesized and
the sources of conflict considered. Data gathered over three decades will be
compiled from published papers as well as unpublished projects. These data will
be combined into new, expanded matrices and analyzed using a diversity of widely
employed phylogenetic methods. The PI will assess data quality, the strength of
the phylogenetic signal, and in the case of conflicts among datasets, will
identify probable causes and provide the rationale for a preferred
interpretation. Available biological data will be analyzed in the context of the
phylogenies generated using either formal methods (e.g., ancestral state
reconstruction of traits of interest, either across the entire tree or some
portions thereof), or, if data are too incomplete for this, they will be
assessed qualitatively. Knowledge gaps will be identified and research
priorities will be selected to both close these gaps and pinpoint evolutionary
questions for which geckos would be especially good systems, thus facilitating
comparative biological investigations of the group by a broad spectrum of
researchers.