* 1555523
* Marine Geological Samples Laboratory:  Graduate School of Oceanography, University of Rhode Island(support of marine sample curation)
* GEO,OCE
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2022
* Rebecca Robinson, University of Rhode Island
* Continuing Grant
* Kevin Johnson
* 05/31/2022
* USD 530,321.00

Samples of seafloor rocks, cores, corals, hydrothermal vent fluids and chimney
deposits, sediments, other materials are valuable scientific resources that are
collected at great expense on scientific oceanographic expeditions. Some samples
come from shallow, near-shore environments of unusual and ephemeral character
and others come from mid-ocean ridges, seamounts, the abyssal plain, the roots
of volcanic islands, and continental shelves. Many samples come from
inaccessible places miles below the surface of the ocean and are retrieved from
the seafloor by specialized robotic vehicles, human occupied submersibles,
coring devices, and/or rock dredges. To preserve these valuable samples and make
them available to other scientists for studies not envisioned by the original
collectors, the Marine Geology and Geophysics Program of the Division of Ocean
Sciences of the National Science Foundation funds four professionally run
repositories that house samples collected by seagoing scientists. This award
funds the curation, storage, and distribution of marine seafloor samples by the
University of Rhode Island's Marine Geological Sample Laboratory. Samples are
distributed upon request to scientists and educators wishing to better
understand the ocean basins, the distribution of its resources, and how the
Earth works. Over the past 3 years, this repository has distributed more than
8,000 samples of seafloor material to US and international scientists to advance
our knowledge of the seafloor, ocean crust, mantle, seafloor volcanism, and the
history of ocean chemistry and Earth's climate. Samples from the repositories
have been used to pioneer new analytical techniques and provide important
insights into seafloor, the continental margins, and sub-oceanic magmatic
processes. This award augments a significant investment by the University of
Rhode Island by supporting additional staffing in the form of a graduate student
dedicated to working with the other repository staff to maintain the collection,
collect and verify submitted information on the samples, and enter these data
and metadata into an online database that makes the collection visible to
interested parties via the Internet so scientists and educators can find and
request samples for research and education. Broader impacts of the work include
graduate level course involvement and public outreach via tours for primary and
secondary school groups, local community organizations, and other interested
parties. This award also provides support for an essential piece of marine
geology infrastructure and provides support to an institution in a state that
does not receive a significant amount of Federal funding (i.e., an EPSCoR
state).