* 1555815
* SBIR Phase II:  Development of a simple device that eliminates bottlenecks in radiopharmaceutical production
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2016,02/29/2020
* Arkadij Elizarov, Trace-Ability, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 02/29/2020
* USD 1,100,541.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project aims to deliver a cost-
effective automated quality control (QC) system for manufacturing of radioactive
drugs used in Positron Emission Tomography (PET). This system will replace
current QC procedures, which involve 18 manual operations, 8 visual assessments,
6 devices, and 8 samples of radioactive drugs. The industry's current reliance
on manual operation, subjectivity and untraceable records impedes progress in
radioactive drug manufacturing and presents compliance risks. Therefore,
introduction of an automated system combining all these tests on a single
platform will facilitate adoption of PET imaging technology beyond top tier
medical centers. By addressing a critical current Good Manufacturing Practice
(cGMP) compliance need in radio-pharmaceutical production, which cannot be
addressed with any other solutions available today, this solution is positioned
for rapid adoption. After adopting this system, it is expected that
manufacturing facilities will realize 20% operating cost reduction and 50%
reduction in time spent on QC-related activities. A reduced cost of compliance
associated with introduction of automated QC will further contribute to the
adoption rate. This project will open the door to new applications of plate
reader technology, an approach which has been traditionally confined to the
fields of biochemistry and diagnostics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Phase II
effort includes four technical objectives. Firstly, the approach will be adapted
to minimize the required sample volume. Methods developed in Phase I of the
project required 0.5 ml of sample, a value which is not optimal for small
manufacturers. To bring this value down to 0.2 ml, test sensitivity will be
adjusted, keeping in mind the potential dynamic range trade-offs. Secondly, we
will design a plastic consumable that supports adoption by a commercial
manufacturer. Current plastic prototype components are only suitable for
academic sites with highly-skilled personnel. To reduce the amount of training
required, and to expand the applicability of this method, a new plastic
component will be designed in order to further automate sample loading. Third,
we will optimize the formulation of the reagents to achieve a one-year shelf
life for the consumable kit. The shelf life of the reagents developed in Phase I
remains unknown. Therefore, accelerated stability studies will be performed to
estimate the rates of decomposition processes, and appropriate changes will be
made to enhance shelf life. Finally, we will develop a pilot production process
for the newly-designed kit, in order to support early installations.