* 1555163
* CAREER: Stabilizing Spin Liquids
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2022
* Rebecca Flint, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 07/31/2022
* USD 500,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports
theoretical research and education in the development of methods to stabilize
spin liquids. Real materials at low temperatures still offer unexplored
territory where the laws of physics and the emerging fundamental particles can
differ significantly from the original building blocks of electrons and atoms.
Spin liquids form one such exotic class of systems. They originate in insulating
materials, which can be thought of as electrons frozen in place, with only their
magnetic moments (spins) able to flip. At very low temperatures, spin-liquid
physics emerges, which enables these materials to carry heat and spin currents,
as if they were metals. An intuitive way to think about that situation is to
imagine electrons that have split in half, leaving their charge half stuck to
the lattice, while the magnetic half has become mobile. These fractional
particles, as they are called, could possibly be exploited to enable quantum
computation. Spin-liquid systems are a challenge to theorists, and require new
ways of thinking. Developing and testing these new methods requires a continuous
conversation between theoretical and experimental research. Spin liquids are
rare both experimentally and theoretically, especially in models that can be
connected to real materials. This project supports theoretical research in
examining how to stabilize these spin liquids in a wide variety of models that
can be realized in materials. The research will lead to the development of a new
toolbox that would make it easier to study these exotic systems both numerically
and experimentally. Moreover, these ideas could be extended to develop new ways
to exploit related phenomena in other systems, which include high-temperature
superconductors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award also supports outreach and
educational efforts that are closely integrated with the research. The
educational component aims towards facilitating the conversation between
condensed matter experimentalists and theorists by developing a course module of
condensed matter theory designed primarily for experimental graduate students.
The module will be implemented at Iowa State University, and it will be made
available online as a wiki course. The outreach component addresses the large
number of physics undergraduates whose career aspirations lie outside academia,
and who are currently under-served by many physics departments. The principal
investigator will develop an extensive and publicly available web resource for
undergraduate students, that clarifies the range of opportunities opened up by a
physics degree, and teaches students how to prepare and apply for these careers.
Increased awareness of the wide variety of available career options will help in
increasing the number and diversity of physics
majors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER
award supports theoretical research and education in the development of methods
to stabilize spin liquids. Spin liquids are exotic magnetic phases that break no
symmetries, fluctuate strongly at zero temperature, and have fractional mobile
collective excitations that carry only the spin of the electron. These spinons
can have strange particle statistics making them of interest for quantum
computation. However, spin liquids are rarely found in nature, which is a major
impediment to theoretically understanding and eventually exploiting their
diverse behavior. Highly frustrated magnetic lattices are promising places to
look for spin liquids, however, there is competition from neighboring ordered
phases, making spin liquid regions narrow, or even nonexistent. This project
will develop methods to stabilize spin liquids by weakly coupling extra degrees
of freedom to frustrated lattices in order to exploit their fluctuating nature.
The initial subprojects tackle magnetic degrees of freedom, where extra spins
are added to a frustrated lattice in ways that favor the spin liquid. These
begin with a honeycomb lattice coupled to spins in the center of the hexagons,
and then explore how to most effectively couple in extra spins, and even how to
use this coupling to select different spin liquids. Other degrees of freedom
are: orbital, where increased orbital degeneracy can be stabilized by strong
spin-orbit coupling, leading to increased quantum fluctuations; structural,
where low-energy local phonons can couple strongly to the spins by modifying the
superexchange paths, again increasing the fluctuations; or optical, where
gapless spinons interacting with a periodic laser pulse can acquire a gap. Model
Hamiltonians involving each of these degrees of freedom will be studied both
analytically and with large-scale numerical calculations to determine how the
phase boundaries change with the coupling, and how to engineer maximally stable
spin liquids. Promising approaches will be used to propose new candidate
materials. This research program will open up access to a diverse set of spin
liquids in which to develop and test new theoretical ideas, as well as improve
our understanding of spin liquids by understanding their fluctuations.
Understanding spin liquids is fundamentally important, as they are at the
vanguard of new strongly correlated physics and are deeply intertwined with
unconventional superconductivity and heavy fermions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award also supports outreach and educational efforts that are closely integrated
with the research. The educational component aims towards facilitating the
conversation between condensed matter experimentalists and theorists by
developing a course module of condensed matter theory designed primarily for
experimental graduate students. The module will be implemented at Iowa State
University, and it will be made available online as a wiki course. The outreach
component addresses the large number of physics undergraduates whose career
aspirations lie outside academia, and who are currently under-served by many
physics departments. The principal investigator will develop an extensive and
publicly available web resource for undergraduate students, that clarifies the
range of opportunities opened up by a physics degree, and teaches students how
to prepare and apply for these careers. Increased awareness of the wide variety
of available career options will help in increasing the number and diversity of
physics majors.