* 1555175
* CAREER: Evryscope Science: Realizing the Potential of the First Full-Sky Gigapixel-Scale Telescope
* MPS,AST
* 02/15/2016,01/31/2021
* Nicholas Law, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Sarah Higdon
* 01/31/2021
* USD 914,913.00

The Evryscope is a new type of telescope that records the entire sky visible
from Chile in each exposure, and it obtains a new exposure every two minutes,
night after night. Its 691 megapixel camera and the continuous operation will
enable the discovery of short-timescale events, such as the decrease in apparent
brightness when a planet passes in front of its host star. Professor Law, along
with students at the University of North Carolina, developed the Evryscope and
will use it as the centerpiece of his 5-year integrated education and research
plan in this Faculty Early Career Development Program award. In addition to
providing opportunities for student research training, the PI will develop
Evryscope-based modules into large introductory classes and into the upper-level
observational astronomy curriculum. The team will create a zoomable, real-time
view of the dynamic sky seen by Evryscope into a giant interactive planetarium
display at UNC's Moorhead planetarium. This public exhibit will be used by
hundreds of thousands of school-age children and planetarium
visitors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI has deployed the 8000 square-degree
Evryscope at Cerro Tololo, where it is recording the entire southern sky down to
16th magnitude with 2-minute cadence. The PI and his students will conduct the
Evryscope survey of a range of variable and transient targets, and they will
develop the data processing/analysis and database tools to maximize the
scientific output of this survey. Their principal focus will be a large survey
for habitable rocky planets around the nearest white dwarfs.