* 1555153
* CAREER:  Dielectric Screening - From First Principles to Mesoscale
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/2016,02/28/2022
* Andre Schleife, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 02/28/2022
* USD 500,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports research
and education in designing and discovering novel optical materials using
computer simulations. The quantum mechanical nature of atoms and electrons
governs the behavior of materials at microscopic length- and time scales, but at
large scales a fully atomistic approach is intractable. Computer simulations
that bridge different length scales carry the promise of bringing fundamental
research closer to manufacturing: New materials and technological applications
could be developed faster and cheaper. That is particularly true for optical
materials that are, for instance, needed for photovoltaic devices and energy
production, displays, and novel efficient sensors for biological and medical
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, the research team seeks to
develop an approach for computational design and discovery of optical materials
across multiple length scales. The researchers will improve approximations that
are used to achieve a quantum mechanical description of optical absorption. This
in turn will enable the team to successfully describe materials with strong
interactions between electrons and ions, a subject of intense current interest.
Based on the results of these predictive simulations, the team will abandon the
atomistic resolution of the model in order to simulate optical materials that
are structured at nanoscale dimensions. The team will incorporate data from
recently developed public online databases into the computational framework
aiming to discover new candidate materials and investigate their suitability for
modern optical applications. The input and output research data sets will be
made publicly available for advanced verification and validation, and possibly
unforeseen uses, e.g. in data-mining.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While the broader
availability of supercomputers transforms how modern research is done, skilled,
interdisciplinary researchers are becoming an essential component. For that
reason, the research project is tightly integrated with educational activities
to train the next-generation workforce at the nexus of materials and computer
science. The PI will incorporate computer simulations into the undergraduate
curriculum at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, and develop
computational learning modules that can be directly used in the classroom. The
PI will also build an interdisciplinary team of undergraduate researchers to
develop virtual-reality-based techniques for education and exciting outreach to
a large audience, which includes high school and undergraduate students. This
will be achieved by new techniques for interactive visualization of simulation
results in three dimensions using a smartphone. All codes and implementations
developed for research, the computational modules for education, and the
virtual-reality apps for education and outreach in high schools will be
documented and made accessible to the broader research and education
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
CAREER award supports research and education in the development of a
computational materials science framework with predictive power across multiple
length scales. The framework will enable the research team to accurately
describe optical properties and allow for computer-aided design and discovery of
novel optical materials. The researchers will extend presently used first-
principles quantum-mechanical techniques to overcome limitations that lead to
large uncertainties for optical absorption spectra, and especially for excitonic
effects in polar materials. They will achieve multiscale predictions for
nanostructured materials by solving Maxwell equations, and they will develop
approaches to screen online data repositories for excited-state properties. This
framework will allow the design and discovery of novel optical materials,
entirely based on computer simulations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To achieve the
goals of this project, the research team will develop detailed understanding of
complicated electron-electron and electron-ion interactions based on parameter-
free quantum-mechanical simulations. They will improve the description of
dielectric screening by accounting for contributions from free carriers and the
lattice, overcoming uncertainties for novel polar materials. Using these results
in Maxwell-equation-based modeling of nanostructured materials eliminates the
dependence on input from experiment, and extends the atomistic first-principles
simulations into the nanoscale regime. The team will use existing data from
large density-functional theory based online databases to learn about excited-
state properties, and to facilitate the discovery of new optical materials
within tens of thousands of available datasets. This project will develop
generally applicable techniques and use them to understand polar materials with
desirable characteristics, e.g. for plasmonic
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While the broader availability of
supercomputers transforms how modern research is done, skilled,
interdisciplinary researchers are becoming an essential component. For that
reason, the research project is tightly integrated with educational activities
to train the next-generation workforce at the nexus of materials and computer
science. The PI will incorporate computer simulations into the undergraduate
curriculum at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, and develop
computational learning modules that can be directly used in the classroom. The
PI will also build an interdisciplinary team of undergraduate researchers to
develop virtual-reality-based techniques for education and exciting outreach to
a large audience, which includes high school and undergraduate students. This
will be achieved by new techniques for interactive visualization of simulation
results in three dimensions using a smartphone. All codes and implementations
developed for research, the computational modules for education, and the
virtual-reality apps for education and outreach in high schools will be
documented and made accessible to the broader research and education community.