* 1555232
* CAREER:   High Precision Spectroscopy of the Beryllium Isotope Chain
* MPS,PHY
* 05/15/2016,10/31/2021
* William Raven, Smith College
* Continuing Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 10/31/2021
* USD 464,346.00

The aim of this project is to advance the understanding of the inner workings of
the atom. Specifically, this project investigates how all the components that
make up the beryllium atom, the fourth element on the periodic table, come
together to give beryllium its atomic and nuclear properties. Our knowledge of
atomic systems is driven by both experimental and theoretical results. The
lighter elements (hydrogen, helium, and lithium) have been extensively studied
both experimentally and theoretically. Because beryllium has more subatomic
particles compared to the three lighter elements, it is more complex and
difficult to model. As the computations involved in modeling this atom grow more
complex, it becomes essential to provide experimental results to both check
those calculations and determine which theoretical models correctly describe
this multi-electron system. The most precise experimental measurements currently
available for beryllium are up to 10,000 times less precise than those for the
three lighter elements. This project will greatly improve upon these
experimental measurements in order to validate fundamental atomic and nuclear
theories as well as provide information about the nuclear and electronic
structure of the atom. Understanding beryllium is an important stepping stone to
developing a multi-electron theory that successfully describes larger and
heavier atoms, which make up the bulk of the periodic table of the elements and
are essential components of the materials that we live and work with every
day.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;High precision spectroscopy will be performed on the
neutral beryllium isotope chain to significantly improve the experimental
accuracy of several key energy levels. The results will delineate various
theoretical models, test quantum electrodynamics, and help determine the nuclear
charge radius of beryllium. Spectroscopy will be performed on both singlet
states (2s2p, 2s3d, and 2snp Rydberg states) and triplet states (2s2p, 2s3s,
2s4s, and 2snp Rydberg states) as well as the ionization threshold. An oven
operating at 1200 degrees Celsius will produce a beam of neutral atomic
beryllium. Transverse spectroscopy will be performed on this atomic beam using a
variety of laser sources including a frequency quadrupled Ti-Sapphire laser and
external cavity diode lasers. Photon energy calibration is provided by a
calibrated ultra low expansion cavity and the atom-light interaction is detected
by absorption, fluorescence, or ion detection depending on the state being
studied.