* 1555752
* SBIR Phase II:  A new sustainable crustacean bait.
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2016,08/31/2018
* Anthony Dellinger, Kepley Biosystems Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 08/31/2018
* USD 937,217.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research Phase II project promises to deliver a convenient, sustainable, cost
effective, and environmentally friendly bait for crustacean fishermen,
worldwide. The patent- pending innovation offers a formulated, synthetic product
that mimics scent cues released from traditional fish bait, while offsetting
unwarranted ecological impacts of current practices. Specifically, scent cues
can be released at variable rates to provide optimal results in addressing
fishing methods and preferences in different conditions and regions. Given
rising costs of fish due to competition with omega-3 supplements producers, as
well as labor and frozen storage costs of obtaining wild bait, and vessel space
needed for such bait when fishing, the new bait will save fishermen time, money,
and inconvenience. Commercially, cost advantages are likely to generate
significant demand in addition to the overall practical advantages. From a
societal perspective, a sustainable, synthetic product can dramatically reduce
"net fishing" for baiting crustacean traps. Thus, fish could be conserved in the
oceanic food chain, and indiscriminate killing of sea turtles, dolphins and
other by- catch would be diminished through reduced net fishing practices now
employed in the capture of small wild fish traditionally used for crustacean
bait.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of this Phase II research project are:
to optimize solubility kinetics of the attractant-releasing matrix; further
characterize naturally occurring molecules released by traditional bait fish;
and validate product performance to catch indigenous crustacean species in the
United States. Field research would focus on concentrations of chemo-attractants
required to optimize manufacturing formulation and direct costs. The
intellectual merit of the proposed activity will be the characterization of the
chemical basis for cues emitted by piscine, avian and mammalian tissue that most
intensely attract crustacean species while developing a range of matrix
formulations for optimally releasing such attractants in various fishing
conditions. In addition to globally urgent considerations of by-catch and wild
stock depletion, the industry has been struggling with bait sustainability
issues. These challenges have intensified with federal and state agencies
seeking court orders to regulate catch limits, resulting in reduced supply and
higher prices of bait fish. These circumstances frame an ecological and
commercial opportunity for this synthetic bait alternative. Reducing the need to
capture wild bait fish, as well as delivering cost and logistical advantages to
commercial crustacean fisheries are expected to drive rapid market penetration
upon completion of product research and development in this Phase II project.