* 1555487
* Alternation of Generations without Gamete Fusion
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2023
* Erin Irish, University of Iowa
* Continuing Grant
* Kimberly Gallagher
* 03/31/2023
* USD 811,540.00

Reproduction by gamete fusion is the norm in the biological world; however, non-
fusion reproduction occurs widely, including among land plants. If harnessed,
non-fusion production of seeds will change the way hybrid seeds, such as corn,
are currently made in agriculture. In order to understand the mechanisms of non-
fusion reproduction, we propose to first understand how non-fusion embryos are
formed in a simpler group of plants - ferns. Ferns are non-seed plants that lack
the storage part of a seed but nonetheless form an embryo as the result of a
sperm fertilizing an egg (fusion). The salient feature of a fern is having the
sperm and egg producing parts of the plant housed in a tiny, free-living entity
independent of the mother plants. Therefore this tiny, simple, green entity
provides a rare opportunity to study the mechanisms of fusion reproduction, and
important to this project, the non-fusion formation of an embryo without
fertilization. Using this system, the genes key to non-fusion reproduction will
be identified and their functions in this process tested. This research program
will emphasize the identification and training of talented female scientists and
data from the proposed research will be used in an undergraduate
course.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Normally performing the essential roles of gamete
formation and fertilization, the macroscopic gametophytes can also be coaxed to
produce sporophytes without fertilization, a process called apogamy. In the
reverse process, apospory, sporophytes can be made to produce gametophytes
without meiosis. With apogamy and apospory, ferns can exhibit non-fusion
alternation of the sporophyte and the gametophyte generations. This level of
plasticity alternating between the two generations is not seen in seed plants.
Thus, the apogamy and apospory of ferns offer an ideal system to answer the
question that lies at the heart of non-fusion reproduction: Which genes control
the developmental pathways leading to the gametophyte or the sporophyte
generations? It is hypothesized that many genes that control fusion reproduction
in ferns and seed plants are conserved and non-fusion reproduction in land
plants has arisen by altering these genes. Furthermore, the non-fusion
alternation of generations through apogamy and apospory in the model fern C.
richardii occurs by altered regulation of a set of genes that normally are
reserved for initiating embryogenesis from a zygote and gametogenesis from a
spore, respectively. The research team has built up necessary technology and
materials including apogamy induction, stable gene transfer, C. richardii
transcriptome, and whole mount in situ methods. These will be used to achieve
the goal of identifying key genes and gene networks involved in apogamy and
apospory in the model fern C. richardii with the following specific aims:
Studying the role of the candidate genes in fusion/non-fusion alternation of
generations in C. richardii, gene discovery for apogamy and apospory in C.
richardii, and functional analysis of newly discovered genes that are predicted
to act in non-fusion alternation of generations in C. richardii.