* 1555458
* EAGER:  Collaborative Research:   Evaluating  Identifier Services for the Life Cycle of Biological Data
* BIO,EF
* 09/01/2015,02/28/2018
* Maria Esteva, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Blood
* 02/28/2018
* USD 234,622.00

Unique identifiers are key to current and future access to and use of research
data, which are often distributed across a landscape of storage and analysis
resources, publishing platforms, and repository services. In the biology domain,
researchers and data managers have expressed the need to use identifiers from
the moment of data creation and throughout the research lifecycle. A wide range
of methods are used in the biological sciences to produce many different kinds
of data, which may require the application of different types of identifiers to
make connections between physical samples, digital data, analysis, and
publications. This project will develop and evaluate proof-of-concept and
prototype services with particular focus on DNA/RNA sequence data. This will
expand on data modeling work done as part of the iPlant Data Commons, using real
world biology datasets from iPlant, the Texas Advanced Computing Center (TACC),
and the National Ecological Observatory Network (NEON). Project results will be
disseminated across the biology and information science communities. Software
generated during this project will be maintained in an open source software
repository for further development by the community. Some of these products will
benefit smaller organizations that provide repository services but have limited
software development staffing. This research will inform the development of
similar services for different data types and in other domains dealing with
issues identification through a project's lifecycle.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There
is a growing need for services to verify, track, and report events (i.e.
provenance) in relation to identified datasets over time. Such services should
start as early as possible in the life of a research project and be as much as
possible automated. Much of the current research and development around digital
identifiers focuses on facilitating data citation and discovery post-
publication. This project will address problems arising for large, dispersed,
biology datasets and changing events. Instead of assigning identifiers only at
the last stage for curated datasets, usage of different identifiers are assessed
throughout the continuum of data management, publication, archiving, and reuse.
A prototype identifier infrastructure for identifiers management, permutation,
and data validation/authentication across time. The implementation and
evaluation of these services will test the use of identifiers beyond the "data
publication stage," to connect dispersed data objects as they transition through
the continuum of data management, publication, and archiving. This project will
develop and evaluate a set of proof of concepts/prototypes to 1) model
identifiers to the lifecycle management of bio data including their transition
into global, unique and persistent identifiers; 2) conduct automated
verification of the data linked to those identifiers to track presence at
registered locations and integrity and identity over time; and 3) assess how
collection creators use identifiers and respond to identifier services.