* 1555041
* CAREER: Fire management effects on Sierra Nevada ecohydrology - a dynamical systems approach
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2021
* Sally Thompson, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Laura Lautz
* 05/31/2021
* USD 548,377.00

Forested mountain watersheds supply the majority of water to the western United
States, and are fundamentally fire-prone ecosystems. Contemporary drought, and
projected future climate change, simultaneously exacerbate fire risks in the
Sierra Nevada and threaten the sustainability of the water supply. Management
approaches that could simultaneously reduce fire risks while safeguarding water
supplies are sorely needed. This research takes advantage of a unique pair of
watersheds in the Sierra Nevada where fire suppression was practiced for almost
a century prior to the 1970s, and managed wildfire has been practiced since
then. These basins will be studied to determine how vegetation cover, snow and
soil moisture behavior, and water yields have responded to the changed fire
regime. The results will be synthesized in a modeling framework that can be
applied to evaluate the potential consequences of similar shifts in fire regime
elsewhere in the Sierra Nevada. Results of the research will provide an evidence
basis to motivate new fire management in the Sierra Nevada, reducing fire risk
and enhancing water security in a region that supplies 60% of California's 38
million residents. These results will be shared through an outreach program
developed with the California Fire Science Consortium. The project will also
include a citizen-science project involving middle-school students participating
in outdoor environmental education programs run by NatureBridge at Yosemite
National Park.

The removal of fire from forested mountain ecosystems represents a century-long,
massive, and poorly-understood experiment, altering the composition, demography,
allometry and succession dynamics of forests, with presumed (although largely
unquantified) effects on biogeochemistry, hydrology and ecosystem function. This
research project leverages a unique opportunity to explore these effects by
examining changes in vegetation, fire and hydrology in the only two watersheds
in the Sierra Nevada where fire suppression has been deliberately alleviated and
the natural fire regime allowed to re-establish. Historical and contemporary
aerial photography will be used to reconstruct vegetation histories in the study
watersheds. The resulting vegetation maps will be used as a basis for upscaling
distributed soil moisture and fuel moisture measurements made throughout the
study basins, and as input into distributed hydrological models. Weather
stations, snow cameras and soil moisture observations will be installed in sites
with distinct post-fire vegetation successions to characterize the effects of
vegetation change on local meteorological and hydrological conditions.
Laboratory experiments will be undertaken to evaluate the persistence of soil
hydrophobicity under repeated freeze-thaw cycles, characteristic of the Sierra
Nevada wet season. The process insights obtained through these field
observations will be used to develop, parameterize and test a probabilistic
model representing the dynamic interactions of fire, vegetation and water. The
project will contribute new process understanding about the interaction of fire
and hydrology in snow dominated landscapes, specifically how fire history
impacts snowpack dynamics (such as interception, sublimation and melt timing),
and how freeze-thaw processes impact post-fire soil hydrophobicity. It will
generate unique spatial, temporal and historical datasets that will reveal the
joint consequences of fire suppression and its alleviation on vegetation and
hydrology in montane forests.