* 1555245
* CAREER: Tabletop Extreme Ultraviolet Spectroscopy of Femtosecond Spin Crossover Dynamics
* MPS,CHE
* 03/01/2016,02/28/2022
* Joshua Vura-Weis, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 02/28/2022
* USD 676,593.00

With this award, the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms (CSDM-A)
Program of the Division of Chemistry is funding Professor Joshua Vura-Weis at
the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign (UIUC) to investigate the
mechanism of light-induced processes where the electronic spin state changes.
After certain iron and iron-cobalt complexes absorb visible light, they undergo
a rapid rearrangement (spin flip) and become trapped in a long-lived state that
may be useful for practical applications. The experimental technique used in
this project is tabletop extreme ultraviolet (XUV) spectroscopy. Two workshops
designed to foster deep and sustained undergraduate engagement in spectroscopy
research are established in association with the International Symposium on
Molecular Spectroscopy (ISMS) at UIUC. A weeklong "Spectroscopy in the Snow"
intensive winter course gives sophomores the foundational knowledge required for
physical chemistry research and allows them to begin high-level work in their
home institutions one year ahead of schedule. A two-day ISMS pre-conference for
undergraduates, analogous to the Gordon Research Seminar series for graduate
students, builds a community of young researchers and raises the level of
undergraduate presentations at the main conference. The new spectroscopic
methods demonstrated in this proposal are applicable for a wide range of
problems in physical and inorganic chemistry, from photocatalysis to solar cell
design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Extreme ultraviolet (XUV) transient absorption
spectroscopy at femtosecond resolution is used to resolve the details of the
spin relaxation process in a series of transition metal complexes. The Vura-Weis
group further extends its capabilities to measure vibrational dynamics during
the spin crossover. The interplay between electron transfer and spin dynamics is
a key factor in the photophysics and reactivity of complexes containing open-
shell transition metals. The Vura-Weis group uses the spin-state specificity and
femtosecond time resolution of XUV transient absorption to measure the
relaxation cascade of iron polypyridyl complexes, specifically focusing on the
potential role of a short-lived metal-centered triplet state. The interplay
between electron transfer and spin crossover in Prussian Blues is being measured
in a series of discrete cyano-bridged iron-cobalt systems. In this case, the
element specificity of XUV absorption allows the dynamics of each metal to be
independently probed. The particular molecular motions that gate the electron
dynamics are identified by element-specific XUV impulsive coherent vibrational
spectroscopy. To make research in physical chemistry more accessible to
undergraduates, a winter school on spectroscopy takes place at the University of
Illinois, Urbana-Champaign, in connection with the International Symposium on
Molecular Spectroscopy (ISMS). In addition, a two-day undergraduate meeting
preceding this conference develops a supportive community of young researchers.