* 1555447
* AF: EAGER: Fundamental High-Dimensional Algorithms
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2016
* Santosh Vempala, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 08/31/2016
* USD 100,000.00

High-dimensional sets and distributions are ubiquitous in science and
engineering. With modern sensing and data collection methods, the bottleneck is
now the analysis of such complex sets. Algorithms that work well in low-
dimension often do not scale well as the dimension increases. Thus,
understanding the complexity of basic problems such as optimization (the best
point in a set) or integration (the total mass of a set) or learning (so as to
be able to decide which points are in the set and which aren't) is critical, and
is the motivation for this project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An important method to
handle data in high dimension is sampling by random walks. The PI will
investigate methods to test the convergence of Geometric Random Walks "on-the-
fly." Such methods would significantly improve the performance of Markov chain
based algorithms by providing nearly optimal empirical tests of convergence.
They would allow algorithms to have complexity that is tuned to the specific
input rather than the worst-case input. As an application, the PI will
investigate faster rounding algorithms for high-dimensional convex bodies and
log-concave distributions. The methods and techniques developed here will be of
interest to researchers in probability and geometry as well as those in
algorithms and complexity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI proposes two specific
functions to test the convergence of the ball walk in a convex body and a
specific rounding algorithm. Both seem to perform well in experiments. Analyzing
them rigorously presents major challenges because known techniques from
probability theory are typically only able to say something about a Markov chain
when it is close to its stationary distribution. The fundamental question here
is: what structure does the distribution of a Markov chain have, *before* it
converges?