* 1555242
* CAREER: Fundamental Studies of Glassy Polymer Mechanics
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2022
* Robert Hoy, University of South Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Serdar Ogut
* 03/31/2022
* USD 490,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports
computational and theoretical research, and education in the field of glassy
polymer mechanics. The industrial importance of understanding strength and
failure of polymeric materials, such as structural plastics, has made
quantitatively predicting their entire range of mechanical response an important
goal of physical polymer science. Polymeric materials are composed of long chain
molecules with repeating chemical units. Chemically different polymers exhibit
dramatically different mechanical properties; large differences in mechanical
responses play a major role in determining the stability of these materials
against fracture. Understanding these different mechanical responses is critical
to developing new high-performance materials as well as predicting the failure
behavior and operational lifetime of existing systems, yet progress towards
understanding them has been slow. Explaining the variety of behaviors observed
has remained an open problem and microscopic, physics-based models are so far
unsatisfactory at a predictive level. While computer simulations can provide
essentially complete information on phenomena occurring during deformation of
model systems, physical interpretation of this information can be difficult in
the absence of an overarching theoretical framework. Recently developed
candidate frameworks that have not yet been tested by simulation provide an
opportunity for transformative advance. The research involves coordinated
modeling that will exploit this opportunity and other opportunities that have
emerged from recent experimental work. Progress toward the long term goals of
this project will facilitate development of strong, lightweight structural
plastics that can be used in applications ranging from automobiles to armaments.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project contributes to training two students in
polymer physics, statistical mechanics, and computer simulations and contributes
to developing a modern materials workforce. This award also contributes to
enhance access of underrepresented minority students, including African
Americans, Hispanics, and Native Americans, to higher degrees in physics through
participation in the American Physical Society Bridge Program. The PI plans to
assume primary responsibility for local Bridge student recruitment, admissions,
and mentoring, as well as teaching a Science and Technology Engineering and
Mathematics Professional Development course. The PI will also continue
developing non-cognitive criteria for admissions and work to ensure their
implementation within the Bridge Program and the local Applied Physics PhD
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports computational and
theoretical research, and education in the field of glassy polymer mechanics.
The project includes a program of simulations and analytical modeling that will
significantly enhance basic physical understanding of how the mechanical
properties of polymer glasses relate to their microscopic interactions and
mesoscale order. Simulations will systematically relate differences in
mechanical response to differences in micro- and meso-structure by varying local
chain stiffness, sample preparation protocol, and deformation history, including
temperature. Systems will be deformed to fracture in order to determine how
these factors influence ultimate mechanical properties, such as ductility and
toughness.&lt;br/&gt;The relatively low computational cost of the coarse-grained
approach will be exploited to explore relevant parameter spaces far more broadly
than is feasible for chemically detailed models. Analytical work will both
complement the simulations and extend recently developed microphysics-based
theories of polymer mechanics, through an iterative process wherein simulation
uncovers problems with theories, the theories are improved as needed, and then
used to make new predictions that will be tested by carefully designed follow-up
simulations. &lt;br/&gt;This combined approach is designed to contribute
maximally to the community's long term goal to obtain a level of physical
understanding sufficient to develop predictive materials design principles to
tailor mechanical response. Progress toward the long term goals of this project
will facilitate development of strong, lightweight structural plastics that can
be used in applications ranging from automobiles to armaments.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project contributes to training two students in
polymer physics, statistical mechanics, and computer simulations and contributes
to developing a modern materials workforce. This award also contributes to
enhance access of underrepresented minority students, including African
Americans, Hispanics, and Native Americans, to higher degrees in physics through
participation in the American Physical Society Bridge Program. The PI plans to
assume primary responsibility for local Bridge student recruitment, admissions,
and mentoring, as well as teaching a Science and Technology Engineering and
Mathematics Professional Development course. The PI will also continue
developing non-cognitive criteria for admissions and work to ensure their
implementation within the Bridge Program and the local Applied Physics PhD
program.