* 1555786
* OPUS: Historical contingency in community assembly
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2019
* Tadashi Fukami, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 03/31/2019
* USD 199,907.00

Local communities of plants and animals, such as those found on islands or in
lakes, contain many species. These species affect one another through various
types of interactions, including predation, competition, and various types of
mutually beneficial relationships. Despite extensive research over the past
century, ecologists still find it hard to explain how these interactions
influence which species are able to live together in a local community. An
overlooked factor may be the history of community assembly -- the order in which
species arrive into a newly available habitat. Growing evidence suggests that,
indeed, the way species affect one another in communities often depends on the
order in which they arrive into the community. Improved knowledge of these
historical effects will be useful for solving a range of pressing issues.
Examples include environmental challenges such as ecosystem restoration under
climate change, agricultural solutions such as biological control against pests
that interact with multiple species, and medical problems such as the management
of gut microbial communities influencing human health. The researcher will write
a book that integrates findings from his work on this topic over the past 15
years. In this book, a new conceptual framework will be developed that can be
used to make general predictions about when the order in which species arrive in
a local community matters and when it does not.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To achieve
a new synthesis in the book, the investigator will integrate four emerging views
that replace traditional assumptions about community assembly: (1) the regional
pool of species that can potentially colonize newly available local communities
should be viewed as dynamic, not static; (2) historical contingency influences
not just the structure, but also the functioning of communities; (3) in many
cases, communities are in long-lasting transient states that are qualitatively
different from their final stable states; and (4) ecological and evolutionary
processes operate at the same time scale to influence local population dynamics.
The book will be the main broader impact product of this project. A secondary
broader impact will be student training. Over the past 6 years, the investigator
has designed and taught a new undergraduate course that integrates research and
education. In this course, which is taken by about 120 students each year, the
investigator uses communities of nectar-inhabiting microorganisms as a study
system for inquiry-based education. In addition to being the focus of this
teaching, these microbial communities have been the investigator's primary
research subject to ask questions about community assembly and historical
contingency. Therefore, this research-education integration effort is closely
linked to the subject of the book. The opportunity to synthesize current
knowledge on community assembly in a broad context will help the investigator to
improve and widen the knowledge base that he can use in teaching the course.