* 1555959
* Understanding Growth and Developmental Responses of Ectotherms to Fluctuating Environments: Beyond Performance Curves
* BIO,IOS
* 02/15/2016,01/31/2021
* Joel Kingsolver, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Theodore Morgan
* 01/31/2021
* USD 680,857.00

Understanding how organisms respond and adapt to fluctuating environments is a
major challenge for biologists. The responses of an organism to current
environmental conditions can depend on conditions it experienced in the past,
due to either stress (negative effects) or acclimation (positive effects).
Biologists currently lack a framework for understanding and quantifying those
effects: the goal of this project is to develop and test such a framework, using
the growth responses of a model system, the Tobacco Hornworm (Manduca sexta), to
variable temperatures. The research integrates physiological experiments,
genomics analyses and mathematical models to predict the consequences of stress
and acclimation on growth, development and survival, and to test these
predictions for unpredictable temperature conditions. This new framework will
allow a quantitative understanding of responses of Tobacco Hornworms and other
agricultural pests to variability in weather; the general framework should be
applicable to most other 'cold-blooded' animals. The project provides research
training and experience for undergraduate and graduate students, and develops a
new citizen science program for monitoring butterflies and moths in the piedmont
region of North Carolina.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During the course of a single
lifespan, terrestrial ectotherms often experience wide variation in temperature
and other environmental factors. An individual's performance can vary with
temperature, represented as a thermal performance curve (TPC), and TPCs are the
basis for many models predicting organismal responses to fluctuating
temperatures. However, many ectotherms exhibit time-dependent effects, including
stress responses and acclimation, where the duration and order of prior
temperature exposure affect organismal performance; these effects are ignored in
the standard TPC approach. The studies proposed here develop and test a new
framework for incorporating time-dependent effects into models of ectotherm
performance, using growth rate of Manduca sexta larvae in fluctuating
temperatures as a model system. The proposed studies integrate physiological
experiments, functional genomic and protein analyses, and mathematical models to
develop and parameterize a systems modeling framework for stress and acclimation
responses, and test predictions from this model in response to stochastic
variation in diurnal temperature fluctuations. The proposed research will
provide the bases for a new conceptual and modeling framework for understanding
and predicting the effects of variation in temperature and climate on growth and
fitness of ectotherms. The project provides research training and experience for
undergraduate and graduate students, and develops a new citizen science program
for monitoring butterflies and moths in the piedmont region of North Carolina.