* 1555634
* Montgomery College Noyce: Excellent Teachers for STEM
* EDU,DUE
* 03/15/2016,09/30/2022
* Debra Poese, Montgomery College
* Standard Grant
* Mindy Capaldi
* 09/30/2022
* USD 1,182,623.00

The goal of this Noyce Teacher Scholarship and Stipend project is to increase
the pool of highly qualified STEM teachers in central Maryland. Faculty from
Montgomery College's STEM divisions as well as the School of Education will work
with Montgomery County Public Schools to support two strands of development: the
first will include the recruitment and support of 39 STEM professionals as they
transition into STEM teaching positions, the second will expand outreach to
encourage undergraduate STEM majors to transfer to STEM teacher preparation
programs at regional four-year institutions. The alternative teacher preparation
program for career changers involves intensive pre-service training and a
teaching internship flowed by a year-long residency. The project will integrate
a variety of elements to address challenges faced by students enrolled in this
rigorous course of study, including (a) orientation materials that address the
time commitment, (b) increased assessment and feedback to students designed to
bolster their self-efficacy and personal confidence, and (c) assignment to field
placements with peer partners. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The key aspects of the
project are designed to respond to an analysis of barriers for transfer
students' enrollment in STEM majors after leaving Montgomery College and the
retention of career changers in their alternative teacher preparation program,
which was supported by a Noyce Capacity Building award. For community college
transfers, a comprehensive plan has been designed to align coursework between
Montgomery College and regional 4-year institutions; a strategy meant to
strengthen the pool of STEM majors who will be attracted to teaching. For the
scholarship recipients (career changers) everything from the selection process,
during which applicants will be pre-screened using results of the Haberman Star
Teacher Pre-Screener Assessment to determine if their mindsets are compatible
with teaching in high-needs schools, to the training activities are designed to
graduate STEM teachers who are both confident and resilient. Formative and
summative evaluation will include the results of assessment of the surveys of
program participants, internship supervisors, and mentor teachers and principals
as well as teacher performance during the resident year. Surveys and interviews
will also be used to assess self-efficacy of the participants and to identify
their best-perceived supports. Program activities and outcomes will be
disseminated through the meetings of the National Association of Community
College Teacher Education Programs and the National Center for Education
Information, among others. Manuscripts will be submitted to the Journal of STEM
Education and the Journal of the National Association for Alternative
Certification.