* 1555626
* AF: EAGER: Randomization and Parallelization in Algorithmic Self-Assembly
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2016
* Robert Schweller, The University of Texas Rio Grande Valley
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 08/31/2016
* USD 99,836.00

In this project the PIs explore various theoretical models of algorithmic self-
assembly, as well as the development of new models while engaging a number of
undergraduate and graduate students in research activities. Self-assembly is the
process by which simple, unorganized components autonomously combine to form
larger, more complex structures. This process is abundant in nature and is a key
underlying mechanism for the construction of biological organisms. Researchers
are turning to self-assembly technology for the design of ever smaller, more
complex, and precise nanoscale devices, and as an emerging fundamental tool for
nanotechnology. The possible revolutionary changes to healthcare, computation,
and engineering make this an exciting and important area of
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The focus of this project is algorithmic self-
assembly in which the objects of a system assemble through local interactions
that simulate sophisticated computation to efficiently assemble target shapes
and patterns. Fully understanding the power of self-assembly systems, and how to
control them, presents the possibility of designing molecular algorithms for
precise and efficient manipulation of matter at the nanoscale. Developing models
and theory towards this goal that are closely tied to experimental reality is
the focus of this project. The PIs explore various established tile-based
theoretical models of self-assembly, as well as the development of new models
motivated by current experimental technology. This includes examining specific
problems within tile self-assembly systems, and the creation and use of
randomness within different models. Using randomness along with the parallel
computation of self-assembly systems should allow for novel solutions and
efficient running times for many useful
functions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical aspects of this project focus on the
tools of randomization and parallelization in the context of tile self-assembly
theory. Specific directions are as follows. The PIs consider the design of
concentration robust tile systems in which randomized abstract tile assembly
systems are converted into equivalent systems whose probability distribution
over assemblies is maintained over adversarially chosen concentration
assignments of tile species. The goal of this direction is to generate a toolbox
for general conversion of tile systems into approximately equivalent systems
that are robust to concentration choice. The PIs further examine the application
of such robust randomized systems for the parallelized solution to classic
computational problems including sorting, primality testing, and the general
simulation of randomized boolean circuits. The PIs also study complexities
related to h-handed self-assembly in which up to h prebuilt assemblies may
combine in a single step. Finally, the continued development and improvement of
the VersaTile and Nubot simulation software are also an important aspect of this
project. These systems are used for verification and educational purposes in
research allowing users to easily create, test, modify, and visualize the self-
assembly process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In tandem with the theoretical work
described, a major goal of this project is to increase research participation
among students at the University of Texas - Rio Grande Valley and increase the
throughput of undergraduate and masters students who enroll in Ph.D. programs in
Computer Science. This project includes support for undergraduate and graduate
student research assistantships, as well as the extension of a successful
ongoing series of research seminars, hosted by the PIs, focused on attracting
undergraduate student participation and co-authorship. The University of Texas -
Rio Grande Valley is a minority-serving institution that has about 30,000
students with a 90% Hispanic and 55% female student population. Due to these
demographics, this project offers a rare opportunity to make a substantial
impact on broadening participation among under-represented minority groups in
the field of Computer Science.