* 1555196
* Endocannabinoid Regulation of Bone Metabolism in Hibernating Marmots
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2016,10/31/2018
* Gregory Florant, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 10/31/2018
* USD 455,151.00

One of the goals of comparative physiology is to understand how different
physiological systems impact each other. Endocannabinoids are signaling
molecules derived from fatty acids that appeared early in evolution and play
important roles in regulating numerous physiological processes including those
that are altered in hibernation such as bone, fat, and energy metabolism. The
research aims to understand how endocannabinoid signaling by fat cells affects
bone remodeling in obese, but otherwise healthy hibernating marmots. The planned
studies will provide research experiences for undergraduate students to prepare
them for advanced education and careers in science. The educational outreach
component of this award will help students understand how diet and exercise
affect fat accumulation and overall health of organisms. It will also elucidate
how some animals have evolved physiological systems that prevent disease during
states of obesity and physical inactivity. It will develop an interactive
exhibit for K-12 students to explore the differences between the metabolism and
physical activity of a hibernating animal and themselves. It will develop
research kits for middle school students to measure and understand the calorie
content of specific foods. It will also develop a presentation on the unique
physiological adaptations in hibernators to underserved K-5 students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hibernating mammals demonstrate remarkable resilience by
having evolved physiological mechanisms that allow them to survive extreme
physiological and environmental conditions for prolonged periods of time.
Physical inactivity, obesity, and anorexia are well known to negatively impact
bone metabolism and structure in non-hibernating animals. However, the physical
inactivity, obesity, and anorexia that occur during hibernation do not
negatively affect bone in marmots. The research will investigate the role of the
endocannabinoid system in preventing bone loss in hibernating marmots. The
research will test the general hypothesis that the endocannabinoid system
regulates bone metabolism during hibernation to prevent bone loss. The project
will undertake an interdisciplinary approach to understanding the role of
paracrine signaling from bone marrow adipocytes in endocannabinoid regulated
bone metabolism during hibernation. Novel targeted mass spectrometry methodology
to measure tissue levels of endocannabinoid ligands, with greater sensitivity
than previously reported, will be used to measure endocannabinoid levels in
marmot serum, bone, and adipose tissue. Pharmacological blocking will be used to
assess the role of specific components of the endocannabinoid system in
regulating bone remodeling and structure during hibernation. Additionally, the
methodology and results from the study will provide the conceptual framework for
modeling how the endocannabinoid system regulates metabolism in other
physiological systems during the extreme conditions of hibernation.