* 1555805
* CAP: Collaborative Research: Building Capacity for Political and Cultural Perspectives to Strengthen the Learning Sciences
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2016,08/31/2018
* Shirin Vossoughi, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Amy Baylor
* 08/31/2018
* USD 24,752.00

The Cyberlearning and Future Learning Technologies Program funds efforts that
will help envision the next generation of learning technologies and advance what
we know about how people learn in technology-rich environments. Capacity-
building (CAP) projects increase the ability of researchers to understand how
such technology should be designed and used in the future and support new
capacity in allowing researchers to answer questions about how people learn, how
to foster or assess learning, and how to design for learning. We are at a phase
where we can advance processes of inquiry and design that substantively address
culture and diversity by building capacity across the networks of scholars with
expertise in how these issues take shape within learning sciences and
cyberlearning. This project will organize two small conferences that bring
together an intergenerational group of learning and technology scholars to
collectively articulate the theoretical perspectives needed to frame, study, and
respond to persistently-produced inequity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over the last
two decades, learning scientists concerned with equity have developed strands of
research that treat learning as a fundamentally cultural process situated within
wider social, political and economic constraints. This project aims to: 1)
collectively identify and name the power relations and cultural perspectives
essential for rigorous, equity-oriented research, including the central tensions
and debates therein; 2) clearly articulate how these perspectives substantively
influence the design and study of new technologies and learning environments; 3)
strategize to establish these conceptual tools within Cyberlearning and the
Learning Sciences; and 4) map a research agenda for theorizing the design and
study of new technological genres and learning arrangements. This project will
also help to articulate criteria that can be used to advance the rigor of
equity-oriented cyberlearning research. We will disseminate deliverables that
are conceptual (theoretical tools), methodological (research designs and
approaches), pedagogical (developing robust tools and designs for formal and
informal educational environments, developing spaces to mentor the next
generation of scholars), and professional (a network of scholars poised to
intervene and take leadership roles in the field). Educational equity requires
expanding the influence of socio-cultural approaches and bringing them into the
foreground of cyberlearning.