* 1555914
* Ideas Lab Collaborative Research: Using Natural Odor Stimuli to Crack the Olfactory Code
* BIO,IOS
* 11/01/2015,10/31/2021
* Aravinthan D Samuel, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Sridhar Raghavachari
* 10/31/2021
* USD 900,000.00

This project was developed during a NSF Ideas Lab on "Cracking the Olfactory
Code" and is jointly funded by the Chemistry of Life Processes program in the
Chemistry Division, the Mathematical Biology program in the Division of
Mathematical Sciences, the Physics of Living Systems program in the Physics
Division, the Neural Systems Cluster in the Division of Integrative Organismal
Systems, the Division of Biological Infrastructure, and the Division of Emerging
Frontiers. The sense of smell is essential for maintaining quality of life in
humans, and its decline can be an important harbinger of neurodegenerative
disease. Moreover, since nearly all animals aside from primates rely on
olfaction for most survival functions, understanding chemical sensing has
immense practical value, for example, in the control of agricultural pests or in
training animals to detect odors relevant for bomb, drug and cancer detection.
In spite of its importance, the understanding of olfaction lags far behind the
other senses, which is in part due to the lack of understanding of the physical
space of odors. The understanding of the neural bases of vision and audition
were greatly advanced by investigations of the physical dimensions of visual and
auditory stimuli. It is therefore likely that a similar in-depth investigation
of odor space - how natural odors occur and the backgrounds against which they
must be detected - will reveal a new depth of richness of neural representations
of odors in the brain. Insects such as the fruit fly and honey bee are excellent
models for this research because of the accessibility of their central nervous
systems, because of their ease of use under controlled laboratory conditions,
and because of the functional similarity of how odors are processed in insect
and mammalian brains. This research will characterize how odor flowers and
fruits with respect to behavioral value for honey bees (food) and fruit flies
(food and egg laying sites). Further monitoring of neural activity in early and
later stage processing in the brain, when combined with computational modeling,
will reveal significantly richer neural representations than have heretofore
been described. This new understanding stands to have an impact on understanding
how healthy brains encode sensations and memories of odors and how brains fail
under disease conditions. It will also have an impact on understanding how the
sense of smell may be built into engineered devices. Finally, both insects are
also of economic importance to agriculture for crop pollination (honey bees) and
damage to fruit (fruit flies). The PIs will teach and work with undergraduate,
graduate and postdoctoral students and especially recruit students from
underrepresented groups in science.

This research will quantitatively characterize the real-world statistics of
multi-component natural odor scenes and investigate how they drive behavior and
processing in several brain regions. The focus will be on honey bee as well as
fruit fly adults and larva as models, where it will be possible to characterize
a library of ethologically relevant natural odors associated with a diversity of
behavioral outputs. The work will begin by quantitatively characterizing the
detailed statistical properties of natural odor scenes in defined ethological
contexts. This will build on the rich literature on identified natural odors in
insects and mammals. Naturally occurring plant and fruit odor samples from the
natural environments of each insect will be collected and chemically analyzed.
Nonlinear dimensionality reduction techniques and approaches based on sparse
coding will determine the dimensions of odor space that are most salient for
behavioral decisions. Such a quantitative deconstruction of the sensory input
would be unprecedented in olfactory neuroscience, and should allow the PIs to
effectively and comprehensively drive olfactory circuits for the first time. The
hypothesis is that the stimulus dimensions that are most behaviorally relevant
to the animal will be most efficiently extracted by the olfactory system.
Synthetic odor blends will be specially constructed to vary along relevant
sensory dimensions, to probe neural codes and adaptive behaviors in the
olfactory system. As in research on the visual system, analysis of such evoked
neural responses using statistical methods that take into account natural odor
statistics will reveal novel olfactory computations and behaviors that have been
previously inaccessible. The project will generate datasets of immediate use and
importance to scientists in theoretical biology and mathematics, engineering and
biology.