* 1555581
* Chloroplast Lipid Composition: Connecting Biophysics to Photosynthetic Function
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2020
* John Browse, Washington State University
* Continuing Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 05/31/2020
* USD 575,400.00

Life on Earth depends on plant photosynthesis, so it is vital that we fully
understand all the component systems that contribute to photosynthetic function.
Despite considerable research effort over the last twenty years, we still do not
know how the lipid composition of the photosynthetic (thylakoid) membrane
affects photosynthesis. This project aims to discover the particular lipid
requirements for chloroplast biogenesis and function. The project will use the
full range of biochemical, molecular and genetic techniques to investigate
mutants of the model plant, Arabidopsis, in which different changes in membrane
lipid composition are associated with dramatic phenotypes. The knowledge gained
will help scientists predict the likely consequences of environmental changes on
plant growth and crop productivity. Eventually it will be possible to manipulate
membrane lipid composition of plants to better suit particular environmental
conditions. Because photosynthesis is central to plant productivity, the
extensive temperature-dependent effects observed in the mutants have wide
implications for understanding the temperature responses of plants, and
agricultural production systems. The project will provide opportunities for
graduate and undergraduate students to receive training and experience in plant
biology research relevant to agriculture, forestry and other fields of plant
production. In particular, the project participants will contribute to an
outreach program that uses experiential learning and peer mentoring to encourage
Native American high school students to enroll in STEM disciplines in
college.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal focuses on two new classes of
mutants with distinct phenotypes. In the fab1 mutant, an increase in 16:0
results in the collapse of photosynthesis after 2-3 weeks at 2°C, and to
destruction of chloroplasts. A collection of suppressor mutations that allow
survival of fab1 at 2°C have been isolated. Cloning and characterization of
these will provide information about the photosynthetic processes that are most
susceptible to the membrane alterations in fab1 plants. The project has
generated an allelic series of fad2 fad6 mutants containing 5% to 46%
polyunsaturated fatty acids (vs. 77% in wild type) that provide the first
opportunity to explore, in detail, the relationship between thylakoid
unsaturation and chloroplast function. Analyses indicate that an increase in
leakage of protons through the thylakoid membrane is one possible defect in the
mutants. The project has also discovered alterations in the capacities of
different pathways of thylakoid protein transport in other mutants and these
investigations will be extended to include the fad2 fad6 mutants. The results
obtained will permit the development and testing of mechanistic models that
relate the physiological phenotypes of the mutants to the biophysics of membrane
lipid structure. The complementary paths of investigation described in this
proposal promise important advances in the application of biophysical principles
to understanding how lipid molecules contribute to the functioning of
chloroplasts and the responses of plants to environmental change.