* 1555582
* SEES: Sustainable Energy Infrastructure Planning
* ENG,CBET
* 08/16/2015,06/30/2017
* Roshanak Nateghi, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 06/30/2017
* USD 123,709.00

This interdisciplinary project will explore the design of a new generation of
policy incentives for sustainable modernization and expansion of U.S. electric
power infrastructure systems in order to ensure a climate resilient
infrastructure that can meet society's projected future energy demands. The
research will contribute to: 1) quantifying risks posed to power systems by
climate hazard under different climate scenarios and policy responses, 2)
developing electric power infrastructure reliability models, both economic and
engineering, for the Gulf Coast and East Coast regions of the United States, 3)
assessing macroeconomic consequences of climate extremes on power systems
infrastructure under different climate scenarios, and 4) devising policy
incentives for sustainably expanding electric generation and transmission
capacity to ensure climate resilience.

Ensuring the sustainability and resilience of the U.S. electric power
infrastructure is one of the grand challenges facing the nation. Due to the
complex interdependencies that exist between energy infrastructure and other
critical lifelines, disruption in the electric sector can adversely affect
national security, digital economy, public health, and the environment, and have
debilitating socio-economic impacts on society. Energy infrastructure is in
urgent need of modernization to meet projected future demands securely and
safely. While this modernization should be done in a sustainable manner that
ensures resilience of the power systems in the face of changing climate, current
energy system planning does not fully account for and integrate the multi-
disciplinary aspects of the problem and fails to provide incentive mechanisms
capable of successfully fostering the needed transition. This study is intended
to provide a framework for the required planning effort.

The project will involve collaborations among government, academic and industry
organizations, both domestically and internationally, and will include
development of a university course on energy infrastructure sustainability and
outreach to high school students.

This project is supported under the NSF Science, Engineering and Education for
Sustainability Fellows (SEES Fellows) program, with the goal of helping to
enable discoveries needed to inform actions that lead to environmental, energy
and societal sustainability while creating the necessary workforce to address
these challenges. With SEES Fellows support, this project will enable a
promising early career researcher to establish themselves in an independent
research career related to sustainability.