* 1555806
* Practice of Innovation: A Value-Creation Workshop to Significantly Improve the Results from NSF's R&D and Commercialization Initiatives
* ENG,EEC
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2016
* Philip Weilerstein, National Collegiate Inventors and Innovators Alliance
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 08/31/2016
* USD 49,988.00

A Value-Creation Workshop for NSF's R&D and Commercialization Initiatives

The systematic creation of high-value innovations from research represents a
primary path for America to achieve growth, prosperity, meaningful jobs, social
responsibility, environmental sustainability, and national security. Today, most
measures of innovative success from basic and applied research and other
innovation programs are relatively poor. Successful innovation is the result of
learning and creating fast; not failing fast, as some believe. It is a
discipline based on both learning-science fundamentals and experiential
practice. Successful innovation is a discipline that can be taught, applied, and
improved. This initiative is an immersive, hands-on, workshop and coaching
program. The workshop uses a value creation playbook, which satisfies the
fundamental requirements for innovative success. To be systematically
successful, professionals must understand value-creation concepts and language;
have fundamental mental frameworks for collecting essential knowledge; and be
able to rapidly create new value using learning best practices, such as
continuous, unrelenting team-based iteration.

The initial workshop teaches professionals the right questions to ask and gives
them the framework for improved R&D and innovative achievement. However, it is
the continuous use of these principles that makes the biggest difference. R&D
achievement and innovative success are the result of a continuous learning
process. Programs that do not require a continuous value-creation process are of
limited or no utility. These fundamental principles are the intellectual basis
of the workshop. Professionals and students with these innovative skills
inevitability become some of the most productive researchers and innovators in
their fields. The use of these practices can help catalyze a major competitive
advantage for the United States, create a large number of new jobs, and educate
the workforce required for our global innovation economy.