* 1555918
* SBIR Phase II:  Novel enzymes for producing homogeneous preparations of individual, monounsaturated industrial fatty acids
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2016,10/31/2018
* Libuse Brachova, VariFAS Biorenewables LLC
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 10/31/2018
* USD 808,812.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is the development and scale-up of a
manufacturing platform for producing bio-based chemicals for application in
lubricants. This manufacturing platform will utilize biologically derived sugar
carbon-source and transform this carbon to higher value products via microbial
fermentation. In contrast to the complex mixture of fatty acids currently
produced in the oleochemical industry, the technology developed in this project
will deliver a product stream containing simpler mixtures of monounsaturated
fatty acids, which will eliminate the costly separation cost and be directly
used to synthesize cost-efficient high-performance lubricants. Due to the
improved lubrication performance of these molecules, this technology will
potentially increase the energy efficiency of industrial and transportation
machinery. By utilizing biological carbon feedstocks and producing bio-
degradable products, this technology has the potential to reduce the environment
footprint of the lubricant industry. More beneficial impacts are anticipated as
we expand the application of monounsaturated fatty acids into other industries,
such as surfactants and polymers. A large commercial potential of this
technology has been identified in the lubricant market, currently valued at
$123B per annum, and predicted to grow to $178B per annum in the next 5-years.

This SBIR Phase II project proposes to develop technology that will deliver
novel bio-based monounsaturated fatty acids that provide new chemical structures
allowing innovations in lubricants not possible from petroleum-based raw
materials. Based on successful development of bacterial strains capable of
producing enriched monounsaturated fatty acids in the Phase I project, the Phase
II project will further de-risk the technology and scale up the capability to
produce sufficient quantities of monounsaturated fatty acids to be evaluated by
potential customers. By optimizing and scaling up the fermentation process and
developing the product extraction procedure, large quantity of the first
generation product (55% enriched monounsaturated fatty acids) will be produced.
It will be used to chemically synthesize high-performance lubricants (i.e.,
polyol esters), whose physical-chemical and tribological properties will be
evaluated and provided to potential customers. In this project, metabolic
engineering, system biology, and evolutionary strategies will be applied to
further improve the strains for producing second generation products that are
more enriched in monounsaturated fatty acids (70-80%) and achieve commercial
viable technology metrics. The monounsaturated fatty acids are envisioned as
platform chemicals for subsequent chemical conversion to numerous specialty
chemicals that have applications in additional markets, such as surfactants and
polymers.