* 1555007
* CAREER: Integrated Research &amp; Education on Controlling the Size and Composition of Diamond Nanocrystals via Molecular Synthesis
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/2016,09/30/2023
* Peter Pauzauskie, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 09/30/2023
* USD 745,374.00

Non-Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Diamond nanocrystals are being considered for a
range of applications including optical bioimaging, quantum-information-
processing, photocatalysis, the optical detection of electric and magnetic
fields, spatially localized magnetic resonance imaging, and also for seeding the
growth of diamond thin films. In nature diamond nanocrystals are formed through
non-equilibrium events including stellar supernovae or the impact of meteors on
Earth. More recently, diamond nanocrystals have been synthesized directly within
laboratories through the detonation of high explosives (i.e., TNT), pulsed laser
irradiation of carbon nanoparticles, or through direct growth within non-
equilibrium atmospheric-pressure plasma reactors. Size is a crucial parameter
for diamond nanocrystals in that it impacts how quickly these materials are
cleared from the body through filtration in the kidneys. Furthermore,
composition is critically important for diamond nanocrystals in that it
determines the optical and electronic properties. Currently there are no
synthetic protocols that enable control over both the 1) size and 2) defect
composition of diamond nanocrystals. This research will generate valuable
fundamental knowledge for controlling both of these crucial parameters.
Additionally, there currently is no known shallow n-type donor in diamond
materials. This research will also pursue the experimental demonstration of
n-type conductivity within diamond nanocrystals that would be valuable to
society at large by enabling beneficial high-frequency, high-power
optoelectronic devices for information processing, UV water-purification, and
extreme environment coatings. The educational outreach efforts proposed here
will build a learning pathway for senior undergraduate students to develop
skills with advanced numerical methods through the development of a numerical
computing module integrated within the existing engineering curriculum at the
University of Washington. These skills will prepare students for careers within
the optoelectronic materials industry, or for continuing their education in
graduate school. Outreach efforts to Native Alaskan elementary students,
undergraduates in the Alaska Native Science &amp; Engineering Program at the
University of Alaska, and Indigenous Alliance outreach at UW will help inspire
&amp; retain the next generation of underrepresented materials
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Currently there
are no options in the scientific literature for rationally synthesizing
nanodiamonds with precise 1) sizes and 2) compositions. The intellectual merit
of this proposal rests on generating new knowledge for how to use high-
pressure/high-temperature diffusion-doping to generate precise 1) sizes and 2)
optoelectronic point-defects in nanodiamond. With support from the Solid State
and Materials Chemistry program, four primary research milestones will be
pursued over 5 years: 1) Test the hypothesis that reducing the grain-size of
amorphous-carbon nanoparticles will reduce the thermodynamic conditions
necessary to produce nanoscale diamond grains through high-pressure/high-
temperature techniques. The chemical-potential for carbon atoms at the surface
of amorphous-carbon is size-dependent (stemming from the Gibbs-Thomson effect)
which may lower the minimum temperature and pressure of the amorphous-carbon /
diamond phase-transition. 2) A predictive numerical model will be employed for
photothermal heating of highly-absorbing amorphous-carbon materials in the
laser-heated diamond anvil cell based on an analytical eigenfunction expansion
solution for the energy partial differential equation using spherical
coordinates. 3) Molecular doping strategies will be used to control the
concentration of model point-defects using either silicon- or nickel-
heteroatoms within the diamond lattice. 4) Prior results for synthesizing doped
diamond nanocrystals from amorphous-carbon will inform high-risk / high-reward
experimental efforts to observe a theoretically-proposed, polyatomic n-type
defect center in diamond. The experimental &amp; theoretical approaches will
provide an integrated understanding of how the size and composition of
amorphous-carbon grains determine final nanodiamond properties