* 1555418
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH:  Genetics and Development of Parallel Pollination System Evolution in Penstemon
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2016,02/28/2021
* Lena Hileman, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Anne W. Sylvester
* 02/28/2021
* USD 264,726.00

This project examines the extent to which evolutionary change is predictable. In
particular, it will test the hypothesis that different species that evolve
similar characteristics do so by changes in the same genes. This hypothesis will
be examined using species in the plant genus Penstemon that have independently
evolved a similar suite of floral characters (e.g. long, narrow flowers,
increased nectar production, lengthening of the reproductive organs) in response
to pollination by hummingbirds. If this hypothesis is true, then in different
hummingbird-pollinated species, genes affecting a given character should be
located at similar positions in the genome. The project will test this
expectation using genetic and genomic approaches applied to four hummingbird-
pollinated species and closely related species pollinated by bees. In addition,
this research will determine the developmental basis (e.g. changes in cell size
or cell proliferation) for the character changes. In examining the main
hypothesis, the project will sequence the genomes of three Penstemon species and
provide genetic maps. These resources will be made available to the scientific
community. The project will provide training for one postdoc and several
graduate students in molecular and genomic techniques, as well as in
bioinformatics and statistical analysis. Finally, it will introduce
undergraduate students to the sciences of evolutionary biology and genomics
through internships and independent study with the PI and co-PI of the project,
with a focus on minority student participation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project examines parallelism across different hierarchical levels (developmental
vs. genetic), across different trait types within the pollination syndrome
(quantitative vs. qualitative traits), and across different origins of flowers
adapted to hummingbird pollination. In doing so, it will provide the first
extensive data specifically designed to determine the extent to which parallel
phenotypic evolution of a complex multi-trait syndrome, comprised of multiple
quantitative characters, evolved by parallel genetic and developmental
mechanisms. Penstemon species pairs representing four independent transitions
from bee to hummingbird pollination floral syndromes will provide the foundation
of this research. For each of the four species pairs, the developmental
differences that lead to divergent bee and hummingbird-adapted floral
morphologies will be assessed to determine whether differences reflect parallel
developmental processes. For the same four species pairs, genetic mapping
combined with genome sequencing will be used to assess whether quantitative
floral trait loci identified in independent transitions to hummingbird
pollination correspond to homologous genomic regions containing the same set of
homologous candidate genes, suggestive that parallelism extends to the genetic
level. As few studies have examined genetic parallelism in quantitative traits,
the project includes the development of a novel 'genetic parallelism score' to
quantify the degree of genetic parallelism for both quantitative and qualitative
traits. Lastly, by quantifying developmental parameters in genetic lines derived
from the mapping study, the project will link genetic and developmental
processes by determining how fixed genetic differences between bee- and
hummingbird-adapted species alter the specific developmental processes that
contribute to divergent floral traits.