* 1555854
* Deciphering the ecology of aquatic single-stranded DNA phages (Microviridae/Gokushovirinae)
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2023
* Mya Breitbart, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 06/30/2023
* USD 492,567.00

Phage (viruses that infect bacteria) are abundant and dynamic components of all
ecosystems. Through infection of bacteria, phage can affect carbon and nutrient
cycles, influence bacterial diversity, and play important roles in gene
transfer. Phage come in two varieties - those with double stranded versus those
with single-stranded DNA (ssDNA). It had been assumed that ssDNA phage were not
important in aquatic ecosystems, but recent studies by this team suggest
otherwise. As the first study of the role of ssDNA phage in inland waters, the
proposed research will shed light on a previously overlooked component of
aquatic ecosystems. Project results will provide the first insight regarding the
abundance, diversity, and ecology of ssDNA phages in natural freshwater
habitats. In addition to training graduate and undergraduate students, outreach
will encourage teenage girls to pursue STEM fields through creating hands-on
learning modules for an Oceanography Camp for 8th Grade Girls at the University
of South Florida and through involvement with local Girl Scout troops.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal will study the diversity and ecological
roles of the ssDNA phages known as gokushoviruses (family Microviridae,
subfamily Gokushovirinae) by focusing on two ground-fed springs and associated
aquatic ecosystems in Florida. Preliminary studies in one of these springs
indicated low ssDNA phage diversity, simplifying evaluations of spatiotemporal
variability and improving the likelihood of discriminating specific phage-host
associations. This research combines quantitative and qualitative methods to
analyze the distribution of gokushoviruses and their potential hosts, as well as
lab-based microcosm studies to provide insight into the ecology of this unique
viral group. Through diel, daily, and monthly sampling from three sites in each
spring system, this project will determine the temporal and spatial patterns of
gokushovirus abundance and diversity to test the hypothesis that the springs
maintain a stable, low-diversity gokushovirus community, while gokushovirus
diversity and abundance display seasonal fluctuations farther from the springs
where environmental variation is more pronounced. Through simultaneous sequence-
based analysis of host and phage communities, single-cell techniques, microcosm
experiments, measurements of bacterial respiration and metabolic diversity,
induction assays, and culturing attempts, this project will constrain the
potential host range of gokushoviruses and determine their ecological roles in
aquatic ecosystems. These experiments will test the hypothesis that ssDNA phages
modify bacterial community composition and ecosystem function through infection
of specific bacterial hosts, some of which they are able to lysogenize.
Completion of these goals will transform aquatic microbial ecology by enabling
the inclusion of ssDNA viruses as a well-understood, integral component of the
aquatic virome.