* 1555852
* SBIR Phase II:  An Accessible Platform for Engaging Children with Motor Impairments in the Classroom Environment
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/2016,11/30/2018
* Johnetta MacCalla, Zyrobotics LLC
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 11/30/2018
* USD 1,015,769.00

This SBIR Phase II project focuses on developing an accessible educational
platform that combines mobile interfaces and adaptive educational tablet
applications (Apps) to support the needs of children with special needs. Tablet
devices are known to provide an interactive experience that has revolutionized
learning for children. Unfortunately, while these tablet devices are intuitive
to utilize and easy for many children, those with disabilities are largely
overlooked due to difficulties in effecting pinch-and-swipe gestures. This
project thus addresses a direct need in our society by providing an integrated
educational experience, focused on math education that addresses the diverse
needs of children, while providing a solution for variations found in their
disabilities. The contributions of this project include 1) the design of
accessible math Apps usable by K-12 children with and without disabilities and
2) the design of apps that adapt educational content and provide feedback to
parents and teachers based on real-time analytics. Given that there are over 93
million children worldwide living with a disability and, in the United States,
children with disabilities are entitled to a free appropriate public education,
there is a large potential of making both a commercial, as well as a societal,
impact in this space. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase II project addresses
an unmet need by developing an innovative solution to enable children with motor
disabilities access to mobile devices and Apps that could engage them fully into
the educational system. This solution capitalizes on the availability of
pervasive technologies by combining an accessible tablet interface and
educational Apps that adapt to each child?s abilities in order to provide an
accessible mobile solution. Tablet devices are known to provide an interactive
experience that has revolutionized learning for children. Unfortunately, while
these tablet devices are intuitive to utilize and easy for many children, those
with motor limitations tend to have difficulties due to the fine motor skills
required for interaction. As such, to address the growing utilization of tablets
in the classroom environment, the specific research objectives of this effort
include the design of methods that enable the embedding of educational math
content into accessible tablet apps for training and evaluating cognitive
skills, the design of methods that enable adaptation of the educational content
based on real-time analysis of interaction data and correlated performance of
the child, and the hosting of interactive design sessions with teachers,
parents, and children to evaluate the usability of the system.