* 1555951
* SBIR Phase II:  Production of an affordable synthetic colostrum replacer in edible green algae
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2016,09/30/2018
* Miller Tran, Triton Animal Products
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 09/30/2018
* USD 728,550.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project will be to produce colostrum proteins in edible
green algae that have the potential to reduce the use and dependence on
antibiotics in livestock animals. Colostrum proteins have both beneficial health
and growth properties that may drastically decrease the dependence on
antibiotics. Unfortunately, there is a limited supply of colostrum. Algae
provide an affordable and scalable system for the production of the valuable
proteins found in colostrum. Recently, it was demonstrated that the use of
antibiotics in livestock animals caused the formation of antibiotic resistant
bacteria. Colostrum proteins naturally stimulate the animal's immune system and
allows them to improve their own ability to fight off infections and ultimately
increase their rate of weight gain. The production of colostrum proteins at a
large scale in an untapped market that has the potential to gain market share
from the multi-billion dollar antibiotic industry.

This SBIR Phase II project proposes to demonstrate the feasibility of producing
colostrum proteins in algae using biomanufacturing. Some of the problems
associated with having the animal livestock industry adapt a new product is
demonstrating cost and feasibility. To accomplish the goal of decreasing
antibiotic use, this project will first focus on optimizing the production
process to drive the cost of producing colostrum proteins in algae down. Next,
work will be done on developing optimal formulations of colostrum proteins and
testing them in mice models before moving to larger livestock animals. Once an
optimal formulation is established, trials will be done in pig models. In the
pig models, colostrum proteins produced in algae will be tested to determine
their ability to assist animals in fighting off infections and also their
ability to improve the animal's rate of weight gain. Finally, this project will
strive to demonstrate that colostrum proteins produced in algae can give the
same positive outcomes in animals when compared to animals given antibiotics. By
accomplishing these goals, algae colostrum proteins can drastically decrease the
dependence on antibiotics and their negative side effects.