* 1555916
* Collaborative Research: Olfactory Navigation: Dynamic Computing in the Natural Environment
* MPS,PHY
* 11/01/2015,10/31/2020
* Bard Ermentrout, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 10/31/2020
* USD 1,818,513.00

This project was developed at an NSF Ideas Lab on "Cracking the Olfactory Code"
and is jointly funded by the Physics of Living Systems program in the Physics
Division, the Mathematical Biology program in the Division of Mathematical
Sciences, the Chemistry of Life Processes program in the Chemistry Division, and
the Neural Systems Cluster in the Division of Integrative Organismal Systems.
The project is a synergistic combination of laboratory experiments and computer
modeling that will lead to better understanding of how animals use the sense of
smell to navigate in the real world. Almost universally, from flies to mice to
dogs, animals use odors to find critical resources, such as food, shelter, and
mates. To date, no engineered device can replicate this function and
understanding the code used by the brain will lead to many novel applications.
Cracking codes, from neural codes to the Enigma code of WWII, is aided by a deep
understanding of the content of messages that are being transmitted and how they
will be used by their intended receivers. To crack the olfactory code, the team
will focus on how odors move in landscapes, how animals extract spatial and
temporal cues from odor landscapes, and how they use movement for enhancing
these cues while progressing towards their targets. The proposed work
encompasses physical measurement of odor plumes, behavioral measurement of
animals' paths through olfactory environments, electrophysiological and optical
measurement of neural activity during olfactory navigation, perturbations of the
environment via virtual reality and of neuronal hardware via genetics, and
multilevel mathematical modeling. The PIs will teach and work with
undergraduate, graduate and postdoctoral students and especially recruit
students from underrepresented groups in science. The project's results may lead
to improved methods for the detection of explosives, new olfactory robots to
replace trained animals, and new theoretically-grounded advances in robotic
control. The project will inform the development of technologies that interfere
with the ability of flying insects (including disease vectors and crop pests) to
locate their odor target, thus opening a new door for developing 'green'
technologies to solve problems that are of global economic and humanitarian
importance.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This proposal is a synergistic combination of
laboratory experiments and computational modeling that will probe how animals
use olfaction to navigate in their environment. Specifically, this effort seeks
to solve the difficult problem of olfactory navigation through the following
aims: (i) Generate and quantify standardized, naturalistic odor environments
that can be used to perform empirical and theoretical tests of navigation
strategies; (ii) Determine phenomenological algorithms for odor-guided
navigation through behavioral experiments in diverse animal species; (iii)
Determine how odor cues for navigation are encoded and used in the nervous
system by recording neuronal data and simulating putative neural circuits that
implement these processes; (iv) Manipulate olfactory environments and neural
circuitry, to evaluate model robustness. In contrast to previous attempts to
understand olfactory navigation, the present strategy emphasizes mechanisms that
are biologically feasible and explores the wide range of temporal and spatial
scales in which animals successfully navigate. The project will generate
datasets of immediate use and importance to scientists in theoretical biology
and mathematics, engineering (fluid mechanics, electronic olfaction, and
robotics) and biology (neuroscience, ecology and evolution).