* 1555957
* Role of Tomato bHLH Transcription Factors in Development and Immunity
* BIO,IOS
* 03/15/2016,02/29/2020
* Mary Beth Mudgett, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 02/29/2020
* USD 878,105.00

Plant growth is influenced by multiple extracellular signals including hormones,
circadian clock, developmental and environmental cues, and pathogen elicitors.
These signals act through distinct and overlapping signaling pathways, which
have been studied extensively. The key factors that control and integrate
interactions between these pathways however remain poorly understood at the gene
regulation level. A plant's ability to prioritize tradeoffs between growth and
defense is critical for optimizing its fitness in an ever-changing environment.
How growth- defense tradeoffs are regulated at the molecular level is largely
unknown and is a central question in plant biology. Recent evidence suggests
that transcription factors (TFs) of the basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) class play
important roles in regulating gene expression networks that control growth-
defense trade-offs. The goal of this project is to study unknown bHLH TFs in
tomato, a representative crop of the Solanaceae and the third most valuable crop
family in the world, to provide new knowledge regarding: (1) the transcription
circuits that play a major role in tomato growth and defense; (2) the factors
that regulate these transcription circuits; and (3) the potential pathways that
can be engineered to enhance disease resistance while optimizing plant fitness.
Ongoing international collaboration will provide a framework to share emerging
concepts, tools and technology. This research will provide hands-on research and
mentorship training at the graduate, undergraduate, and high school level with
special consideration of women, underrepresented minorities, low-income
students, and disabled students. Outreach partnerships with high schools will
provide curriculum development, laboratory upgrades, technical support and
enrichment training for teachers and students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sparse
information is available about the transcription factors (TFs) and transcription
networks in crop plants that integrate multiple signals to optimize fitness in
response to pathogen attack and how they are manipulated by pathogens. Recent
evidence suggests that the tomato pathogen Xanthomonas euvesicatoria
specifically regulates basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH)- controlled transcription
circuits to dynamically alter tomato growth and immunity to promote
pathogenesis. One of these networks in roots is required for lateral root
development and is hypothesized to impact the efficiency of nutrient
acquisition. The goals of this research is to: (1) use RNAseq and ChipSeq
technologies to study the DH1 transcription network(s) controlling development
and immunity in tomato; (2) determine how Xanthomonas directly alters the
transcription complex that controls DH1 transcription in tomato leaves to
provide mechanistic insight for how pathogens manipulate TF-modules during
infection; and (3) define additional bHLH TFs that function in growth and/or
immunity in tomato. This information will be used to engineer novel approaches
to optimize growth in important crops. Ongoing international collaboration will
provide a framework to share emerging concepts, tools and technology. This
research will provide hands-on research and mentorship training at the graduate,
undergraduate, and high school level with special consideration of women,
underrepresented minorities, low- income students, and disabled students.
Outreach partnerships with high schools will provide curriculum development,
laboratory upgrades, technical support and enrichment training for teachers and
students.