* 1555237
* CAREER: Neuronal Data Assimilation Tools and Models for Understanding Circadian Rhythms
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2016,09/30/2022
* Casey Diekman, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 09/30/2022
* USD 466,001.00

Human beings possess an internal timekeeping mechanism known as the circadian
clock that aligns physiological processes with the appropriate time of day, for
example by stimulating the release of the sleep-promoting hormone melatonin in
the evening and the wake-promoting hormone cortisol in the morning. Misalignment
of the circadian clock with respect to 24-hour environmental cycles occurs after
rapid travel across time zones and leads to symptoms of jet lag including sleep
disturbances, digestive problems, and decreased cognitive performance. The
circadian clock is highly conserved across animal species, and there are many
similarities in the genes and neural circuits involved in the circadian systems
of humans and the fruit fly Drosophila. The goal of this project is to obtain a
mathematical understanding of the biology underlying jet lag by developing a
detailed model of the circadian clock in Drosophila and then systematically
analyzing how the clock is disrupted by sudden changes in the timing of the
external light-dark cycle. The predictions of the computational model will then
be tested in flies through experiments that simulate transmeridian travel. This
project will also create new tools for building mathematical models directly
from observed data by bringing together techniques from applied mathematics,
statistics, and neuroscience. A unique graduate-level course at the intersection
of these fields will be developed. Graduate, undergraduate, and community
college students will be involved in this research and obtain interdisciplinary
training. The undergraduate and community college students will form integrated
summer research project teams. Community college students will be recruited to
enroll in an undergraduate-level mathematical modeling course at the New Jersey
Institute of Technology and will receive mentorship on pursuing four-year STEM
degree program opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on the
interface between dynamical systems and statistical data analysis in the context
of neuronal modeling. The research goal of this project is to develop novel data
assimilation methodologies for inferring models of neuronal dynamics directly
from time-course data that enable insights into biological mechanisms.
Specifically, this project will create new data assimilation tools to identify
and parameterize neurophysiological models from voltage traces recorded from the
Drosophila circadian (~24-hour) clock network. This research effort will address
two major gaps in the mathematical/computational neuroscience field: a scarcity
of methods for inferring parameters of unobserved ionic currents from
measurements of membrane voltage alone, and a lack of models that link
molecular, cellular, and behavioral scales. This will be accomplished by
developing a method to design stimulus protocols for use in data assimilation
algorithms that optimally unmask the dynamics of unobservable neuronal variables
and improve inference of electrophysiological models and parameters. The method
will be used to build a model of the Drosophila clock network that links
circadian rhythms in gene expression to changes in neuronal activity and
behavioral outputs. These models will be used to analyze how the internal
circadian oscillator re-entrains following phase shifts in the external light-
dark cycle. More generally, this work aims to elucidate fundamental aspects of
synchronization and entrainment in oscillatory systems.