* 1555071
* CAREER: Dynamic Games and Institutions
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2016,02/28/2023
* Alexander Wolitzky, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 02/28/2023
* USD 457,897.00

This award funds research on topics at the intersection of dynamic game theory
and institutional issues in political economy. The goal is to help us understand
the economic institutions that help foster cooperation among individuals. These
institutions range from formal law enforcement to on-line information sharing
systems, to word of mouth social networks, and even to the use of money. In
order to understand how these institutions help support the cooperation that is
necessary for economic growth, the PI plans to work in two steps. First, what
kinds of cooperative behavior could emerge in the absence of such institutions?
Second, what new kinds of behavior can emerge when a particular institutions is
introduced? The research will develop foundational results in game theory. It
will also help us understand the value of information sharing institutions,
centralized vs decentralized enforcement institutions, and the ways in which
wealth can be employed in society. The award also funds new curriculum
development in game theory and political economy for graduate students and
undergraduates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project includes several interrelated
research projects on dynamic games and institutions, divided into three parts:
game-theoretic foundations of enforcement institutions, foundational research on
repeated games, and dynamic models of political power, wealth, and status. The
PI will develop a model of the foundations of enforcement institutions to
compare the roles of private-order (eg decentralized) and public-order (eg,
centralized) enforcement. Community enforcement models are a special case of
repeated games with private monitoring; the PI plans to develop a new type of
recursive characterization of (or bound on) equilibrium payoffs in games of this
type. Finally, game theory results on coalition formation will be used along
with public finance ideas on optimal fiscal policy without commitment to develop
a new model of dynamic fiscal policy under political constraints.