* 1555062
* CAREER: Control and Sensitivity Analysis for Fluid-Elasticity Interactions and Fluid-Solid Mixtures
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2024
* Lorena Bociu, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 06/30/2024
* USD 421,000.00

Many important biological and physical problems involve either the interaction
of a fluid with an elastic body, or the flow of a fluid through a deformable,
porous medium. These problems are known as fluid-structure interactions and
fluid-solid mixture problems, respectively. In most of these applications, the
ultimate goal is the optimization or optimal control of the considered process,
as well as related sensitivity analysis (with respect to relevant
physical/biological parameters) investigations. Examples include the design of
small-scale unmanned aircrafts and morphing aircraft wings, like robo-bees,
minimizing turbulence in blood flow within a stenosed or stented artery, or
optimizing the pressure of the blood flow and investigating the influence of
pertinent biological parameters in the case of the lamina cribrosa in the eye,
where these factors are believed to be related to the development of glaucoma.
This research program addresses sensitivity analysis, control, and optimization-
related problems for moving boundary fluid-elasticity interactions and fluid
flows through biological tissues. The project will focus on the particular
example of the coupling between biomechanics and hemodynamics in the lamina
cribrosa in the eye, where performing sensitivity analysis with respect to
important parameters (like blood flow and intraocular and retrolaminar
pressures) will further the understanding of the cause and progression of
glaucoma, and enable novel means for preventing or treating glaucoma. This
research will also be applicable to other biological fluid-solid mixtures such
as cartilages, bones, and engineered tissues. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Moving
boundary fluid-elasticity interactions and porous media flows are nonlinear
dynamical systems with Banach space parameters, and most questions related to
their sensitivity analysis and control are open in the field. This project will
(i) advance the theory of optimal control problems subject to these nonlinear
systems by developing the theoretical framework for sensitivity analysis and
optimality conditions; (ii) perform sensitivity analysis on the lamina cribrosa
model to identify the important biological parameters, and use the obtained
results to develop and address possible control strategies in the development of
glaucoma. Well-posedness of optimal solutions, Frechet differentiability of cost
functionals and state with respect to both distributed and boundary controls,
and derivation and well-posedness analysis of adjoint systems will be addressed.
These results will provide the starting point for all sensitivity calculations,
parameter estimation, and derivative-based optimization algorithms.