* 1555406
* Conference Support: XXXV Dynamics Days 2016 Conference on Nonlinear Dynamics and Chaos; Durham, North Carolina; January 7-10, 2016
* ENG,CMMI
* 12/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Lawrence Virgin, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 05/31/2016
* USD 15,000.00

Dynamics Days is a conference that focuses on nonlinear dynamical and complex
systems, including physical and biological systems. The conference brings
together experts in experimental techniques, theoretical analysis, and
mathematical modeling. The themes of the conference include Mechanical Systems,
Mathematical Sciences, Computing Sciences, Physics, Life Sciences, and Network
Sciences. Funds are requested to support the participation of students and young
researchers, who will have the opportunity to contribute talks or present in a
poster session.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the last decades, Dynamics Days has
established itself as a premier conference for interactions between specialists
in different fields and between young and established researchers. The topics of
the conference cover a variety of areas with overlapping interests in nonlinear
dynamics, including mathematics, physics, engineering and the life sciences.
This variety attracts participants from a broad range of fields. Topics of
emphasis in 2016 include, but are not limited to: Applications of Network
Science to biological and social systems; Self-propelled particles, flocking,
swarming; Complex materials, granular materials; Control and stability of
dynamical systems and complex systems; and Pattern formation, fluid dynamics,
nonlinear waves.