* 1555030
* CAREER: Uncertainty Estimates in Low-Energy Nuclear Physics
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2023
* Lucas Platter, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Continuing Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 06/30/2023
* USD 590,647.00

Many important reactions in nuclear physics cannot be measured with currently
available experimental techniques. For example, the reaction probability of the
process in which two protons fuse to a Deuteron (a bound state of a neutron and
a proton) is an important process in the sun. However, it cannot be measured
experimentally and only theoretical calculations can provide this rate. In the
absence of guidance from experiment, it becomes important to quantify
theoretical uncertainties. To address these issues, this project will use
analytical and numerical methods to calculate reaction rates for astrophysically
relevant reaction rates and new parametrizations of the internuclear interaction
that will be useful to the larger nuclear physics community. Specifically, the
PI and his students will use nuclear interactions constructed using effective
field theory. In this theoretical approach, the nuclear interaction model can be
systematically improved to improve the accuracy of the calculation. Intrinsic
error of this approach will be determined using numerical techniques. This
project will allow not only for a better understanding of important nuclear
processes occurring in the universe, but also the project will provide a
stimulating training ground for students and postdoctoral fellows and outreach
community activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims at improving our
understanding of electroweak processes using effective field theory. A number of
weak processes in few-nucleon systems will be calculated within the unified
framework of 'pionless' effective field theory. Specifically, the well-measured
decay half-life time of tritium will be studied theoretically in order to obtain
a highly accurate description for proton-proton fusion and weak proton capture
on Helium-3. Furthermore, the PI and his student will study the intrinsic error
of Hamiltonians and associated electroweak currents generated in 'pionfull'
effective field theory. The PI will use novel techniques to analyze
uncertainties in matrix elements calculated with the chiral potential and the
associated electroweak currents in order to account correctly for the intrinsic
error of the Hamiltonian order-by-order. With his collaborators, the PI will
then use these results to calculate observables such as half-life times or total
decay rates that are currently measured to new accuracy and with correct error
estimates. The resulting interactions and currents will be made available to the
nuclear theory community.