* 1555947
* SBIR Phase II:  Imaging Flow Cytometer for High-Throughput High-Content Screening
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2018
* Eric Diebold, Omega Biosystems Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 03/31/2018
* USD 749,999.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project will be to develop an imaging flow cytometer to
enable high-throughput, precision analysis of biological cells for the drug
discovery and biotechnology industries. The goal for this project is to provide
order-of-magnitude throughput improvements versus other high content cell
analysis technologies, which will ultimately lead to an increase in the
efficiency of drug discovery. A high throughput imaging flow cytometer is an
ideal solution for the pharmaceutical and biotechnology industries, as well as
flow cytometry core facilities, because of the demand for higher throughput
cellular analysis. In addition to drug discovery, the imaging capability of this
flow cytometer will enable researchers to perform rare cell detection with
higher precision than is currently available, and ultimately, in vitro
hematology and oncology diagnostics using imaging flow cytometry. Finally, a
high throughput flow cytometer with an order of magnitude greater throughput
will dramatically reduce the time researchers spend in flow cytometry core
facilities, ultimately enabling a general increase in biomedical research
productivity.

This SBIR Phase II project proposes to improve the efficiency of drug discovery
by introducing a higher throughput, high content screening (HCS) instrument. HCS
investigates the effects and associated mechanisms of action of therapeutic
compounds by measuring multiple parameters from individual cells, typically
using imaging. Although HCS has been highly effective in discovery new drugs,
it, unfortunately, has significant throughput limitations. Namely, HCS requires
data to be collected at the single cell level versus the population level.
Typically, low-throughput readout techniques, such as flow cytometry and
fluorescence imaging, are used to collect this data. This project aims to
alleviate the speed limitations associated with imaging in drug discovery by
introducing a high-throughput imaging flow cytometer capable of performing sub-
cellular imaging at the speeds of traditional high throughput screening. The
project leverages a high-speed fluorescence imaging modality based on frequency
domain multiplexing, which was developed and demonstrated in Phase I, to provide
market-leading imaging performance. Expanding this technology into a full flow
cytometer by the end of Phase II, the goal is to have a 3-laser, 10-color
imaging flow cytometer ready for researchers performing HCS as well as the
general biomedical research community.