* 1555520
* Behavioral Dysfunction and the Evolution of Reproductive Isolation between Species
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2016,09/30/2022
* Karin Pfennig, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Jodie Jawor
* 09/30/2022
* USD 558,083.00

The breeding of different species, called hybridization, is a common phenomenon
that raises a fundamental problem: if species can interbreed, what maintains
their distinct characteristics and keeps species separated? Answers to this
question have usually focused on hybrid offspring: if hybrids cannot survive or
reproduce, then gene exchange between species will be restricted and species are
kept separate and distinct. To date, most work exploring the possibility that
hybrids perform poorly focuses on hybrid physiology and morphology. Few studies
have investigated whether hybrids show altered behaviors that prevent them from
reproducing and thereby limiting further gene exchange. The proposed work
evaluates the impact of behavior on hybridization in spadefoot toad species. By
doing so, the research will provide important insights into how behavior acts to
help maintain species boundaries. The research has critical implications for
understanding biodiversity and conservation of endangered species that could
hybridize with others. In carrying out this work, the PI will train
undergraduates and graduate students in both research techniques and public
outreach. Indeed, the PI and her lab members will engage in public outreach in
North Carolina and beyond through work at the North Carolina Museum of Natural
Sciences. Specifically, they will give talks in the museum's Daily Planet
Theater, which provides live programming to museum visitors and live streaming
of presentations to K-12 schools, senior centers, and libraries throughout North
Carolina. Videos of these presentations are uploaded as podcasts onto iTunes
University, on which the museum receives 20,000 downloads a month, and to the
museum's website, which receives approximately one million hits per year;
programs distributed via the museums website are available to users
anywhere.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Under the widely used biological species concept,
species are defined as groups of organisms that do not exchange genes; they
possess evolved features that prevent gene flow between them. A major class of
such 'isolating mechanisms' includes traits that engender low fitness in hybrid
offspring, thereby preventing them from backcrossing to the parent populations.
Because hybrid maladaptation is crucial to the speciation process, clarifying
the causes of hybrid maladaptation is central to understanding speciation. Most
speciation research has focused on three causes of hybrid maladaptation:
decreased survival, reduced fertility, and decreased likelihood of succeeding in
either parental niche. In contrast, the role of behavior in hybrid
maladaptation, specifically that hybrids might exhibit dysfunctional
reproductive behavior, has been relatively understudied. Yet, viable, fertile
hybrids might fail to respond appropriately to courtship signals, or,
alternatively, they might express mate preferences that reduce their likelihood
of mating with fitness-enhancing mates. Such dysfunctional reproductive behavior
could render viable, fertile hybrids 'behaviorally sterile', thereby acting as a
potentially key isolating mechanism between species. The proposed work will
ascertain if hybrid spadefoot toads display dysfunctional reproductive
behaviors, and whether such behavior explains patterns of gene exchange in
natural populations. Using two species of naturally hybridizing toads, the
research will: 1) evaluate hybrid responses to breeding opportunities; 2)
establish hybrid mate preferences; 3) measure the fitness consequences of mate
preferences; 4) ascertain whether hybrids invest less in reproduction; and 5)
determine patterns of hybrid mating in the field. Together, the projects will
identify behavior's role in the origins and maintenance of species boundaries.