* 1555324
* CAREER: Fundamental Studies of Multidentate Halogen Bond Donors for Supramolecular Catalysis
* MPS,CHE
* 03/01/2016,02/28/2021
* Orion Berryman, University of Montana
* Continuing Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 02/28/2021
* USD 689,587.00

With the support from the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry
program of the NSF Division of Chemistry, Professor Berryman of the University
of Montana, conducts research to gain a better fundamental understanding of the
interactions between molecules and to provide insights for developing novel
approaches to accelerate chemical reactions. This research aims to develop a new
class of catalysts for more efficient synthesis of sulfur containing compounds.
Considering the wide range of useful sulfur containing pharmaceuticals, this
research has the potential to help advance drug development and benefit society.
Additionally, educational and outreach activities are designed to inspire
students and broaden participation in science fields. Specifically, 3D printed
models of crystal structures are used as an interactive learning tool at the
spectrUM science museum and on Native American reservations. 3D printed models
are also used to facilitate the teaching of X-ray crystallography in university
courses and help high school students understand the concepts of molecular
recognition and shape selectivity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Berryman group
performs studies to obtain a fundamental understanding of the strength,
structure and nature of halogen bonding interactions between organic donors and
soft chalcogen and pnictogen Lewis bases. His group further investigates whether
multidentate halogen bonding receptors can selectively bind and catalyze the
reactions of soft substrates. An important goal of this research is to address
the question of whether halogen bonding interactions can be developed into a new
genre of organocatalysis. The goal of the broader impacts is to develop hands-on
methods to teach X-ray crystallography and inspire underrepresented students to
explore science education. A tactile approach improves students? basic
understanding of structure and appreciation of chemistry. 3D printing technology
is exploited to translate crystal structure coordinates into tangible models
that can be visualized, held and manipulated.