* 1555997
* Collaborative Research: LTREB: Feedbacks between evolution and demography in severely fragmented prairie populations of the purple coneflower, Echinacea angustifolia
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2022
* Ruth Shaw, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 03/31/2022
* USD 228,528.00

This project will continue a long-term study of natural selection in the purple
coneflower, Echinacea angustifolia. At the beginning of the 1800s, prairie
covered a great swath of North America. Since then, about 99% of the tallgrass
prairie has been destroyed. The small, isolated patches of prairie that remain
harbor great biodiversity, yet rates of local plant extinctions are alarmingly
high in remnant prairies. This project will advance scientific understanding of
why some populations go extinct and others persist. Threats to prairie
populations include fire suppression, declines of pollinators, inbreeding, loss
of genetic diversity, and a reduced capacity to evolve by natural selection.
This project builds on a long-term investigation of these ecological and genetic
processes and feedbacks between them affecting a model prairie plant species.
The purple coneflower typifies prairie plants in its long lifespan, often
decades, and in other attributes. This study is the first of its kind to
illustrate a population's capacity to adapt. In addition to advancing scientific
knowledge and disseminating information to scientists and land stewards, this
project will provide research experience and training to diverse participants at
a level appropriate for their interests and career stage: high school, college,
and graduate students, teachers, and citizen scientists in Minnesota and at the
Chicago Botanic Garden.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project uses formal
quantitative genetic approaches and common garden experimental designs to
quantify additive genetic variance for fitness, population differentiation, and
inbreeding depression. Researchers will estimate the amount of genetic variation
in Darwinian fitness of individuals planted in 2003, many of which flowered for
the first time in 2015 using aster statistical models to analyze fitness data.
Other experiments will estimate the reduction in mean fitness due to mating
between siblings. Together with demographic censuses of remnant populations,
started in 1996, these studies will yield comprehensive assessments of
population growth rates and the potential for evolutionary rescue. A key
strength of the research is that experiments are conducted in a realistic
habitat, including interactions of the coneflower with its pollinators and
herbivores. The core datasets comprise continuous individual fitness records,
including annual survival and reproduction of over 17,000 plants in ten
experiments and in 27 natural prairie remnants in Minnesota. These datasets,
which will extend up to 30 years by the end of the project, offer a rare window
into the interplay of evolutionary and ecological processes of a long-lived
species.