* 1555875
* SBIR Phase II:  Novel Capacitor-less Dynamic Random Access Memory Technology with Energy Efficiency, Manufacturability, and Scalability
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2016,07/31/2019
* Yuri Zadorozhny, Alacrity Semiconductors Inc
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 07/31/2019
* USD 744,115.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is to produce a new type of computer memory
called Ferroelectric Dynamic Random Access Memory (FEDRAM). FEDRAM is cheap and
can be mass-produced in current semiconductor manufacturing facilities. It also
uses much less energy than current-state-of-the-art memories, and enables
electronic devices to be much smaller in physical size. Commercially, FEDRAM
works best as an embedded memory, which means they are ideally suited for
products such as mobile phones where the processor and memory are on the same
chip. Additionally, the same block of FEDRAM can be configured for high
performance applications in addition to longer storage applications. This means
that future devices will adapt to maximize power, performance, and usability.
Due to the factors of price, performance, and low power, once FEDRAM is proven
to work, it can potenitally be adopted in nearly every electronic
device.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase II project addresses the commercialization questions of Ferroelectric
Dynamic Random Access Memory (FEDRAM). In SBIR Phase I, it was shown that FEDRAM
cells can be manufactured in an existing foundry with no new materials or
equipment changes, and that FEDRAM has leading performance characteristics. The
next step is to prove the same characteristics in an array, which would be
considered a minimum viable product; this is the goal of SBIR Phase II. By
proving this array, it will be possible to quickly scale the FEDRAM memory array
into embedded applications for commercial deployment. The performance
characteristics to be demonstrated are read/write latency, switching time,
endurance, retention, and energy use.