* 1555610
* Identifying Research Approaches, Technologies, Options, and Tradeoffs for Encrypted Communications Access
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2017
* Jon Eisenberg, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Nina Amla
* 08/31/2017
* USD 100,000.00

This National Academies study examines the tradeoffs associated with mechanisms
to provide authorized government agencies with access to the plaintext version
of encrypted information. The study describes the context in which decisions
about such mechanisms would be made and identifies and characterizes possible
mechanisms and alternative means of obtaining information sought by the
government for law enforcement or intelligence investigations. It seeks to find
ways to measure or otherwise characterize risks so that they can be weighed
against the potential law enforcement or intelligence benefits. The study does
not seek to answer the question of whether access mechanisms should be required
but rather provides an authoritative analysis of options and
tradeoffs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project yields a more nuanced understanding
of technical mechanisms for providing access to encrypted information,
alternative means of obtaining needed information, and ways of characterizing
associated risks and benefits. It provides a basis for policy discussion and
debate and for further exploration of the topic including future research. The
project, which is focused on a topic of current public discussion, provides an
objective source of information on technical and policy options and thus
provides information to all stakeholders.