* 1555079
* CAREER: Biologically inspired neural network models for robust speech processing
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2021
* Nima Mesgarani, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth Whang
* 05/31/2021
* USD 502,210.00

The recent parallel breakthroughs in deep neural network models and neuroimaging
techniques have significantly advanced the current state of artificial and
biological computing. However, there has been little interaction between these
two disciplines, resulting in simplistic models of neural systems with limited
prediction, learning and generalization abilities. The goal of this project is
to create a coherent theoretical and mathematical framework to understand the
computational role of distinctive features of biological neural networks, their
contribution to the formation of robust signal representations, and to model and
integrate them into the current artificial neural networks. These new bio-
inspired models and algorithms will have adaptive and cognitive abilities, will
better predict experimental observations, and will advance the knowledge of how
the brain processes speech. In addition, the performance of these models should
approach human abilities in tasks mimicking cognitive functions, and will
motivate new experiments that can further impose realistic constraints on the
models. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This interdisciplinary project lies at the
intersection of neurolinguistics, speech engineering, and machine learning,
uniting the historically separated disciplines of neuroscience and engineering.
The proposed innovative approach integrates methods and expertise across various
disciplines, including system identification, signal processing,
neurophysiology, and systems neuroscience. The aim of this proposal is to
analyze and transform the artificial neural network models to accurately reflect
the computational and organizational principles of biological systems through
three specific objectives: I) to create analytic methods that can provide
insights into the transformations that occur in artificial neural network models
by examining their representational properties and feature encoding, II) to
model and implement the local, bottom-up, adaptive neural mechanisms that appear
ubiquitously in biological systems, and III) to model the top-down, knowledge
driven abilities of cognitive systems to implement new computations in response
to the task requirements. Accurate computational models of the neural
transformations will have an overarching impact in many disciplines including
artificial intelligence, neurolinguistics, and systems neuroscience. More
realistic neural network models will not only result in human-like pattern
recognition technologies and better understanding of how the brain solves speech
perception, but can also help explain how these processes are impaired in people
with speech and language disorders. Therefore, the proposed project will advance
the state-of-the-art in multiple disciplines.