* 1555388
* CAREER: Elasticity and Lattice Dynamics of Iron Alloys under Earth's Core Conditions
* GEO,EAR
* 02/15/2016,01/31/2022
* Bin Chen, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 01/31/2022
* USD 596,039.00

Residing at the center of the Earth, the core is the innermost but extremely
dynamic region of our planet. Over the last two decades, geophysicists have
expended tremendous effort in deciphering the compositional makeup, thermal
structure, and seismic features of the Earth's core. Understanding the nature
and dynamics of the core can deeply enhance our abilities in understanding the
magnetic field generation process, the thermo-chemical evolution of the Earth's
deep interior, and the formation of the Earth as a habitable planet. This
Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) program aims to investigate the
elasticity and lattice dynamics of iron alloys as candidates for the inner core
under high pressure and temperature conditions of the core, using multiscale
state-of-the-art experimental facilities. The outcome of the proposed research
is a new set of fundamental mineral physics data on density, sound velocities,
and single-crystal elasticity of iron alloys under previously uncharted
pressure-temperature regimes, essential for us to provide further constraints on
the core's composition and dynamics. The experimental results are to be
integrated to a comprehensive mineral physics database for the core, cultivating
collaborations with sister disciplines such as seismology, geodynamics and
geochemistry, and ultimately enhancing our profound understanding of nature and
dynamics of the Earth's deepest interior. Furthermore, the involvement of
student researchers in the proposed research and the development of a research
and teaching facility for high-pressure mineral and materials science will
initiate the 'pipeline' that helps influence and attract diverse student
population, particularly traditionally underrepresented minorities, into Earth
science and build diverse geoscience workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
proposal aims to systematically measure high pressure-temperature elastic and
vibrational properties of candidate iron alloys for the inner core, using
synchrotron-based X-ray spectroscopies combined with resistively- and laser-
heated diamond anvil cell techniques, so as to address the following scientific
questions: (1) How do pressure and temperature affect the elastic and
vibrational properties of iron alloys under core conditions? (2) What are the
alloying effects of candidate light elements on the elasticity of iron under
core conditions? (3) What are the single crystal elasticities of iron alloys
approaching the core conditions, for the interpretation of the inner core's
seismic anisotropy and fine-scale seismic? (4) Finally, what are the likely
lighter alloying components in the inner core and what would that imply for the
thermochemical evolution of the core and the planet? The integrated education
and outreach objective is to train a new generation of independent solid Earth
geoscientists in laboratory- and synchrotron-based facilities and to offer
inquiry-base learning opportunities and experience to K-16 students through the
implementation of a 'Multi-Anvil Press Laboratory' (MAPLab) teaching module to
geosciences curricula. The results of the project will be widely disseminated on
a timely manner through national and international meetings, public lectures and
outreach, and news media.