* 1555375
* CAREER: Oxygen sensitivity of aerobic respiration and nitrification in oxygen minimum zones and biogeochemical feedbacks to deoxygenation
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2024
* John Beman, University of California - Merced
* Continuing Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 03/31/2024
* USD 663,682.00

________________________________________________________________________________
__________&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Aerobic microorganisms in
the ocean help regulate biogeochemical nutrient cycles through the linked
production and consumption of dissolved oxygen (DO) and organic matter.
Concentrations of DO have been shown to be steadily decreasing in deeper ocean
waters and the resulting areas of critically low DO content, known as oxygen
minimum zones (OMZs), are expanding. While this phenomenon is recognized as
having potentially serious impacts on biogeochemical cycles where OMZs are
growing, surprisingly little research has been done to identify the mechanisms
and quantify the specific processes that will affect these changes. This project
will study the connection between changing DO concentrations and nutrient
cycling in the interior of the ocean. The oxidation of nitrogen compounds
(ammonia and nitrite in particular) is strongly influenced by DO concentrations.
Because of the complex and connected nature of marine biogeochemical reactions
that involve DO, each one potentially altered by concentration changes, this
research is critical for a complete understanding of how ocean chemistry will
change in the near future. The project will incorporate education into the
research by developing materials to teach high school students about the
nitrogen cycle, by developing a marine chemistry based course for undergraduates
that will give them both field and computational experience, and by building on
past efforts to include traditionally underrepresented groups in science. One of
the graduate students funded by this project will translate lectures into
Spanish and make these available on the internet for increased accessibility for
minority students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The world's largest oxygen minimum zone
(OMZ), located in the Eastern Tropical North Pacific (ETNP), is an ideal study
site for research into the effects of varying dissolved oxygen (DO)
concentrations on nutrient cycling in the interior ocean. Throughout this OMZ,
the extent of anoxia exhibits a range that allows for study of the effect of
changing DO content on the rates and mechanisms that control consumption of DO
and organic matter by aerobic microorganisms in a 'real world' setting. In
particular, ammonia and nitrite oxidation, reactions that play a critical role
in the nitrogen cycle, are likely to be significantly affected by varying DO
concentration. This project will evaluate aerobic respiration, ammonia, and
nitrite oxidation rates at various stations in the ETNP, examine carefully
controlled incubations, and develop primers to target active microorganisms in
the OMZ; all to quantify the connections between DO and these biogeochemical
nutrient cycles. The research will also examine the hypothesis that more organic
carbon is respired in waters with low DO and a shallow OMZ than previously
thought and evaluate the possibility that nitrogen cycling in low DO regions
could push OMZs to anoxia due to nitrite oxidation coupled with nitrate
reduction, which could potentially accelerate DO consumption. With the expansion
of OMZ's in a changing ocean, it is crucial to more fully understand the
connections between these various, complex, components.