* 1555270
* CAREER: Novel Nanomaterials for Scalable Entangled Photon Emitters
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2023
* Paul Simmonds, Boise State University
* Continuing Grant
* Yaroslav Koshka
* 05/31/2023
* USD 505,798.00

This CAREER award is jointly funded by the Electronic and Photonic Materials
Program (EPM) in the Division of Materials Research (DMR), and by the
Electronics, Photonics, and Magnetic Devices Program (EPMD) in the Division of
Electrical, Communications and Cyber Systems (ECCS).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nontechnical Description: The research goal of this CAREER
award is to develop novel nanomaterials that may one day transform computing
power and data security. To achieve these outcomes, one strategy relies on a
peculiar property called quantum entanglement. According to quantum mechanics,
two entangled photons remain "linked" together, even when separated by a large
distance. A change to one of the two photons instantaneously affects the other.
To help revolutionize computing and cryptography, efficient sources of entangled
photons are needed. The research component of this CAREER award is to develop a
new type of quantum dot for efficiently generating entangled photons. The
research efforts are integrated with educational activities benefiting graduate
and undergraduate student researchers who are learning cutting edge techniques
to synthesize nanomaterials, measure their physical properties, and fabricate
test devices. Educational outreach activities, involving undergraduate
researchers, grade 4-6 students and the general public enhance Idaho's workforce
diversity in science, technology, engineering and math fields, while also
increasing undergraduate retention.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description:
Researchers have long proposed using quantum dots as the basis for compact,
electrically driven entangled photon sources. However, traditional quantum dots
are prone to large fine structure splitting between exciton states, preventing
robust photon entanglement. The research project addresses this issue by
introducing a novel technique for synthesizing self-assembled quantum dots on
semiconductor surfaces with specific orientations. These new quantum dots are
not expected to suffer from fine structure splitting and should hence be ideal
entangled photon sources. The project aims to explore quantum dot nucleation and
growth at the atomic level; to study quantum dot synthesis-structure-property
relations; to demonstrate photon entanglement; to investigate fiber-compatible
entangled photons; and to fabricate proof-of-concept devices.