* 1555608
* SBIR Phase II:  VocaliD - Infusing Unique Vocal Identities into Synthesized Speech
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2016,09/30/2020
* Rupal Patel, VOCALID INC
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 09/30/2020
* USD 1,140,749.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is to offer custom crafted digital voices for
text-to-speech applications. Each one of us has a unique voiceprint - an
essential part of our self-identity. Though the quality of text-to-speech
technology has improved, voice options remain limited. For the 2.5 million
Americans (and tens of millions worldwide) living with voicelessness who rely on
devices to talk, access to a custom digital voice is a game changer. It's the
difference between a functional solution and being heard, uniquely, as oneself.
Enhanced opportunities for social connection increase quality of life,
independence, and access to educational and vocational resources that can narrow
the gap between those with and without disability. This immediate unmet societal
need, coupled with the increasing proliferation of devices that speak to us and
for us, creates a compelling, timely and significant commercial opportunity for
high quality, personalized digital voices that can be produced at scale. By
leveraging the company's crowdsourced human voicebank and proprietary voice
matching and blending algorithms the technology has the potential to empower
everyone to express themselves through their own
voice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II
project builds on the company's NSF-funded research and Phase I results that
support feasibility and commercialization of a customized voice building
technology. The text-to-speech market, encompassing assistive technologies,
enterprise and consumer applications, is currently valued at around $1B and is
rapidly growing and ripe for innovation. To create custom voices, the company
leverages the source-filter theory of speech production. From those who are
unable or unwilling to record several hours of speech the company extracts a
brief vocal sample - even a single vowel contains enough 'vocal DNA' to seed the
personalization process. Identity cues of the source are then combined with
filter properties of a demographically and acoustically matched donor in the
company's voicebank. The result is a voice that captures the vocal identity of
the recipient but the clarity of the donor. Phase II technical objectives
address the need for 1) customer-driven voice customization, 2) quality
assurance of crowdsourced recordings, 3) voice aging algorithms, and 4) targeted
donor recruitment algorithms. These advances will help secure the assistive
technology beachhead and spur innovations for broader applications such as
virtual reality, personal robotics, and digital persona for the Internet of
Things.