* 1555205
* CAREER: Theoretical Investigation of Photo-induced Charge and Energy Transfer in Organic Photovoltaic Materials
* MPS,CHE
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2020
* Nandini Ananth, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 12/31/2020
* USD 648,255.00

Nandini Ananth of Cornell University is supported by a CAREER award from the
Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program in the Chemistry
Division to develop new theoretical methods to uncover a detailed, atomistic-
level picture of the factors that drive efficient electron and energy transport
in material systems. A delicate balance of chemical interactions along with
external forces like light and heat determine the outcomes of reactions in
complex molecular systems. The current research focuses on designing organic
solar cell materials that absorb solar photons and efficiently generate free
electrons. The long-term objectives of this research are to develop a complete
toolbox of theoretical methods that can provide general, transferable design
principles for materials relevant to renewable energy technology.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The use of mathematical tools to understand chemical
reactions is central to the proposed work, and is reflected in the educational
outreach component of this award. The early incorporation of mathematics
significantly impacts aptitude for science in the later stages of education and
is an important step towards encouraging participation in Science, Technology,
Engineering and Mathematics (STEM) careers. This challenge is addressed by
working with high-need school districts to develop lesson plans and
demonstrations that encourage the gradual incorporation of mathematical tools in
science classrooms. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical challenges addressed in
this work include accurately modeling the electronic structure of large, many-
atom systems and developing a computationally efficient method to incorporate
quantum dynamic effects in condensed-phase charge and energy transfer processes.
The electronic structure challenge is addressed with fragment-based methods
where a large system calculation is divided into many accurate calculations on
smaller subsystems using a high level of theory. The challenge of dynamics is to
develop a method that can accurately capture quantum effects, but that is based
on classical molecular dynamics where the computational effort scales well with
system size. Here, this is achieved by mapping the quantum dynamics of a complex
system to the classical dynamics of an isomorphic classical system derived using
the path-integral representation of quantum mechanics. The methods developed
here are general, and allow accurate studies of quantum behavior in complex
systems with applications to many areas beyond condensed-phase photochemistry.
The group works with schools in New York State, and in particular the high-needs
focus district of Syracuse City, to develop curricular&lt;br/&gt;materials that
incorporate math and that meet the new Next Generation Science Standards adopted
by the state.