* 1555271
* Workshop: Additive Manufacturing for Health; Arlington, Virginia; December 2015
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2016
* Yong Huang, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 08/31/2016
* USD 49,760.00

This award supports a workshop to bring together additive manufacturing
researchers in the broad field of health. Additive manufacturing describes a
collection of manufacturing processes that produce parts layer-by-layer,
controlled by a computer, and without the use of expensive tools or dies. This
manufacturing strategy has been an enabling technology for a large number of
existing and emerging biomedical research and medical industry applications, and
the approach has become widespread in recent years. Additive manufacturing is
expected to fundamentally change the nature of advanced manufacturing and
revolutionize many areas of research in the 21st Century. The workshop will help
realize the full potential of additive manufacturing technology for various
health-related applications and products. First, the increased awareness of
additive manufacturing for health will increase the level of interest in
manufacturing research in general and additive manufacturing in particular. Any
research thrusts initiated subsequently based on workshop recommendations and a
better understanding of additive manufacturing for health are expected to
increase the further adoption of additive manufacturing in various medical
research and development efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop will last
1.5 days, and will include thought leaders from industry and academe to address
the future of additive manufacturing in health as well as the research
accomplishments to date and the basic research needs. Invited speakers will make
presentations regarding the future applications of additive manufacturing in
health. Further invited speakers will address funding perspectives, both in
terms of needs and the prognosis for funding support. Speakers will be recruited
from industry, academe, and government in order to obtain a broad perspective.
The objectives of the workshop are to: (1) review the state-of-the-art in basic
research in additive manufacturing for health; (2) examine future prospects of
additive manufacturing for health; (3)share perspectives on additive
manufacturing for health from funding agencies such as DoD, NIH, NIST, and NSF;
(4) identify needs, gaps, and challenges facing additive manufacturing for
health, for both existing products and new enabled technologies; and (5)
formulate recommendations for basic research initiatives.