* 1555972
* The Roles of Pioneer Neurons and Adhesion Molecules in Neuronal Migration
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2021
* Victoria Prince, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Evan Balaban
* 05/31/2021
* USD 620,000.00

Nerves, the major communication pathways of our brain and spinal cord, are made
of many individual communication fibers called axons. Each axon carries
information from one single nerve cell (neuron). As an embryo develops, these
fibers have to connect up correctly in order to make working neural circuits.
Before these connections can form, the neurons have to move from the place they
are born to the location where they will perform their role. Previously, the
Principal Investigators have studied this process in the facial nerve, which
controls facial expressions, and found that a single "pioneer" neuron guides the
movement of the remaining neurons to their final destinations. Where do pioneer
neurons come from, how do they know where to go, and how do other neurons know
how to follow them? This project will address these questions in developing
zebrafish embryos (animals with facial nerves similar to humans). Zebrafish
embryos are transparent, and the experiments use specially-engineered zebrafish
whose facial neurons are fluorescently labeled to make their cell migration
visible. Experiments will also examine the roles of particular molecules found
on the cell surface that are important for cell migration (cell adhesion
molecules). A new kind of 3-dimensional imaging (light sheet microscopy) will be
used to measure cell movements, and new software will be developed to visualize
and analyze cell movement data. Once developed and tested at the University of
Chicago and the Marine Biological Laboratory, these software tools will be made
freely available. The project will additionally provide training opportunities
for high school, undergraduate and graduate students; introduce elementary and
middle school students to research; and engage the public via interactive
displays at the Museum of Science and Industry
(MSI).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Subsets of neurons migrate tangentially within the
neuroepithelial plane, often over significant distances. To better understand
mechanisms underlying tangential migration that are important for neural circuit
formation, this project focuses on facial branchiomotor neurons (FBMNs), which
undergo a tangential migration that is conserved in vertebrates ranging from
fishes to mammals. The study will utilize zebrafish embryos as they are
accessible, transparent, and a powerful genetic model. Migrating FBMNs will be
imaged in transparent zebrafish embryos with genetically marked cells, and
tracked using light sheet microscopy. The Principal Investigator recently
described the pioneer neuron as the first FBMN to migrate on each side of the
hindbrain, and demonstrated the critical role of this neuron. Aim 1 will study
the newly recognized pioneer neuron by establishing its cellular origins and
tracking its subsequent trajectory through development. FBMN tangential
migration also relies on interactions with two different pre-laid axon tracts
and both interactions depend on adhesion molecule N-Cadherin. Aim 2 will
investigate the role of N-Cadherin in mediating interactions between FBMNs and
axon tracts, and whether it functions autonomously within neurons during
migration. Additional adhesion molecules important for FBMN migration will be
identified using RNAseq. An integral part of this project will be the
development of new, broadly-applicable computational tools to analyze imaging
data.