* 1555330
* CAREER: Impact of Eco-Evolutionary Feedbacks on the Dynamics of Adaptation
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2022
* Oskar Hallatschek, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 08/31/2022
* USD 750,000.00

How fast do microbes adapt? While this question has been explored in well-mixed
populations with great effort and quantitative success, there is a large gap
between theory and experiments for natural populations exhibiting spatial
structure. This leaves us at a serious loss in understanding the evolutionary
response of, e.g., microbial colonies or biofilms, and makes it impossible to
predict the pace of drug-resistance evolution. The P.I. has demonstrated in his
past research that theory and experiments can be joined effectively to dissect
the evolutionary processes induced by spatial structure. This effprt puts this
work onto a new level by the use of innovative experimental designs such as
engineered microbial systems to track the spontaneous emergence of selectable
mutant clones, and theoretical concepts that allow dealing with fluctuations and
eco-evolutionary feedbacks exactly. The results of this project will advance our
understanding of spatio-temporal aspects of adaptation, and elucidate
specifically how populations respond to environmental deterioration, which is
key to efforts ranging from the rational design of strategies to conserve
species in the face of environmental change to mitigating drug resistance
evolution. The data set generated by this experimental research, combined with
novel theory and simulations, will allow the community to reassess established
paradigms about adaptation of microbial populations. The research will invite
novel interdisciplinary activities in the quest to understand, predict and
control adaptation of spatially-structured microbial populations. The
interdisciplinary research is closely orchestrated with broad educational
efforts designed to promote crossing of traditional disciplinary boundaries to
achieve new ways of thinking about evolutionary processes, such as drug
resistance evolution, that transcend the limitations of the standard mean-field
theories of evolution. At the graduate and undergraduate level, the research
will be accompanied by a new interdisciplinary course, Statistical Biophysics of
Cells and Populations, that the PI offers to students of physics, chemistry,
biology and mathematics. In addition, the PI has established a firm
collaboration with the Lawrence Hall of Science at Berkeley to prepare novel
educational resources for high-school students and undergraduates to explore the
ubiquity and evolutionary potential of microbial populations and to establish
the crucial link between ecology and evolution. These resources, which include a
learning module and hands-on activities, will be documented in write-ups and
made freely available online through existing NSF-funded cyber-infrastructure
platforms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Demography and evolution are tightly
intertwined. The distribution of individuals in space determines the influx of
new mutations, the strength of genetic drift and the competition between
genotypes. Evolution on the other hand, influences the sizes and densities
populations can attain, how individuals migrate and interact with each other and
the environment and how they reproduce and die. The feedback between population
dynamics and evolution is absent in standard models of evolving well-mixed
populations. Yet, it constrains the pace of adaptation, the predictability of
evolutionary outcomes and the evolutionary response of spatially-structured
populations. The objective of this project is to fill this gap by quantifying
the associated eco-evolutionary feedback in microbial populations and its
consequences for adaptation. To this end, the P.I. proposes tightly-controlled
microbial evolution experiments to quantify how population dynamics alters
patterns of molecular evolution, and new population genetics theory that bridges
the gap in spatio-temporal scales between laboratory experiments and natural
populations. The specific aims are: 1. Determine how the stochastic dynamics of
how cells generate population-level patterns of genetic drift and selection and
how these patterns control the fate of beneficial mutations. Generalize well-
established theories of evolution in well-mixed populations to capture the eco-
evolutionary feedback dynamics of the experiments. 2. Determine how spatially-
structured populations adapt to environmental challenges (i) via pre-existing
mutations and (ii) via the accumulation of new mutations. 3. Establish a new
course, a workshop on unintentional biases and undergraduate mentoring to
increase diversity in the STEM fields at UC Berkeley.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is being jointly supported by the Physics of Living Systems program in
the Division of Physics and the Cellular Cluster and the Systems and Synthetic
Biology clusters in the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences.