* 1555780
* A Model Checking based Framework for Analyzing Information-Propagation over Networks
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Samik Basu, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Nina Amla
* 08/31/2018
* USD 124,701.00

In the age of globalization and informatization, the study of information
propagation in the network of connected entities plays an important role in
understanding and analyzing security and safety concerns. Entities in the
network can be people, groups or computing devices, while the network is the
relationship describing how one entity can influence or can be influenced by
others. In epidemiology, the network of entities may correspond to the
population groups and their spatial/proximity relationships. In social or market
sciences, the network captures the exchange of ideas and information (or
misinformation among peers, or leaders and followers), and the studies focus on
identifying the critical groups of entities that are sufficient to influence the
entire network. In all the above applications, the central theme is to analyze
the spread of information/infection and use external influences/stimuli to
either contain its spread within desired level or maximize its impact. Such
external influences/stimuli that impact the spread can be referred to as
vaccines. This project investigates ways to identify the way to deploy the
vaccines, and the order in which to do so to realize the desired objective.

At its core, the project develops and applies formal method techniques,
particularly model checking, to capture the dynamics of information spread in a
network and analyze them. The long term objective is to develop a robust and
application-domain agnostic framework which will allow succinct and precise
representation of network and spread-model of information as a finite-state
graph, and desired objectives as temporal properties over the graph. The project
establishes a natural connection between the application domains and solution
methodology, which furthers research in formal methods, particularly in terms of
developing new types of specification language and efficient techniques to
analyze and explore models expressed in this language. The cross-disciplinary
nature of the educational and research activities, and the dissemination of
research results will help to open new avenues of research not only in formal
methods but also in information propagation and analysis. The project involves
undergraduate and under-represented students.