* 1555876
* ECOLOGICAL AND EVOLUTIONARY RESILIENCE OF AQUATIC COMMUNITIES  TO THE CLIMATE-MEDIATED EXPANSION OF AN APEX PREDATOR
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2016,09/30/2022
* Mark Urban, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 09/30/2022
* USD 898,919.00

An ongoing challenge in ecology is to understand how ecosystems respond to
environmental disturbances. Climate change is one such disturbance that is
expected to result in a re-organization of global biodiversity, including shifts
in species geographic distribution and increases in rates of extinctions.
Alterations in local species populations may impact the functioning of
ecosystems and the services they provide for humans. However, natural ecosystems
might prove more resilient that we think if species better adapted to new
climates can immigrate or if local populations can adapt to the changes. In this
project, researchers will manipulate entire ponds to understand the degree to
which these ecosystems are resilient to the climate-induced expansion of a top
aquatic predator. As winters warm, the marbled salamander is rapidly colonizing
newly suitable temporary ponds in New England. Marbled salamanders are top
predators in these ponds and can strongly reduce biodiversity and shift pond
ecosystems to a state characterized by high algal production. The project will
have broader impacts on society beyond contributing to fundamental science and
conservation. The investigators will create a scientific internship for K-12
teachers and an undergraduate internship focusing on students from
underrepresented groups. They will also develop a system of linked remote video
cameras to record and broadcast the annual amphibian migration, as a means of
public outreach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In a region where climate change is
promoting the rapid expansion of a top predator, the investigators will quantify
how immigration and adaptive evolution facilitate ecological and evolutionary
rescue. The work will focus on ecological resilience originating from the
immigration of species that can restore diversity and replace lost functional
roles and the adaptive evolution of an intermediate consumer previously shown to
mediate the impacts of the apex predator on community structure. The project
advances fundamental and applied questions by 1) performing one of the first
tests of resilience theory in parallel, repeated, whole-ecosystem experiments;
2) allowing a comparison of ecological versus evolutionary mechanisms of
resilience; 3) challenging the existing paradigm that predictions about biotic
responses can ignore landscape connectivity and adaptive variation; 4)
initiating an important long-term study on evolution in wild vertebrates; and 5)
developing a generalizable understanding of how apex predators alter freshwater
systems as they expand in a warming world. The project takes a multi-tiered
approach in order to develop insights about two fundamental responses to
predator introductions across space and time to contribute to building a
broader, more mechanistic understanding of eco-evolutionary resistance to food
web changes.