* 1555698
* Do Welfare Drug Offender Bans Affect Recidivism?
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Naomi Sugie, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Reginald Sheehan
* 06/30/2020
* USD 164,828.00

The interrelationships between welfare and criminal justice systems have long
been studied; however, their connections for structuring key outcomes among
individuals, such as offending, have been rarely explored. This project tests
whether government policies of agencies outside of criminal justice are
consequential for shaping law-breaking behavior. To do so, it focuses on a
potentially salient but often-overlooked welfare policy that may have critical
consequences for criminal behavior. Specifically, the 1996 welfare reform
policies included a provision to exclude individuals convicted of drug-related
felonies from receiving cash assistance and food stamps for their lifetimes
(Section 115 of Personal Responsibility and Work Opportunity Reconciliation Act
of 1996a). Nearly two decades later, it remains unclear how these policies
impact criminal offending and recidivism among the individuals who no longer
qualify. Have the policies decreased deviant behavior by promoting self-
sufficiency from the government dole? Alternatively, have they increased
offending by eliminating critical resources to people in financially constrained
circumstances? To answer these questions, this project examines the effect of
these bans for recidivism outcomes, including arrests, convictions,
incarcerations, and time to recidivism. It also considers whether the bans have
had differential impacts depending on the benefit program, demographic
subgroups, local labor market conditions, crime types, and sentencing outcomes.
With criminal justice agencies facing severe financial constraints, it is
critical to understand whether welfare policies are exacerbating crime and
increasing prison admissions among individuals with previous convictions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using administrative records from California, the project
will employ a novel analytic method--regression discontinuity (RD) analysis--to
estimate the causal impact of the bans. RD designs are considered "quasi-
experimental" approaches that take advantage of random variation in a treatment
variable to approximate pre- and post-test comparisons of experimental designs.
In the case of drug-related felonies and public assistance bans, RD analysis
methods address several issues that have hampered previous efforts to make
causal claims about the effect of the exclusions. Using this method, the project
will provide the strongest evidence to date about the impacts of the cash and
food stamp bans for recidivism and will provide point estimates of cost-savings
(or cost-expenditures) of the welfare policies given criminal justice
consequences. In addition, the project will differentiate recidivism effects by
benefit program and demographic subgroups, such as women and minorities. It will
also examine whether local labor market conditions moderate the consequences of
the bans for recidivism, and whether the exclusions impact certain types of
criminal behavior, such as pecuniary-related crimes, or types of sentencing
outcomes, such as incarceration.