* 1555095
* CAREER: Super-Earth or Mini-Neptune? Exploring the Mysterious Origins of the Smallest Transiting Planets
* MPS,AST
* 02/15/2016,01/31/2023
* Heather Knutson, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Sarah Higdon
* 01/31/2023
* USD 465,055.00

Ongoing surveys of nearby stars have revealed a diverse array of planetary
systems, many of which have characteristics that differ substantially from those
of our solar system. Perhaps one of the biggest surprises to come out of these
surveys was the discovery that "super-Earths" (planets between 1-10 times the
mass of the Earth) are one of the most common types of extrasolar planet. We
currently know very little about the compositions of these mysterious planets,
and it has been suggested that this mass range may include both "water worlds"
and "mini-Neptunes" with thick hydrogen envelopes around a rocky core. THE PI
and her students will conduct a carefully-designed observational program to
distinguish between these two scenarios and to measure the properties of these
exoplanets. These measurements will offer key insights into the formation and
migration histories of this surprising new class of planets. This program will
support thesis work for two graduate students as well as a series of
undergraduate summer research projects. Students will have the opportunity to
observe remotely on Keck and to travel to the telescope for observing runs at
Palomar.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI and her students will combine a Keck/HIRES
radial velocity campaign with Palomar transit photometry and spectroscopy in
order to characterize new low-mass transiting planets and to develop improved
cloud models for their atmospheres. They will use radial velocity studies to
measure planetary masses, thereby constraining bulk compositions, and they will
measure precise orbital ephemerides. For low-density super-Earths, they will use
transmission spectroscopy to characterize the mean molecular weight of their
atmosphere to distinguish between those that are water-rich and those with rocky
cores surrounded by H/He envelopes. Transmission spectroscopy details can be
obscured by upper-level clouds, so they will also study "cool Neptunes" in order
to develop a better understanding of the cloud formation processes. These
observations will utilize new capabilities for precision photometry and
spectroscopy at Palomar and significantly enhance the science return from future
atmospheric characterization studies with HST and JWST.