* 1555742
* OPUS: Connecting genomics data with subsurface microbial biogeochemistry of a contaminated aquifer.
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2020
* Anthony Hay, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 03/31/2020
* USD 199,846.00

For decades scientists have used classical methods in environmental science to
characterize groundwater aquifers contaminated by hydrocarbons. Those methods,
including measurements of the concentrations of organic chemical pollutants,
other chemical conditions such as the acidity and oxygen content, and the
physiological and genetic traits of microbial populations, have provided a rich
characterization of polluted ground waters. However, such data do not take
advantage of recent advances in molecular biology that have greatly expanded our
ability to characterize the microbial organisms that are often critical to
remediation efforts. In this project, the investigator, who since 1991 has
studied a contaminated aquifer, will connect his data on that aquifer to recent
data generated by advanced genomic methods in molecular biology. The molecular
data of DNA and RNA sequences, will provide the researcher with an opportunity
to explore the limits, frontiers, and pragmatic relationships between
geochemical data and molecular characterizations of the microbial organisms and
potentially discover how the metabolism of the microbial assemblages determines
aquifer geochemistry.

The researcher has studied both microbial and geochemical properties of a
shallow aquifer near the Hudson River in South Glens Falls, NY, which is
contaminated with naphthalene-rich coal-tar waste. This project is designed to
gain new insights into the microbial biogeochemistry of the biodegradation of
pollutant compounds. The overarching goal of this OPUS project is to merge
previous geochemical and microbial data with recently-created DNA sequencing
data, specifically omics information generated by a United States Department of
Energy Joint Genome Institute microbial community sequencing project. The
researcher will use statistical and other analytical procedures to discern new
causal relationships between the dynamic microbiological and geochemical
processes at this site. Information about key processes catalyzed in this
subsurface site will deepen understanding about the composition and function of
microorganisms dwelling in this study site and establish principles that can be
transferred to other ecological settings. The project will integrate knowledge
from ecosystem science, microbial ecology, taxonomy, and genetic diversity, and
nutrient cycling in subsurface, sediment and soil habitats, to address how
microbial processes purify water and influence environmental quality.