* 1555346
* CAREER: Rheological Evolution of Subduction Interface Shear Zones: Insights From   Exhumed Subduction Complexes
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Jaime Barnes, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Whitmeyer
* 08/31/2019
* USD 198,998.00

Geophysical data from subduction zones worldwide illustrate that subduction
interfaces are rheologically complex and heterogeneous. Observations of exhumed
remnants of subduction interface shear zones yield fundamental insight into the
processes that control this complexity. The scientific objective of this project
is to systematically investigate the rheological properties and evolution of the
subduction interface using exhumed rocks. Specifically, the project will
investigate the heterogeneity of deformation within subduction interface shear
zones and the nature of changes in deformational styles and mechanisms as rocks
are progressively subducted to depth. The research component of this project
will focus on three exhumed subduction shear zones that each record prograde
deformation and that together represent a wide range of pressure-temperature
conditions. The field sites include the: 1) Chugach accretionary complex, Alaska
(T = 150-300 degrees C, P = 2-5 kilobars), 2) the Condrey Mountain Window,
southern Klamath Mountains, northern California (T = 300-420 degrees C, P = 5-7
kilobars), and 3) the Cycladic Blueschist Unit in Syros Island, Greece (T =
450-550 degrees C, P = 2-15 kilobars). The project uses a wide range of
structural, microstructural, and petrological tools to track macro-scale
distributions of strain, degrees and mechanisms of strain localization,
fluctuations in fluid pressures and strain rates, microphysical mechanisms of
rock creep, effects of metamorphic reactions on deformation, and sources of
anisotropy, in rocks that have been cycled through the subduction process. The
research involves: 1) identifying domains in each field area that represent
deformation under prograde conditions; 2) documenting macro-scale strain
distributions; 3) determining the microphysical mechanisms of rock creep in
different rock and mineral phases; and 4) synthesizing the field and
microstructural observations in the context of subduction zone mechanics. The
integrated educational objective of this CAREER award is to establish a five-
year mentoring and research program at the University of Texas ? the Jackson
School of Geosciences-Catalyst (JSGC) ? aimed at ethnic and racial minorities
and first-generation college students in the Earth Sciences. JSGC will provide
1) mentoring, community support, and career advice for undergraduates through
mentorship pairing, monthly meetings, social events, and field trips; and 2)
financial support for members while simultaneously enhancing their undergraduate
research experience through summer internships, senior thesis projects and
participation in field-based team research. The JSGC program is designed to
increase retention and completion rates of underrepresented minorities in STEM
fields and to prepare and encourage these students to go on to graduate
school.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Processes in the zone between a subducting oceanic
plate and the overriding plate ? the subduction zone interface - are responsible
for a all-too-familiar yet poorly understood phenomena such as large devastating
earthquakes as well as other more enigmatic events such as episodic slip and
tremor. This project aims to improve understanding of this zone through a
systematic study of terranes that were exhumed from the depths of the interface
by various tectonic processes. These terranes provide an unusual opportunity to
understand the geologic processes associated with the various phenomena along
the subduction zone interface. Additionally, the project will advance desired
societal outcomes through: (1) full participation of women and underrepresented
minorities in STEM through support of an early career Hispanic female PI, a
female graduate student, and, most notably, a robust plan to provide mentoring,
and research and professional development opportunities to underrepresented
minorities majoring in Earth Science, thus directly contributing to retention
and promotion of underrepresented minorities in STEM fields; (2) development of
a diverse, globally competitive STEM workforce through undergraduate and
graduate student training with emphasis on mentoring students from
underrepresented groups in Earth science; and (3) increased partnerships through
international collaboration.