* 1555422
* Workshop On Ocean Mixing: Recent results and future prospects from combining process studies, theory and numerical modeling approaches; Scripps Inst.; Oct.27-29, 2015
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2017
* Jennifer MacKinnon, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 08/31/2017
* USD 64,335.00

Turbulent mixing is a crucial driver of heat and nutrient and current
distributions through the world oceans. Away from direct atmospheric surface
forcing, most of the turbulent mixing in the ocean interior is driven by
breaking internal gravity waves. Global levels and patterns of mixing are hence
set by the detailed geography of internal wave generation, propagation and
breaking. The NSF-funded Climate Process Team (CPT) on ocean mixing has been
working for the past five years to develop, implement, test and refine new
parameterizations of diapycnal (vertical) mixing for use in global ocean and
coupled climate models. In particular, the CPT has concentrated on turbulent
mixing due to breaking internal waves, including internal tides, wind-driven
near-inertial internal waves, and more recently, internal lee waves. In all
cases the diverse membership of the CPT, consisting of sea-going
observationalists, theorists, those doing numerical process studies, and members
of two national modeling centers, has allowed multi-faceted approaches to
tackling these issues. Thirty to forty participants are expected for this
workshop, including a few international scientists and a good number of early
career scientists. This workshop will further our ability to understand and
improve the veracity of the ocean component of climate models. Improved climate
models will benefit many fields within oceanography, as well as the ability for
society as a whole to anticipate and adapt to a changing climate as effectively
as possible.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop has multiple goals. The first
goal is to pull together the collective state of knowledge from both the members
of the Climate Process Team on Ocean Mixing and invited participants on topics
including the global geography of diapycnal mixing, associated global energy
budgets, the net influence and model sensitivity to the different processes, and
best practice tools and techniques that span multiple process experiments.
Intensive working time will allow for active collaboration between participants
working on similar problems. Finally, participants will reconvene to identify
issues that need concentrated work, steps forward, and step back to consider the
most interesting and important open questions for the field as a whole in the
decade to come. Three clear outcomes are anticipated: a reenergized level of
communication and understanding within the active turbulent mixing community;
the dissemination of several products for broad community use, including the
microstructure observations database, the CVMIX repository of code modules, and
a best practices website of commonly used observational analysis techniques and
a whitepaper summarizing our collective state of the field knowledge.