* 1555135
* CAREER:Topologically Protected Quantum Devices
* MPS,DMR
* 02/01/2016,01/31/2023
* Jay Deep Sau, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 01/31/2023
* USD 443,908.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Division of Materials Research
and the Physics Division contribute funds to this CAREER award to support
research and education aimed at generating and exploiting quantum behavior at a
macroscopic level. While quantum mechanics naturally operates at the microscopic
regime, i.e. length scales much smaller than those we experience daily,
stabilizing macroscopic quantum phenomena in large quantum systems can be
exceedingly difficult due to the detrimental influence of the unavoidable
interaction of the system with its surroundings. One possible approach to
creating macroscopic quantum phenomena is based on recently discovered
topological phases in condensed matter systems, which for fundamental reasons
are effectively protected from the environment. The funded research is aimed at
studying the rich variety of static and dynamical phenomena that arise from the
interplay of these novel topological phases with conventional physics, such as
electrostatic interactions, lattice vibrations, and material impurities. From
recent experiments it is becoming clear that the physics of these systems cannot
be understood without considering these conventional ingredients. More
optimistically, apart from helping in understanding experiments, exploring the
physics resulting from this interplay will likely lead to the discovery of new
phenomena, which could influence the design of quantum computers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The education component includes disseminating knowledge
on topological phases through an extended online course coupled to an open
access forum on the subject that target graduate and undergraduate students; a
concept version of the course has recently generated substantial interest from
many countries. The PI will complement this kind of international outreach to a
broad spectrum of budding scientists with outreach specific to local students
aimed at a more basic level. In collaboration with colleagues at the University
of Maryland, the PI will contribute in running a seminar series that aims to
retain underrepresented minority students who transfer to the physics department
at the University of Maryland from local community
colleges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Division of Materials Research and the Physics
Division contribute funds to this CAREER award to support theoretical and
computational research and education with the goal to extend the ideas of
topological phases of matter and design robust quantum mesoscopic devices
through the following steps: (1) analyzing the effects of phonons, interactions,
and disorder on Majorana phases, (2) understanding the interplay of phase
dynamics and topology in ultracold atomic gases, (3) stabilizing topological
phases against disorder using quantum dot arrays, (4) using superconductors to
generate phases beyond Majorana modes, (5) evaluating the robustness of excited
topological states to interactions. Majorana modes, which are predicted to occur
in certain topological phases of matter, are the most accessible examples of
topological excitations. In addition to aiding the ongoing search for Majorana
modes in solid-state systems, the research will provide insight into active
areas of research in mesoscopic systems, topological materials, and quantum
computation. The PI will use a combination of established analytical approaches,
such as Keldysh perturbation theory, and state-of-the-art numerical techniques,
to predict new phenomena relevant to mesoscopic quantum devices. The insight
gained will be used to design new variants of topological materials. The
intrinsic similarities of topological systems, e.g. the similarity of the toric
code to quantum error correcting codes, will result in the research having
impact on the quantum information community as well. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
education component includes disseminating knowledge on topological phases
through an extended online course coupled to an open access forum on the subject
that target graduate and undergraduate students; a concept version of the course
has recently generated substantial interest from many countries. The PI will
complement this kind of international outreach to a broad spectrum of budding
scientists with outreach specific to local students aimed at a more basic level.
In collaboration with colleagues at the University of Maryland, the PI will
contribute in running a seminar series that aims to retain underrepresented
minority students who transfer to the physics department at the University of
Maryland from local community colleges.