* 1555016
* CAREER: New Solid State Metal Foams Using Oxide Reduction and Intraparticle Expansion
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2016,07/31/2020
* Mark Atwater, Millersville University
* Continuing Grant
* Judith Yang
* 07/31/2020
* USD 419,354.00

Nontechnical Description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Metals are useful materials, as
they are durable and easy to manufacture, but they have characteristically high
densities which make them inefficient in many weight-sensitive applications.
Their density can be reduced by introducing porosity, but porosity is also
useful for increasing surface area, enhancing energy absorption, assisting bone
ingrowth and more. Methods used to "foam" metals often require high
temperatures, high pressures and/or complex processes, which limit the
availability and cost-effectiveness of these materials. A new method has been
developed to enhance porosity in metals at modest temperatures using simple,
well-established powder metallurgy processes. The fundamental difference is that
pores are developed within individual powder particles in the solid state, and
this expandable metal powder can be incorporated into current, state-of-the-art
foaming processes to enhance the level of porosity, or it can be used as a
stand-alone process. This unique approach to creating porous metals may allow
for cost reduction, the development of new metals and alloys for solid state
foaming and the overall improvement of solid state foam processing. Both the
fundamental mechanisms and commercial potential of this technology will be
investigated to create a holistic understanding of the process and resulting
materials. This technology can result in more fuel-efficient transit, safer
vehicles, reduced emissions and much more. Through this work, educational
awareness and career opportunities will be developed in partnership with the
local community. This will involve establishing, promoting and expanding
undergraduate research initiatives and promoting diversity in materials research
and nanoscale technologies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A new method in the solid state foaming of
metals has been developed using standard powder metallurgy processing. The
technique involves two steps: (1) disperse oxides in a metal powder and (2)
reduce oxides at a temperature sufficient to allow expansion. In general,
mechanical milling can be used to create an oxide dispersion-strengthened (ODS)
metal which is later foamed under hydrogen at elevated temperature via the
formation of steam at oxide sites. The conditions under which this process is
achieved depend on the oxide and matrix composition but are expected to be
modest when compared to current foaming processes. This fundamentally different
approach will allow for advances on three major fronts: (1) the ability to make
metal foams with new compositions, (2) enhanced ability to control the structure
and properties of the metal foam, and (3) the ability to combine this process
with established powder metallurgy foaming methods to significantly increase the
resulting porosity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will help to elucidate the
fundamental mechanisms of this new method and has the potential to alleviate
some of the critical issues plaguing solid state foaming. These issues include
the complexity of processing, the lack of diversity in foamed metals and alloys
and the modest porosities and/or mechanical properties achieved using current
solid-state foaming methods. A number of fundamental research questions will be
addressed, including: What is the influence of process variables, including
reduction temperature, oxide chemistry, content and character, the
microstructural properties of the matrix, and quantity and chemistry of process
gas(es) on the pore formation process? What is the reduction and pore expansion
behavior of multi-element systems, especially in which the elements possess
greatly differing oxidation potentials? And what is the fundamental behavior of
the ODS powder feedstock during bulk processing? A process map will be produced
for creating metallic foams of a given porosity while independently controlling
pore size, morphology and interconnectedness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work
will be conducted in a multi-scale manner, and an understanding of the nano- and
micro-scale phenomena will be leveraged to inform processing decisions and
methods by which to incorporate this feedstock into current, state-of-the-art
methodologies. Educational initiatives will impact the university and community
through increased collaboration internally and engaging local organizations to
provide new opportunities for students to develop professionally. Expanded
programs and opportunities in undergraduate research will be developed through
this work, and outreach in the community will be conducted to help inform others
of advanced materials and manufacturing as well as to inspire the future
generation toward science and engineering.