* 1555999
* Evolution of Dosage Compensation - An Empirical Test using Turtles with Independently Evolved XX/XY and ZZ/ZW Chromosomes
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/2016,01/31/2023
* Nicole Valenzuela, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Anna Allen
* 01/31/2023
* USD 914,973.00

This project will illuminate the evolution of dosage compensation (DC) by
contrasting turtle species with XX/XY, ZZ/ZW and temperature-dependent (TSD)
gender determination. In species like humans, XX/XY females have two copies of
genes in the X chromosome and males one because females carry two Xs and males
one X and one Y. An imbalance in gene dosage, such the one caused by the
difference in the number of X or Z chromosomes between genders, may reduce
fitness or even cause death, without a mechanism to re-establish a balance.
Dosage compensation mechanisms (DCM) equalize the activity of genes located in
the X or Z (X-linked or Z-linked) between chromosomes, and between males and
females. DC is important for normal development, and has consequences for the
evolution of genomes and speciation. Yet, DCM diversity and evolution remain
unclear. Turtles are ideal to study DCM evolution because XX/XY and ZZ/ZW
chromosomes have evolved independently multiple times, and there are increasing
turtle genomic resources. To address this puzzle, gene expression is being
compared in turtles with contrasting mechanisms of gender determination. The
results will advance our understanding of the diversity and evolution of DMC by
illuminating whether there are general rules to DCM across organisms or whether
unique solutions evolved independently in each lineage. This project involves
undergraduate discovery-based learning by recruiting biology undergraduates, and
broadens the participation of underrepresented groups in biology. Undergraduates
will be trained in a variety of biological fields, participate in reflection
sessions and present their results at scientific meetings. Results will be
disseminated via presentations, publications, and a bilingual web-site.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;When XX/XY or ZZ/ZW chromosomes evolve in diploid species,
genes are lost from the Y or W (or lose their function) as they degenerate over
time due to their lower recombination. This loss means that XY-males carry a
single functional copy of X-genes while XX-females carry two copies (likewise,
ZW females have one copy of Z-genes and ZZ-males have two copies). Because X-
and Z-linked genes are part of genetic networks, the inequality of gene copy
number causes an imbalance in transcription which may produce sub-optimal or
lethal phenotypes, unless a mechanism existed to re-establish a balance. In the
absence of such mechanism, transcription will differ (a) between genes in these
chromosomes and autosomes in XY males (or ZW females), and (b) between males and
females for X-genes (or Z-genes). Dosage compensation (DC) is a system to
equalize the activity of X- or Z-linked genes to counterbalance the deleterious
effects of differential gene copy number. DC re-establishes a balance between
these genes and autosomal genes ("chromosome-to-autosome" compensation), and
between the genders ("male-to-female" compensation). Mechanisms may balance
entire chromosomes (global compensation), other some genes only (local
compensation). This project tests the hypothesis that global DC (i.e.
chromosome-wide) does not evolve inevitably with the evolution of chromosomes,
but instead that DC tends to be local when present (i.e. affecting some genes
only), and independent of the size, evolutionary age, and gene content of the
chromosomes. Accordingly, this project it is sequencing microdissected turtle
chromosomes, and examining them by arrayCGH, and assessing the expression of
these genes via transcriptomics.