* 1555278
* CAREER: Designing Functionality Into Two-Dimensional Materials Through Defects, Topology, and Disorder
* MPS,DMR
* 03/15/2016,02/28/2022
* Elif Ertekin, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 02/28/2022
* USD 472,611.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports integrated
research and education activities centered on computational and theoretical
design of functional two-dimensional materials through controlling defect-
structure relationships. Defects are deviations from the ideal expected
structure of a material and include: missing atoms, the appearance of impurity
atoms, and rearrangements of atoms. Most conventional three-dimensional
semiconductor materials, such as those that make up the transistors in
computers, rely on the intentional incorporation of defects to modify their
properties to enable them to function as required for the application. For
instance, photovoltaic solar cells rely on incorporation of defects to enable
sunlight to electricity conversion as a renewable energy source. Thermoelectric
materials rely on defect incorporation into semiconductors to convert heat to
electricity, which is used to power satellites in space and may be useful for
waste heat harvesting on earth. The properties of defects in semiconductors are
closely linked to the behavior of electrons in the material, which is governed
by the laws of quantum mechanics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this
research is to develop and apply predictive computational tools to understand
how defects control the properties of emerging two-dimensional materials that
are promising for applications. Single atomic-layer thick graphene with a
honeycomb arrangement of carbon atoms that resembles atomic-scale chicken wire
provides one example. In comparison to three-dimensional materials, the defect-
property relationships in two-dimensional are not well understood. A unique
coupling between material structure and electronic properties arises in 2D
materials and leads to a distinct and rich defect physics that is different from
3D materials. The outcomes of this research will be the development of
computational tools to establish these relationships, and an enhanced
understanding of defect engineering in two-dimensional systems to help realize
better performing devices in electronics, photonics, energy harvesting and
storage, and other areas. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research effort will be
integrated with educational and outreach activities to increase the diversity of
the next generation technical workforce. Through the introduction of a new
course entitled "Community Outreach for Science and Engineering Researchers,"
the effort targets several key junctures of the student development pipeline
from middle school to graduate students. Graduate and undergraduate students
enrolled in the course will be directly engaged in outreach activities to local
schools. They will design, test, revise, deploy, and disseminate active learning
modules both to local middle schools in the Champaign-Urbana region and at
weeklong residential summer camps for high school students held on the Illinois
campus. The learning activities will be disseminated to the community through
annual teacher training workshops and an online dedicated website. Software
developed in the course of the research will be disseminated as open source to
the broader community through
GitHub.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports integrated research and
education activities centered on computational and theoretical design of
functional two-dimensional materials through tailored defect and topological
structure. Recent advances in 2D materials have raised intriguing possibilities
with applications in electronics, photonics, energy harvesting and storage, and
other areas. A critical barrier is that defects in 2D materials exhibit behavior
from those in 3D materials, and currently they are not well understood. A unique
coupling between topological structure and electronic structure arises in 2D
materials and gives rise to a distinct and rich defect physics. The goal of this
work is to exploit this unique coupling to enable unprecedented functionality
through the purposeful addition of defects in a controlled
way.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To merge aspects of topological structure and
electronic structure in 2D materials, the PI will invoke approaches that span
length scales from the atomic scale where a quantum mechanical description based
on the interacting Schrodinger equation is required to micrometer-scale
topological defect structures. Statistical mechanics frameworks that predict the
defect topology of a 2D material that deforms in 3D will be directly linked with
first-principles electronic structure methods to demonstrate that topology and
chemical doping can be integrated in ways that enable new functionality. First-
principles approaches will utilize both hybrid density functional theory and
emerging, high-accuracy quantum Monte Carlo methods. Since quantitative first-
principles descriptions of defects require extraordinarily high accuracy,
potential limitations to the accuracy attainable will be assessed. The
integrated approach will be used to answer several outstanding questions on
defect physics in 2D systems. These include: (a) How can topological structure
and functionalization be integrated to design high-performance 2D
thermoelectrics? (b) How can topological structure and chemical doping be
integrated to design high-performance 2D photovoltaics? (c) Do 2D materials
undergo defect-mediated ductile/brittle transitions as their 3D counterparts?
(d) What is the nature of the defect-induced insulator to metal transitions in
2D materials? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research effort will be integrated with
educational and outreach activities to increase the diversity of the next
generation technical workforce. Through the introduction of a new course
entitled "Community Outreach for Science and Engineering Researchers," the
effort targets several key junctures of the student development pipeline from
middle school to graduate students. Graduate and undergraduate students enrolled
in the course will be directly engaged in outreach activities to local schools.
They will design, test, revise, deploy, and disseminate active learning modules
both to local middle schools in the Champaign-Urbana region and at weeklong
residential summer camps for high school students held on the Illinois campus.
The learning activities will be disseminated to the community through annual
teacher training workshops and an online dedicated website. Software developed
in the course of the research will be disseminated as open source to the broader
community through GitHub.