* 1555155
* CAREER:Interdealer Networks and the Distribution of Credit Risk
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Jennifer La'O, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 08/31/2021
* USD 460,975.00

This project examines how the network of trading relationships determined by the
interdealer market determines how US banks interact on this market and how this
affects the banks' ultimate exposures to credit risk. The Financial Crisis of
2007 - 2009 and ensuing recession highlighted the importance of bank
interconnectedness. However, facts about the trades and positions of complex
financial institutions are generally difficult to obtain. The PI and
collaborators will develop an innovative new data source; their data analysis
will focus on understanding and measuring systemic vulnerabilities in the
banking system. The PI will also engage in innovative educational activities,
including curriculum development on network issues in financial markets and a
mentoring effort aimed at undergraduate women interested in careers in
macroeconomics. The results will be valuable to central banks and financial
regulators who work to promote US prosperity through a stable financial
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI and collaborators will match and analyze
detailed data from the corporate bond, credit default swap, and syndicated loans
markets at the financial institution level. By aggregating flows in these
markets for each dealer, the team will be able to construct measures of gross
and net exposures of intermediaries to credit risk, and will also create a
network map of the interbank market. They will answer questions about what
dealers are most central in these markets, what types of dealers have the
largest exposure to credit risk, and whether/how characteristics of dealers and
counterparties affect derivative prices.