* 1555267
* CAREER: Elements of Interactive Cartography: Design Principles for Interactive, Online, and Mobile Maps
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2022
* Robert Roth, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Tom Evans
* 05/31/2022
* USD 454,264.00

Maps are now ubiquitous to society. They are found in cars, on phones, and
across social media news feeds. Professionals in a variety of fields now use
mapping technologies to address many of the Earth's most pressing problems, with
the U.S. Department of Labor estimating that the American geospatial workforce
exceeded 425,000 people by 2010. Recent advances in personal computing and
information technologies have fundamentally transformed how maps are produced
and consumed, which requires educators to rethink how mapping is taught in
educational settings and professionals to retool in response to a new range of
technical competencies. While much of the empirical research in in the field of
cartography over the past half century has addressed representation design (the
graphic encoding of geographic information), relatively few empirically derived
and time-tested principles exist regarding interaction design (implementation of
a digital interface for manipulating an online or mobile map). The investigator
undertaking this project will undertake four research activities that address
critical, overarching needs for interaction design in cartography and GIScience.
The investigator will characterize current practices in interaction map design
through a content analysis of online news maps. He will develop guidelines for
interactive map design through a controlled experiment evaluating the utility of
unique forms of interactivity for different map reading tasks. He will integrate
representation and interaction design principles through a second experiment
evaluating the utility of interactivity for different thematic map types (e.g.,
choropleth, dot density, isoline, proportional symbol), and he will identify
best practices for cartographic design on mobile devices through a field study
evaluating mobile map designs in various application settings.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Faculty Early-Career Development (CAREER) award will
support a project that investigates the design of maps that are interactive and
are delivered online or through mobile devices. This project will use mixed-
method research to establish first principles for designing effective
interactive, online, and mobile maps, thereby providing guidance regarding
contemporary map design for the geospatial workforce. The project will respond
to numerous calls for research about interaction design within cartography and
geographic information science (GIScience), and it will contribute to the
emerging and interdisciplinary science of interaction crossing human-computer
interaction, information visualization, usability engineering, and visual
analytics. The project will create unique undergraduate and graduate student
learning opportunities through new coursework and design apprenticeships, and it
will produce several open-access, publicly available products, including an
extensible web mapping code repository, a blog with design and technical
instructional material, and an electronic textbook on interactive cartography.
An ultimate result of this project should be better interactive, online, and
mobile maps.&lt;br/&gt;