* 1555053
* Collaborative Research: An integrative approach to understanding the evolution and systematics of Chalcidoidea: A recent megaradiation of Hymenoptera
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2016,02/29/2020
* Matthew Yoder, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Katharina Dittmar
* 02/29/2020
* USD 78,963.00

Chalcidoidea (jewel wasps) are among the most species rich, ecologically
important, and biologically diverse groups of terrestrial organisms. Their
diversity is staggering, with more than 500,000 species thought to exist. These
minute wasps (mostly 1-2 mm in size) are numerically abundant and common in
almost every habitat. The smallest of these wasps are smaller than a typical
single-celled organism, and yet the adults can fly, locate their hosts, deposit
their eggs, and as larvae, consume their insect hosts. Most chalcidoid wasps are
parasitoids; they feed on their insect hosts, eventually killing them. A few
groups have also evolved to attack plant hosts and some serve as pollinators.
Species attack all life stages from eggs to adults, and live and feed either
internally or externally. Some are parasitoids of other parasitoids and some may
even feed on their own species. Because they kill other insects, these wasps are
extremely important for the control of pests of agricultural and forest crops,
as well as vectors of human disease and veterinary pests. The economic
importance of these wasps in pest management is unparalleled. They are widely
used in biological control programs against major pests, with outcomes
documented to result in decreases in pesticide, increases in yield, and in
landmark cases direct savings of billions of dollars or permanent pest control.
The evolutionary events leading to this enormous diversity in morphology,
biology and rates of diversification are poorly understood, leading to an
artificial system of taxonomic classification. In this research project,
researchers will use a diverse array of molecular, morphological and
bioinformatics approaches to develop a solid understanding of the hierarchy of
relationships across the entire group. These relationships will then be used to
reclassify major groups to reflect common ancestry, to provide a framework for a
web-accessible portal to manage and deliver information on their diverse
biology, and to explore the evolutionary changes that have driven and shaped
this enormous radiation of terrestrial insects.

The objectives of the research project are to 1) generate a robust molecular
phylogeny of the Chalcidoidea using new data from transcriptomes and targeted
DNA enrichment for over 400 species, 2) generate morphological data for over 200
fossils from Eocene and Cretaceous amber and combine these with a comprehensive
morphological data set for extant taxa, 3) develop a revised classification of
Chalcidoidea in book form through a series of workshops and worldwide
collaborations, and 4) make available information on the taxonomy, biology and
distribution of over 31,000 available names and information in over 40,000
references. The project will train two postdoctoral researchers, one graduate
student and several undergraduates. To involve the wider scientific community, a
worldwide group of biocontrol researchers and taxonomists will develop a new
classification for Chalcidoidea. With groups of Research and Extension
Specialists, the project will develop posters, fliers, specimen education kits,
and other educational materials for use in the classroom and by extension
specialists, agricultural advisors, master naturalists and master gardeners, and
the general public to develop a greater interest and understanding of this
charismatic and and important group of insects.