* 1555168
* Dietary Properties and Chewing Patterns in Primates: An Analysis of Cyclical Loading
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2016,05/31/2018
* Matthew Ravosa, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 05/31/2018
* USD 346,317.00

This project investigates relationships between diet and chewing behaviors in
primates, to improve our understanding of the evolution and variation in primate
and hominin feeding behaviors. The investigators will measure chewing patterns
in 23 primate species that are given foods spanning a range of material
properties, to see how individuals in each species process the different foods
and how this processing relates to the shape of their jaw and skull. These
comparative data will be important not only for framing ecological research in
living primate species, but for reconstructing diet and feeding behaviors in
extinct primate and hominin species based on fossil jaws and skulls. The project
will foster interdisciplinary approaches to training and education involving
members of under-represented groups, and will support training and mentorship of
a postdoctoral fellow, graduate students and undergraduates as well as local
STEM teachers and students, all of whom will participate in lab apprenticeship,
scientific presentations and public outreach to local institutions and the lay
public. Therefore, another benefit to society includes development of a novel
training environment for the next generation of academic researchers and
educators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Phenotypic variation in the primate skull is
influenced by masticatory stress, with taxa relying on stiff or tough foods
having specialized jaws, teeth and jaw muscles. However, the link between diet
and jaw form in living and fossil primates is poorly understood. Difficulty
understanding adaptive diversity in the feeding apparatus is due to two
shortcomings of the evidence about diet-related chewing and loading behaviors.
The first is the fact that infrequent, high-magnitude forces elicit the same
physiological and evolutionary responses in bone as do low-magnitude, cyclical
loads. In the skull, a second and related issue is a surprisingly incomplete
knowledge of the role of food properties on variation in chewing behaviors that
underlie load-related variation in primate jaw form. Given the ubiquity with
which cyclical loading is invoked to explain jaw robusticity in fossil hominins,
the remarkable lack of key behavioral data on this chewing pattern cannot be
overstated. Using in vivo data on 23 representative primate species kept in
domestic institutions, this project tests the hypothesis that food material
properties affect masticatory parameters underlying variation in cyclical
loading of primate jaws: chewing frequency, chewing investment, and chewing
duration. High-speed video will record dynamic diet-related chewing patterns in
isolated and unrestrained adult primates presented a known mass of five foods
that span a range of material properties paralleling the diversity of values for
items ingested by wild primates. Intra- and interspecific analyses will compare
chewing parameters with food stiffness, toughness, and respective oral
fragmentation indices. Due to its experimental and comparative focus, this in
vivo research is likely to inform theoretical and methodological advances in
biological anthropology and other organismal and biomedical fields.