* 1555950
* Collaborative Research: Analysis of the Mammalian Olfactory Code
* BIO,IOS
* 11/01/2015,10/31/2020
* Marcelo Magnasco, Rockefeller University
* Continuing Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 10/31/2020
* USD 424,449.00

This project was developed during a NSF Ideas Lab on "Cracking the Olfactory
Code" and is jointly funded by the Chemistry of Life Processes program in the
Chemistry Division, the Mathematical Biology program in the Division of
Mathematical Sciences, the Physics of Living Systems program in the Physics
Division, the Neural Systems Cluster in the Division of Integrative Organismal
Systems, the Division of Biological Infrastructure, and the Division of Emerging
Frontiers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The mammalian sense of smell is arguably the
most complex sensory system in the animal kingdom. Hundreds of olfactory
receptors are deployed to detect a vast array of chemicals with exquisite
sensitivity in complex environments. This collaborative project combines
biochemistry, neurobiology, genomics, mathematics and new technologies to
understand how the mammalian olfactory system detects, encodes and extracts
meaning from chemical stimuli. The goals of this project are to: (1) elucidate
fundamental neural mechanisms for how chemical sensation turns into the
perception of a smell; (2) produce a vast array of scientific resources to
olfactory scientists; (3) provide valuable information for broader audiences,
including for molecular evolution, chemical ecology, and flavor and fragrance
communities; (4) establish new technologies and mathematical frameworks to study
biological systems; and (5) facilitate applied chemical sensing technologies for
environmental monitoring, food safety, and homeland security. The project also
offers training opportunities from the high school to the postdoctoral trainee
level, and educational opportunities and outreach through partnerships with
local science museums as well as science learning centers and their media
outlets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project's efforts are organized around three
aims that focus on how information about odor identity and odor valence
(attractiveness/aversiveness) is encoded at the level of olfactory receptors
(Aim 1); within the olfactory bulb, where odor information is first processed
(Aim 2); and the cortical amygdala, where odor codes may integrate with other
information streams (Aim 3). Completion of the project entails the development
and use a broad array of innovative approaches that include mapping all human
and mouse odorant receptors to the chemicals they bind, defining the innate
valence of these chemicals using behavioral assays, mapping all odorant receptor
projections to the olfactory bulb, functionally characterizing their neural
representations in the olfactory bulb and cortical amygdala, and using novel
mathematical approaches to understand the underlying structure of odor coding
and olfactory neural circuits at the level of sensory neurons, olfactory bulb
glomeruli, and amygdala. Progress towards each aim involves close collaborations
between team members with diverse expertise, including molecular biology,
behavioral neuroscience, in vivo functional imaging, and mathematical and
theoretical analysis of complex datasets. The multidisciplinary strategy
implemented here promises to lead to an integrated and comprehensive
understanding of how mammals sense and make sense of their chemical
environments.