* 1555005
* CAREER: Ultrafast Nanoscopy of Energy Transport in Molecular Assemblies
* MPS,CHE
* 02/01/2016,07/31/2021
* Libai Huang, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Colby Foss
* 07/31/2021
* USD 624,712.00

The Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms Part A (CSDMA) Program in the
Chemistry Division of the NSF supports Professor Libai Huang at Purdue
University to develop innovative microscopy techniques that provide 'movies' of
how light energy absorbed by molecules moves in space and in time. The molecules
in this research absorb light strongly and are potentially useful for devices
such as solar cells. In order to use them in solar energy conversion devices,
the molecules have to be closely packed together and the packing greatly
influences how energy is transferred from one molecule to the other. These
factors determine the efficiency of the solar cell. By tracking how energy moves
in molecular assemblies with different packing, this work is resolving
mechanisms that control the speed and distance of energy migration and providing
guidelines for designing structures for efficient solar energy harvesting. To
achieve these goals, microscopy techniques are being developed to record fast
energy transfer events with a resolution of 100 femtoseconds (a femtosecond is
one quadrillionth of a second) and to image energy migration distance with a
resolution of 20 nanometers (a nanometer is one billionth of a meter). Dr. Huang
is developing a new instructional model that integrates active learning with
scientific writing aimed at better teaching abstract concepts in physical
chemistry. In particular, solar energy applications in this award are being
developed into demonstrations to illustrate key concepts in quantum mechanics.
Writing assignments of these demonstrations are being utilized to promote high-
level cognitive understanding of abstract concepts. The researchers are also
developing a scientific outreach program to bring state-of-the-art solar energy
research to high schools in Northwest Indiana. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
ultrafast nanoscopy methods being developed in this project directly image
exciton transport across multiple length and time scales to elucidate coherent
and incoherent energy transfer pathways in molecular assemblies. Exciton
populations and dynamics following photoexcitation are being mapped with
simultaneous &lt; 100 fs temporal resolution and ~20 nm spatial precision. These
measurements provide first-of-a-kind visualization of the spatial extent of
coherent transport. Two model molecular aggregates are employed to
systematically probe energy transfer in the intermediate coupling regimes.
Linear H aggregates serve as model 1D excitonic quantum wires in which long-
range wavelike coherent transport is expected. Tubular aggregates are employed
to elucidate exciton transport as a function of dimensionality. Building on
results from the model systems, the long-term goal of controlling transport in
supramolecular assemblies is achieved by modulating both short- and long-range
intermolecular coupling. The research and educational activities are integrated
to educate the next generation of solar energy researchers at the K-12,
undergraduate, and graduate levels.