* 1555300
* CAREER: Chemical Transformations Enabled by Flow Chemistry
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2021
* Aaron Beeler, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* Jin K. Cha
* 04/30/2021
* USD 614,196.00

In this CAREER project funded by the Chemical Synthesis Program of the Chemistry
Division, Professor Beeler of the Department of Chemistry at Boston University
is developing new chemical methods utilizing flow chemistry. Traditionally,
chemical transformations have been carried out in batch reactors such as flasks
and beakers. Instead, the Beeler lab carries out reactions by continuously
flowing reagents inside of tubing. This approach may lead to significantly more
efficient methods for synthesizing molecules with applications in human health,
materials science, and agriculture. The Beeler lab is involved in efforts to
bring science education to high school students in the Boston area. This award
supports the development of outreach activities including a science summer camp
for local high school students.

The research projects focus on three reaction classes that are significantly
enabled by flow chemistry. Photochemistry may be considered one of the most
powerful complexity-generating reaction classes available to chemists. When
utilizing a flow chemistry platform, it may be possible to overcome issues
inherent to batch photochemical reactions, such as long reaction times, poor
reproducibility, and difficult scalability. This aspect of the project explores
a number of powerful photochemical reactions such as [2+2]-photocycloaddition,
reactions of photoinduced phenyl cations, and photoinduced electron transfer
reactions. Electrochemical reactions are often underutilized and can be
difficult to optimize and scale. This project develops a practical and scalable
electrochemical flow platform that is utilized in the development of oxidative
coupling of phenols. Many examples of flow chemistry utilize highly toxic and/or
reactive species or reactions under extreme conditions. This project focuses on
generating and utilizing highly reactive diazoalkanes in complexity-generating
reactions. In addition to this research, the educational outreach focuses on
developing a science summer camp at the high school level for students from
disadvantaged backgrounds. New laboratory experiments are being developed to
introduce flow chemistry into the undergraduate organic chemistry laboratory
curriculum at Boston University.