* 1555870
* SBIR Phase II:  Economical Fabrication of Bulk Metallic Glass Sheets through Roll-Stretching
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2018
* Evgenia Pekarskaya, Supercool Metals LLC
* Standard Grant
* Linda Molnar
* 03/31/2018
* USD 689,362.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is in enabling wide range of commercial
applications of bulk metallic glasses (BMG). BMGs are novel metallic materials
that are fundamentally different from, and advantageous to conventional alloys.
They are stronger than most crystalline metals, but at the same time shapeable
like plastics. Additional benefits of BMGs include extremely high precision of
parts, increased complexity and elimination of expensive machining. Use of BMGs
will provide broad opportunities for manufacturers in areas such as watch making
and precision mechanics, electronics, biomedical, nano-imprint, defense,
aerospace, and automotive. The current barrier to industrializing BMGs is non-
availability of practical feedstock material such as BMG sheets. Technologies
that we are developing as part of this project include BMG sheet fabrication and
thermoplastic forming (TPF) of final components for a variety of applications.
Using sheets, manufacturers can leverage BMGs unique processability to fabricate
complex shapes at highest precision and ease through thermoplastic forming
methods. Our technology also has significant societal implications. It will
empower innovative small and medium size U.S. companies by bringing them a novel
manufacturing technology that is highly versatile, energy efficient and low in
capital investment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
based on the recent scientific discovery of BMG sheet fabrication using the
thermoplastic forming technology. This is a low-force, high-rate deformation
method with great potential for large-scale commercial manufacturing. We expect
that our findings will lead to a better understanding of TPF-based processes.
Specifically, for multi-step TPF-based sheet fabrication, the proposed work will
reveal process stability and how it is affected by processing parameters.
Proposed research will also determine the effects of TPF-based processing on
mechanical properties of BMGs, will help identify suitable BMG alloys for sheet
fabrication and provide insights into their commercial feasibility. In addition,
the proposed work will also enhance theoretical understanding of BMG sheet
fabrication and help develop a predictable and quantitative model description.
Such models can allow prediction of alloy-specific processing conditions in
industrial settings in the future. Finally, this project will result in a
commercially viable sheet fabrication process and apparatus for BMG sheets of
unprecedented sizes. It will significantly advance opportunities for bulk
metallic glasses in a wide range of applications, bringing two decades of
academic discoveries to the commercial arena.