* 1555013
* Support for the Participation of U.S. Scientists and Students in the International Conference on Global Positioning System (GPS) Radio Occultation; Taipei, Taiwan; March 9-11, 2016
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Ying-Hwa Kuo, University Corporation For Atmospheric Res
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 08/31/2018
* USD 48,988.00

This award funds the travel of US scientists to attend the Third International
Conference on GPS Radio Occultation (ICGPSRO) in Taipei, Taiwan. NSF has a
longstanding partnership with the Taiwanese National Space Organization (NSPO),
in the development of space-based GPS radio occultation (GPSRO) as a technique
for observing the atmosphere. This partnership, conducted through the University
Corporation for Atmospheric Research and with the participation of other US
agencies, produced the Constellation Observing System for Meteorology, the
Ionosphere, and Climate (COSMIC). COSMIC is a six-satellite constellation of
polar orbiting satellites with GPS receivers launched in 2006. The COSMIC
mission has been highly successful, and the follow-on COSMIC-2 mission is under
development as a joint US-Taiwan project with the first of two launches
scheduled for 2016. While COSMIC-2 is not an NSF-funded mission, the
observations to be collected will be of greater quality and quantity than
existing GPSRO measurements and hold substantial promise as a resource for NSF-
funded researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The conference covers a number of
topics related to RO measurement techniques and the use of GPSRO data for
weather, climate, and space weather research. The meeting will provide a venue
to expose US participants to the GPSRO technique and its research applications,
to foster interactions between end users of the data and developers of the
observing technology, and to promote international collaborations between US and
Taiwanese scientists. Funds provided through this award will support the travel
of up to ten U.S. scientists and students to attend the conference. US
participants will be a mix of students, early career scientists, and senior
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award has broader impacts due to the
practical value of GPSRO observations as an input to weather forecasts and for
tracking the state of the ionosphere. GPSRO data has been demonstrated, for
example, to be effective at reducing errors in forecasts of hurricane tracks. In
addition, the observations are absolutely calibrated and thus useful for
detecting long-term trends in atmospheric temperature, and can be used to help
calibrate other kinds of weather satellites. Beyond these societal broader
impacts, the meeting will provide valuable education and mentorship for students
and early career scientists.