* 1555667
* SBIR Phase II:  Continuous Manufacturing of Nano- and Micron-particle Drugs Using Focused Acoustics
* TIP,TI
* 03/15/2016,08/31/2017
* Carl Beckett, Covaris Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 08/31/2017
* USD 732,082.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is the enablement of new and improved
therapeutic drug development. One hurdle in the development of new drugs, is
their relatively low effectiveness due to poor water solubility limiting
formulation choices and/or limiting cellular uptake. Forming drug nano
particles, by way of controlling the drug crystal formation process, is one tool
to overcome this low solubility hurdle. Acoustical energy has been shown to aid
in the formation of drug crystallization however, current acoustical
technologies are not able to reliably achieve the crystal size and distribution
needed for many new drug candidates. A reliable method for nanoparticle drug
production will allow better and more effective drugs to make it to market.
Additionally, the Pharmaceutical industry is transitioning from batch to
continuous flow manufacturing processes. This has significant impact on cost,
responsiveness, and quality control of the drug supply chain, and will enable
more rapid and lower cost drug development and manufacturing.

The proposed project will develop equipment and processes that enable the
continuous manufacture of drug nano and micron sized particles by controlling
the crystallization using a novel focused acoustical field. Focused acoustics
has the advantage of delivering a highly efficient, controllable, scalable
energy field to the crystallization zone. The project will demonstrate a focused
acoustics crystallization process capable of being developed into commercial
grade equipment suitable for use in a continuous flow production pharmaceutical
manufacturing environment.