* 1555116
* CAREER: Fluorescent Tools for the Study of Biological Magnesium
* MPS,CHE
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2021
* Daniela Buccella, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Michelle Bushey
* 12/31/2021
* USD 600,000.00

With this CAREER Award, the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program of the
Chemistry Division is funding Professor Daniela Buccella of New York University
(NYU) to develop chemical tools for the study of biological magnesium by
fluorescence-based techniques. Magnesium(II) is the most abundant divalent ion
in most cells and plays numerous roles that are essential for cellular function.
Abnormal levels of magnesium have been linked to cardiovascular disease,
diabetes, neurodegenerative diseases and cancer. The biochemical basis for the
connection between magnesium imbalance and human disease, however, remains
partially obscure. This gap in knowledge stems from the scarcity of efficient
probes for the direct and selective measurement of biological magnesium(II) with
the required spatial and temporal resolutions. To fill this gap, this research
project focuses on the development of new molecular probes designed to track the
accumulation and speciation of magnesium(II) in cells and tissues by optical
imaging, which will facilitate detailed studies of the role of this ion in human
health and disease. This CAREER Award also supports efforts toward promoting the
pursuit of higher education in Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics
(STEM) disciplines by providing early exposure to scientific research and
college life to female high school students in the New York area, and the
development of educational resources to bolster undergraduate science teaching
at member institutions of the Faculty Resource Network at NYU serving
underrepresented minorities in the sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
focuses on the development of synthetic small-molecule fluorescent indicators
for rapid visualization and quantification of various forms of cellular
magnesium, seeking improved spatial and temporal resolutions as well as reduced
interference from other cations abundant in the cellular milieu. Specific
objectives include the development of wavelength ratiometric and lifetime-based
fluorescent indicators for the study of metal speciation in the cell, with
distinct responses for free and bound forms of the metal, as well as new
targeted probes aimed at informing in a time- and position-sensitive manner
pools of magnesium(II) ions released from intracellular stores. The educational
components of this project include hands-on research experiences through a
summer program for high school female students in the New York area, and the
development of educational resources emphasizing connections between Chemistry
and Biology to be made available to member faculty of the Faculty Resource
Network at New York University.