* 1555767
* Scholars Award: Light Pollution's Social and Ecological Consequences and Contexts
* SBE,SES
* 04/15/2016,03/31/2021
* Sara Pritchard, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 03/31/2021
* USD 102,142.00

This project will analyze how scientists, research teams, and organizations have
produced knowledge about environmental light pollution. The project will
contribute to our understanding of the politics of artificial light at night and
the history of nightscapes, and lightscapes. This project will expands empirical
and analytical insights regarding the politics of environmental knowledge
production. This study will bring critical social science perspectives to
research impacts and responses on communities to artificial light at night. The
findings from this project will contribute to conservation science,
policymaking, and citizen science and will be made public through writings,
conferences and educational activities.

Using approaches from science and technology studies and environmental history
the project will examine how historical, cultural, institutional, and
technoscientific factors shape what is known about artificial light at night and
its socio-ecological consequences through citizen/expert approaches, cultural
and political contexts, and public/private conservation efforts. The research
will be done in collaboration with light pollution scientists, government
agencies, and NGOs using archives, oral histories, interviews, and ethnographic
observation. The project will contribute social science insights into light
pollution and its role as growing socio-ecological issue that can indicate on a
global-scale, anthropogenic environmental change.