* 1555313
* CAREER: Quantum Emulation of Strongly Driven Interacting Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/2016,08/31/2021
* David Weld, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 08/31/2021
* USD 712,610.00

Non-technical Abstract: Using lasers that can be turned on and off extremely
quickly, scientists can now probe the behavior of electrons inside atoms at
timescales smaller than a millionth of a billionth of a second. This capability
has the potential to unlock new technologies, including cameras for imaging
electron motion inside biomolecules, ultrafast information processors, and
devices based on exotic non-equilibrium states of matter. However, these
exciting developments will require major advances in our ability to understand
and control non-equilibrium quantum systems. To this end, the research team is
building an artificial solid in which trapped strontium atoms are used to
emulate the behavior of electronic solids on ultrafast-equivalent timescales.
Using this approach, the team aims to reveal hitherto invisible ultrafast
processes in matter, in regimes beyond the limits of existing theories and
experiments. Research activities are integrated into local science education at
the high school, community college, undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral
levels, with a focus on scientific professional development. As part of the
project, the PI guides a multi-layered mentoring system in which graduate
students and postdocs are trained to become advocates for science literacy and
leaders who encourage broad participation in research.

Technical Abstract: This project studies interactions between intense pulsed
fields and solids using optically trapped ultracold strontium as a quantum
emulator of ultrafast dynamics, thus probing some of the fastest processes in
atomic physics using some of the slowest. As a result of this rescaling of time,
the dynamics underlying ultrafast phenomena like tunnel ionization occur over
milliseconds rather than attoseconds, and can be observed in extreme slow-
motion. The research consists of three related efforts: (1) studies of the
impulse response of interacting quantum systems; (2) exploration of exotic
strong-driving Hamiltonians beyond those which are currently possible in the
solid state; and (3) realization of controllable emergent non-equilibrium phases
in driven lattice systems. The quantum-emulator-based approach enables clean
realization and study of strong-field phenomena, provides a tool for validation
and extension of existing approximate theories of ultrafast interactions, and
opens the path to studying new forms of matter and new phenomena that emerge in
non-equilibrium regimes beyond the reach of existing ultrafast experiments.