* 1555295
* CAREER: Elucidating the role of ATP in Cytosolic Iron Sulfur Cluster Biogenesis
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2022
* Deborah Perlstein, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* Pablo Sobrado
* 04/30/2022
* USD 777,575.00

With this CAREER award from the Chemistry of Life Processes Program, Professor
Deborah Perlstein at Boston University is investigating how clusters of iron and
sulfur are assembled and transferred to their appropriate proteins in the
cytosol of eukaryotic cells. Cluster biosynthesis is essential for cell growth
and division since proteins requiring iron sulfur clusters play central roles in
DNA replication and repair as well as many other important cellular functions.
Despite its unquestionable importance, scientists understand remarkably little
about the molecular details of how these iron sulfur clusters are synthesized
and ultimately transferred into the appropriate proteins/enzymes. Professor
Perlstein's lab is using a combination of genetic, biochemical, and biophysical
approaches to shed light on how assembly of a cluster on a protein scaffold
takes place as well as on the subsequent steps required to ultimately insert the
cluster into a protein. The research provides an excellent training environment
for students at the undergraduate and graduate students as well as postdoctoral
fellows, equipping them with the expertise required to become leaders in
research at the chemistry-biology interface. Furthermore, by developing the
curriculum for an undergraduate biochemistry lecture and laboratory course and a
K-12 STEM outreach program both intimately connected with the research plan,
Professor Perlstein's work broadens interest in biochemistry and biotechnology
research which forms a significant portion of the job opportunities in the
Boston area. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific goal of this project is to
uncover why the yeast cytosolic iron sulfur cluster scaffolding proteins require
ATP hydrolysis for their activity. Since the yeast enzyme and its homologs in
the Mrp/Nbp35 family of cluster scaffolding ATPases form a distinct subfamily
within the deviant Walker A family of P-loop NTPases, Dr. Perlstein and her
group hypothesize that ATP hydrolysis is utilized to induce a conformational
change within the scaffold that is used to coordinate assembly of a nascent
cluster on the scaffold with the transfer of this cluster to a recipient. This
nucleotide driven switch could impact cluster assembly and/or transfer functions
of the scaffold via direct allosteric communication between the cluster
scaffolding site and the ATPase site, via regulation of dynamic interactions
with other cluster biogenesis proteins, or via a combination of these two
mechanisms. By determining how ATPase mutants affect cluster scaffolding
activities in vitro, identifying other factors that interact with the scaffold,
and elucidating how kinetic mechanism of ATP hydrolysis is affected by
scaffolded cluster or other cluster assembly factors, the researchers expect to
uncover how nucleotide hydrolysis is exploited by this large family of ATP
hydrolyzing iron sulfur cluster scaffolds to coordinate assembly of a nascent
cluster within the scaffolding site with the subsequent trafficking steps
required to mobilize the cluster from scaffold to target. This research is
integrated with an educational plan aimed at exposing K-12 students to research
and career opportunities at the chemistry-biology interface via collaboration
with Boston University's Learning Resource Network. Furthermore, Professor
Perlstein leads the development of an Intensive Biochemistry course for
undergraduate chemistry and biology majors tailored to the needs of students
planning to pursue research careers.