* 1555426
* EAGER: A Feasibility Study for a Wide-Area WiMAX  Infrastructure for Wireless Experimentation
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Suman Banerjee, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Monisha Ghosh
* 08/31/2018
* USD 216,986.00

This project is evaluating the feasibility of an outdoor wireless
experimentation facility that leverages WiMAX base stations and clients. WiMAX
has been one of the candidate standards for 4G cellular networks, and is
technologically fairly similar to the more popular 4G standards, namely LTE. The
experimentation facility, if successful, will allow researchers (both local to
the University of Wisconsin-Madison and external) to deploy new types of
wireless services on them and experiment with them in a realistic manner.
However, building such an experimental facility is a significant challenge due
to various issues related to design, operations, maintainability, and usability.
The goal of this project is to evaluate the feasibility and define one possible
way to implement such an experimental infrastructure in the
future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To create a preliminary prototype to evaluate
feasibility, the researchers at UW-Madison are deploying a small number of
commercial-grade wireless base stations at various outdoor locations in and
around the university campus and beyond. The researchers are also deploying
different client devices to test the functioning of the infrastructure to
evaluate various strategies of acquiring users in the system. Furthermore, the
project is also setting up appropriate network connectivity that can in the
future provide suitable isolation between some of the more critical functions
and the more experimental ones on the infrastructure. The project is being
realized through an academia-industry partnership in the Madison area.