* 1555773
* Mechanisms of Color Perception: Dependences on Color Contrast and Spatial Pattern
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2018
* Robert Shapley, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Gottlob
* 06/30/2018
* USD 357,462.00

Color perception is a primary aspect of visual experience for most people. This
research project aims to resolve an apparent contradiction in human color
perception. When a human observer is asked to detect a colored target that is
barely visible, the visual system sums color signals across space to achieve
maximum sensitivity to the weak stimulus. However, when one views a highly-
colored scene, the visual system takes the difference between color signals at
different locations, leading to color appearance that is highly dependent on
contrasts in color. The apparent contradiction between adding and subtracting
can be resolved by the hypothesis that color perception adds color signals at
threshold, when they are barely visible, but subtracts color signals when color
stimuli are well above threshold. This research tests this hypothesis by
studying how color perception depends on the pattern of the color in space.
Spacing has different effects on color perception if the visual system is adding
or subtracting color signals. Better understanding of how the visual system
processes color may translate to advances in fields such as lighting design or
color graphics. The project involves training of young scientists in methods of
studying human vision through measuring behavior and brain activity, as well as
science outreach to public school students.

The experiments will measure the spatial pattern dependence of suprathreshold
color perception in humans and compare suprathreshold results with those at
color threshold. Two different techniques for studying suprathreshold color
perception are used: hue and saturation scaling, and reaction times. The project
also includes measurements of the human cVEP (color-Visual Evoked Potential, an
EEG measure of color responses in early visual cortex) and its dependence on
spatial stimulus variables at different levels of color contrast. The aim of the
cVEP experiments is to determine the cortical mechanisms that are the basis of
color perception near threshold and suprathreshold. A computational model will
be used to fit the psychophysics and cVEP data.