* 1555793
* Collaborative Research: Plant, Fungal and Linguistic Diversity of Tafea Province, Vanuatu
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2023
* Thomas Ranker, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Maureen Kearney
* 06/30/2023
* USD 262,546.00

Vanuatu is a group of 80 islands located in the South Pacific, situated roughly
equidistant from New Caledonia, Fiji, and the Solomon Islands, all of which are
globally important biodiversity hotspots. Despite its significance as a treasure
trove of biodiversity, Vanuatu's plants and fungi remain poorly documented,
leaving a significant gap in our knowledge of regional biodiversity compared
with neighboring island countries, all of which have active or completed flora
surveys. The few existing plant surveys in Vanuatu have focused primarily on the
northern end of the archipelago. In the southern part of the country, little
reliable botanical data exist, and there is great potential for new scientific
discoveries. This project focuses on Tafea Province, the five southernmost
islands of Vanuatu. In March, 2015, Tafea Province was the site of a
catastrophic category-5 super-cyclone. Just prior to that, eight forest
transects were established to characterize vegetation growth and change over
time. These study sites were severely impacted by the storm, and monitoring
efforts will provide an important opportunity to understand how Pacific-Island
forests recover from this type of event. Along with its rich biological
diversity, Vanuatu is also the most linguistically rich country in the world,
with 112 languages for a total population of only 253,000; nine of these
languages are found only in Tafea Province. As globalization and economic
development are proceeding in Vanuatu, local languages are being replaced by
English, French, and Bislama (a local Creole), and thus there is a critical need
to document local languages and the botanical knowledge that is encapsulated
therein. Undergraduate students will be trained in the analysis of linguistic
data, and graduate students will participate in all aspects of the research and
receive valuable training in tropical botany and
mycology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers will complete the first
comprehensive survey of angiosperms, gymnosperms, ferns, lycophytes, bryophytes,
endophytic and macro-fungi, and lichens ever undertaken in Tafea Province.
Surveys will be conducted using two approaches: 1) establishment of permanent
monitoring transects and plots, which will allow for both vegetation analysis
and dense floristic and fungal sampling, and provide an opportunity for long-
term monitoring in the face of global climate change, and 2) a general
collecting approach will be used across larger areas. From these data, an
annotated checklist (both hard copy and online) will be assembled using the
database of newly collected and historical specimens. The checklist will allow
for tests of phytogeographic relationships among Vanuatu and its closest
neighbors (New Caledonia and Fiji), allowing the researchers to address
questions relating to levels of endemism, species distributions, and evolution
of the regional flora. Because most land in Vanuatu is held under customary
ownership, and local people are the stewards of their environments, the loss of
biocultural knowledge is a serious threat to their ability to manage
biodiversity resources sustainably. To support local environmental education
efforts, the project will combine the expertise of the team's linguists and
botanists to work with indigenous speakers of eight Tafean languages to document
names of plants and fungi, providing a tangible linkage between biodiversity,
traditional culture, and conservation. Project linguists will produce printed
and digital dictionaries of indigenous plant and fungal names and will use web-
based videography and 'story maps', which spatially link names and traditional
uses of organisms onto the landscape, helping viewers visualize the connections
between biodiversity, knowledge, and place, providing a complement to the
botanical databases.