* 1555699
* ATE Regional Center for Semiconductor and Nanotechnology Education
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2015,09/30/2018
* Robert Geer, SUNY Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 09/30/2018
* USD 2,520,254.00

Nanotechnology and semiconductor manufacturing industries are undergoing
continued expansion in the Northeast. An example of this expansion is the recent
announcement by New York Governor Cuomo that six leading global technology
companies are investing $1.5 billion to develop "Nano Utica", the state's second
major hub of nanotechnology research and development, spearheaded by the College
of Nanoscale Science and Engineering (CNSE) and the State University of New York
Institute of Technology (SUNYIT), creating over 1,000 new high-tech jobs. A
highly qualified technical workforce is needed to continue to support the growth
of the nanotechnology and semiconductor manufacturing industries in New York
State and Western New England. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Northeast Advanced
Technological Education Center (NEATEC) will support the industry workforce
needs. NEATEC partners include GlobalFoundries, IBM, General Electric, SEMATECH,
Hudson Valley Community College (HVCC), Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute (RPI),
Rochester Institute of Technology (RIT), CNSE, SUNYIT, Mohawk Valley Community
College (MVCC), Fulton Montgomery Community College (FMCC), SUNY Adirondack,
regional K-12, and additional community colleges in NY, VT, MA, and
CT.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NEATEC will implement and enable (1) the expansion of
cutting-edge semiconductor and nanotechnology related AAS/AS degree programs
among its community college partners, (2) on-the-job co-op and internship-based
training, (3) distance learning options and just-in-time education, (4) K-12
career pathway development, (5) the coordination of student recruitment, and (6)
research studies on emerging workforce trends and education needs. The Center
will improve community college student learning in science and engineering by
providing a broader range of students access to the educational materials,
facilities and faculty of several premier U.S. science and engineering
schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The evaluation and assessment plans will inform
the wider community about the effectiveness of materials developed in educating
a qualified entry-level technical workforce, the knowledge transfer from the
center to partner institutions, the performance of program graduates in the
field, and the value of the collaborative partnerships established.