* 1555035
* CAREER: Quantum Spin-Optomechanics of Optically Levitated Nanodiamonds
* MPS,PHY
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2021
* Tongcang Li, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 04/30/2021
* USD 457,770.00

Very small particles can behave in ways that are contrary to common sense. For
example, an electron (one of the particles that make up atoms) can be at
multiple locations at the same time and can tunnel through a barrier--something
forbidden by the classical laws of physics. The theory that explains these
counterintuitive behaviors of small particles is "quantum mechanics". This
CAREER project will investigate the possibility of making quantum mechanics
appear manifest in larger, more macroscopic, systems. In specific, the project
will investigate how to couple the spin of an electron to the motion of a
nanoparticle (containing millions of atoms). The nanoparticle will be levitated
by a laser beam in vacuum to avoid perturbations from the environment. This
system should serve as a very sensitive force detector with many applications.
It may enable other experiments to study the conflict between general relativity
and quantum mechanics, a longstanding problem in physics. The research will be
integrated with several related educational activities, including direct
training of graduate and undergraduate students participating in the research,
and conducting inquiry workshops about infrared light for middle and high school
teachers and students. Infrared light is not visible to human eyes, but plays a
crucial role in global warming and fiber-optic communication. In the present
work, infrared light will be used to levitate nanoparticles in vacuum. After
doing hands-on experiments with infrared light in the workshop, teachers will be
able to take their apparatus for use in their
classrooms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In more technical detail, this research project
will develop a system that combines the advantages of both trapped atoms and
conventional optomechanical systems for studying macroscopic quantum mechanics:
an optically levitated nanodiamond with a built-in nitrogen-vacancy (NV) center.
In some ways, this system can be considered to be an "artificial atom" with a
very large mass. The electron spin of the NV center can be coupled to the motion
of the nanodiamond with a magnetic field gradient. This coupling can be used to
create large quantum spatial superposition states of the nanodiamond, which will
lead to the development of a nanoparticle matter-wave interferometer for
fundamental tests of quantum mechanics in unexplored parameter regimes. The main
focus of this CAREER project will be to experimentally study the coupling
between an NV electron spin and both the center-of-mass motion and the rotation
of an optically levitated nanodiamond. The motion of the levitated nanodiamond
will be cooled to near quantum ground state by active feedback cooling. The NV
electron spin will be used to sense and manipulate the motion of the
nanodiamond. It will also be used to measure the internal temperature of the
levitated nanodiamond which affects the quantum coherence time.