* 1555871
* SBIR Phase II:  Hydrogen Bromine Electrolysis for Highly Efficient Hydrogen-Based Energy Storage and High Value Chemical Applications
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2016,09/30/2018
* Trent Molter, Proton Energy Systems, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 09/30/2018
* USD 691,209.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research Phase II project includes applications ranging from peak load shifting,
grid buffering for renewable energy input, frequency regulation, and chemical
conversions. As the percentage of energy from renewables on the grid increases,
energy storage will be essential to stabilize the supply and demand. Currently,
20-40% of wind energy is often stranded due to the inability to capture the
energy in the peak generation periods. Germany, Europe, Japan, Korea, and other
countries are funding significant efforts in energy storage projects. Energy
storage is also a critical need for all of the United States armed services,
including microgrids for forward operating bases. While batteries can
demonstrate very good round trip efficiencies, they suffer from self-discharge,
capacity fade, and high cost. Flow batteries separate the reactant and product
storage from the electrode active area, enabling higher capacities through
merely adding more storage. Many systems have not been practical in the past due
to low energy density values, but fuel cell and electrolysis developments have
provided pathways to higher energy density. Advances in these areas would find
immediate commercial interest, and address key strategic areas related to energy
security and grid stabilization and resiliency. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
objectives of this Phase II research project are: 1) flow field design for
balanced fluid distribution in both operating modes and minimization of shunt
currents; 2) selection of catalysts and membranes for reversibility, durability
and efficiency requirements; 3) integration and testing of Proton components
with the Sustainable Innovations embodiment hardware; 4) scale up to a full size
stack and operation in both modes at SI; and 5) development of a performance
model in collaboration with SI based on the final configuration. These
objectives address present limitations in energy storage solutions. While
traditional batteries can demonstrate very good round trip efficiencies, they
suffer from self-discharge, capacity fade, and high cost. Flow batteries
separate the reactant and product storage from the electrode active area,
enabling higher capacities through merely adding more storage. Many systems have
not been practical in the past due to low energy density values, but fuel cell
and electrolysis developments have provided pathways to higher energy density.
Advances in these areas would find immediate commercial interest, and address
key strategic areas related to energy security and grid stabilization and
resiliency. The anticipated result will be a highly efficient, durable flow
battery system with high power density.