* 1555138
* CAREER: Mechanistic and Biosynthetic Studies of Dinoflagellate Bioluminescence
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2016,09/30/2022
* Steven Mansoorabadi, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Christine Chow
* 09/30/2022
* USD 843,598.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division is funding Dr. Steven O. Mansoorabadi from Auburn University, whose
research project is focused on mechanistic and biosynthetic studies of
dinoflagellate bioluminescence. Dinoflagellates are an important group of
microorganisms found in freshwater and marine environments. Certain
dinoflagellates produce potent toxins and cause red tides, which have a
significant negative impact on coastal ecosystems and the health of humans and
marine wildlife. Several species of dinoflagellates are both photosynthetic and
bioluminescent, and are responsible for the bright blue glow of the sea.
Dinoflagellates produce light in response to physical agitation using an enzyme
known as dinoflagellate luciferase. The substrate of this enzyme, luciferin, is
produced from chlorophyll by an unknown pathway. This research project aims to
provide a better understanding of the dinoflagellate bioluminescence system by
elucidating the mechanism of light production by dinoflagellate luciferase and
the biosynthetic pathway for the production of luciferin. These studies help
facilitate the use of dinoflagellate luciferase as a cellular imaging agent, and
may lead to the development of algicides for the remediation of coastal
seawater. This project also integrates bioluminescence, an exciting and
fascinating natural phenomenon, into two K-12 outreach initiatives designed to
attract and inspire young students to pursue careers in science and related
fields. It will also include students in the Auburn University Summer Science
Institute directed at gifted high school students and the AU Explore a program
that engages middle school students from predominantly rural
schools&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dinoflagellate luciferase is a model system for the
study of both pH-dependent enzyme regulation and the chemical mechanism of
biological chemiluminescence, neither of which are well understood. To gain
insight into the regulation of dinoflagellate luciferase, the magnitude and
timescale of the pH-induced conformational change and the associated variations
in structure and dynamics is determined using time-resolved photothermal
methods, constant pH molecular dynamics simulations, and hydrogen/deuterium
exchange mass spectrometry. The detailed mechanism by which dinoflagellate
luciferase produces light is investigated by determining the structure of the
luminophore and other key catalytic intermediates using a combination of
transient kinetic and spectroscopic methods and time-dependent density
functional theory calculations. In addition, the identity of active site
residues important for substrate binding and catalysis is ascertained using
mutational analysis. Finally, insight into the pathway of chlorophyll catabolism
leading to the formation of dinoflagellate luciferin is obtained through the
biochemical and structural characterization of identified biosynthetic
intermediates and enzymes. Together, these studies provide significant insight
into the biochemistry of these important marine microorganisms and afford
excellent interdisciplinary training opportunities for undergraduate and
graduate students.