* 1555958
* STTR Phase II:  Scale-Up of An Innovative Spray Pyrolysis Process for Producing Pyrochlore Catalysts
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/2016,10/31/2021
* Jeffrey Harrison, Pyrochem Catalyst Company
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 10/31/2021
* USD 1,399,989.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Business Innovation Research
Phase II project is to commercialize Pyrochem Catalyst Company's (PCC) catalyst
materials. These catalyst materials are unique in that the catalytically active
metal is atomically dispersed in a rigid crystalline matrix. This imparts
unparalleled thermal stability, even at temperatures in excess of 1000Â°C.
Conventional catalysts typically require much higher precious metal loadings (as
much as 20 times) to achieve the same activity as the materials developed in
this project and at high temperatures those active metals can agglomerate into
large clusters reducing their performance and the lifetime of the catalyst. The
series of catalysts developed in this project are designed in a way that all
precious metal is optimally utilized and protected. This includes resistance
from sulfur poisoning and the accumulation of carbon when operating under severe
conditions. This makes these materials ideal for high temperature processes such
as steam methane reforming for hydrogen generation, autothermal reforming for
syngas production, syngas generation in oxygen transport membranes (OTM), and
exhaust oxidation in automotive catalytic convertors. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
objectives of this Phase II STTR program are to build on the success of the
Phase I objectives that developed a low cost and continuous catalyst
manufacturing method for producing the pyrochlore powders that are the basis for
the proposed catalyst product. The method may be equally effective for producing
other types of mixed metal oxides like perovskites and fluorites. In Phase II,
PCC will construct and test a scaled-up production platform, following the
design elements of the proof of concept demonstrated in Phase I. The new unit
will be designed to manufacture proprietary pyrochlore powders at a rate with a
hundred-fold increase over production rates of the Phase I unit. The Phase II
technical efforts also examine a range of catalyst synthesis parameters like
oxidant gas concentration/composition, temperature distribution in the
production unit, precursor residence times, synthesis solution chemistry, and
optimizing heat and mass transport. Through a subaward, powders produced from
the process will be characterized and tested for activity by the National Energy
Technology Labs, Morgantown, WV. The overall goal of this project is the
development of a high throughput / high yield manufacturing process that
produces high performance catalysts for commercial sale.