* 1555444
* Collaborative Research: RUI: Evaluating the Molecular Genetic Pathways Responsible for Stable Host:  Symbiont Interactions in Sponge:Algal Associations
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/2016,01/31/2020
* Jeremy Weisz, Linfield College
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Shisler
* 01/31/2020
* USD 128,416.00

Intracellular associations between animal hosts and algal symbionts support
important ecosystems like coral reefs. Despite the importance of these
associations, there is limited understanding of basic aspects about how stable
interactions between host and algal partners is achieved. This inhibits our
ability to make informed decisions about the management of vulnerable
ecosystems. For example, coral reefs experience periodic bleaching events that
involve the breakdown of the symbiosis and jeopardize reef health, but the
process of bleaching and subsequent recovery of the host are poorly understood.
To protect our valuable reef resources, greater understanding of the cellular
and genetic cross-talk between symbiotic partners is required. This project will
elucidate key components of the conserved genetic regulatory pathways important
in host:symbiont exchanges. As changes to ocean environments occur (e.g.,
increasing average seawater temperatures), it is imperative that details about
how hosts support symbiont populations at the cellular and genetic level are
fully understood. The project has a diverse suite of planned broader impacts
including training of STEM undergraduates, involvement in a pre-college summer
bridge program to increase diversity in STEM, partnerships with national leaders
in incorporating undergraduate research in community colleges, and high impact
community based learning opportunities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will
refine understanding of host:symbiont interactions through identification of
major-effect symbiosis genes and genetic pathways. The proposed work takes
advantage of unique properties of marine and freshwater sponge hosts and their
algal partners to identify the molecular, genetic, cellular, and physiological
interactions that occur. These properties allow control over the timing of
symbiont infection, so that gene expression profiles can be correlated with
events involved with symbiont contact, engulfment, recognition, intracellular
migration, and repopulation. In a methodologically novel way, the research will
create different combinations of hosts and algal partners to explore reasons why
particular hosts become suitable habitat for particular symbionts while other
hosts cannot support those symbionts. The project will explore how down-
regulating gene expression can change dynamics of host:symbiont interactions,
and combining field-based experiments, RNAseq, and advanced physiological,
microscopic, and molecular tools, the research will identify common regulatory
features of those interactions. The results will increase understanding of the
habitat requirements of the symbiont, and the ability of the hosts to interact
with different partners. The results will also help define the scope of change
in the identity of symbiotic partners. In addition to intellectual contributions
in the form of publications and presentations, this project will expand
educational and research opportunities for pre-college, community college, and
undergraduate students, particularly those from underserved backgrounds. The
proposal will support high impact practices like course-based research and
community-based learning in the context of an undergraduate curriculum, as well
as community outreach through a multi-disciplinary faculty learning community
and civic-engaged talks.