* 1555015
* CAREER: SusChEM: Dynamic Defect Interactions in Ferroelectrics
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2022
* Geoff Brennecka, Colorado School of Mines
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Lane
* 05/31/2022
* USD 458,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: All ceramics contain defects, impurities, and
interfaces; this is simply unavoidable. Decades of work have gone into
understanding the effects of defects on properties, but the vast majority of
this prior work has focused on static or steady-state conditions. Ferroelectrics
(materials with a permanent dipole that can be reoriented by an electric field)
and piezoelectrics (materials that develop an electric charge when a mechanical
stress is applied) are important for applications ranging from memory devices
and capacitors that help cram more features into smaller electronic devices to
actuators that increase automotive fuel economy and devices that harvest ambient
vibrational energy. These types of materials are commonly used under dynamic
conditions in which moving domain walls dominate the property responses. This
project uses new experimental techniques and unique sample sets to improve the
quantitative descriptions of the interactions of these moving domain walls with
ubiquitous point defects and interfaces such as vacancies and grain boundaries.
Better understanding of domain wall interactions with defects and interfaces
enables improved performance from Pb-free piezoelectrics and active control of
high-value catalysts which are free of toxic or precious metals, thus using more
sustainable materials to produce devices that contribute to increased energy
efficiency and process sustainability across a variety of industries. The
project integrates with the PI?s extensive efforts to expand student engagement
including participation in an annual Discover STEM! Camp, curriculum
development, and introduction of a hot glass shop on campus. A student swap
agreement allows the supported graduate student to work for several weeks each
year with collaborators in Virginia and Australia, taking advantage of the tools
and expertise available in those groups while benefitting from the experience of
living and working in a different environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
DETAILS: This work links the abstract energy barriers currently used to describe
the domain nucleation and pinning processes to real chemical and/or structural
features in order to identify and generalize the conditions under which various
features serve as nucleation and/or pinning sites. The sample sets and
experiments isolate variables (e.g., domain wall interactions with cation
vacancies and with grain boundaries separately) and apply new tools including
atom probe and X-ray tomographies, time domain thermal reflectance, and a custom
low-impedance drive circuit to develop fundamental mechanistic descriptions of
domain nucleation and pinning that will apply broadly across many materials
families.