* 1555408
* EAGER: Development of Model-Based Active Chair for Proactive Injury Prevention
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2018
* Dimitris Metaxas, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 09/30/2018
* USD 300,000.00

Overview: Computers and Internet use have dramatically transformed our life
style and exposed us to many significant occupational health hazards including
neck and shoulder pains and low back pain associated with long-time sitting.
These hazards have become a significant public health problem both in the US and
the rest of the world. Although many lifestyle-related risk factors have been
identified, effective monitoring and management is lacking to prevent the
occurrence of these diseases in long term. The aim of this project, in
partnership with Liberty Mutual Research Institute for Safety, is develop a
first smart active chair to prevent injuries and improve office
safety.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Keywords: ergonomics, sensor fusion, visual
tracking, proactive intervention.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The
intellectual merit of this proposed exploratory research is that our research
leads to a new paradigm of proactive preventing unhealthy lifestyle based on
multimodal sensing research and technology. The investigators develop a novel
method to predict neck, back and shoulder joint loading and muscle forces in
real-time and to develop a personalized and real-time intervention system to
automatically reconfigure the workstation and chair to reduce the
injury/disorder risk.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broad Impacts: The broader Impact is
that our project achieves substantial reduction in office-related health
disorders, such as lower back pain, promoting improved lifestyle quality in the
office and in our homes. The proposed research results in a unique and diverse
generation of undergraduate and graduate researchers capable to address this new
class of multidisciplinary problems and encourages active participation of women
and underrepresented.