* 1555491
* Meeting: Identifying, understanding, and overcoming technical issues in identifier systems, Oracle, Arizona, winter 2015-16
* BIO,EF
* 09/01/2015,03/31/2017
* Ramona Walls, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Blood
* 03/31/2017
* USD 49,986.00

A growing awareness of the need for permanent, globally unique identifiers for
both physical specimens and digital data has led to the development of new
systems for minting, tracking, resolving, and querying identifiers. While work
has been published on identifier type characteristics and best practices for
their application, there has been little empirical research on the functionality
of identifiers or the services that support them, especially on elements of the
data lifecycle that occur before publication. Practitioners working with
identifiers are aware of the technical and social issues and limitations in the
application and use of identifier systems. Yet, there is limited understanding
of whether and how systems will scale to support very large, multidisciplinary
datasets, or time to imagine and address next generation challenges. This award
will support a meeting to bring together experienced identifier practitioners
for facilitated activities to document the current state of the field, identify
and elucidate the technical issues, and propose solutions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This workshop will focus on identifier solutions to big,
interdisciplinary data. Multi-disciplinary participants will be tasked with
imagining, discussing, proposing, and hacking next generation solutions for data
identifiers. In addition, a portion of the workshop will serve as a hackathon,
so that participants have opportunities to develop some initial implementations.
This meeting will seek synergy across disciplines by inviting diverse
participants from multiple domains who might not otherwise work together,
opening potential for new, cross-community collaborations. A meeting report and
peer reviewed articles will be written on the workshop outcomes, and any
software produced during the hackathon activities will be available for public
access through Github. Inclusion of early career scientists will provide
training and promote the adoption of new solutions and technologies, and care
will be taken to ensure participation by under-represented groups.