* 1555701
* Family Court Decisions About Child Custody in the Context of Intimate Partner Violence
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2020
* Jennifer Hardesty, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Reginald Sheehan
* 07/31/2020
* USD 249,932.00

Intimate partner violence (IPV) is common among divorcing parents who are unable
to develop custody and visitation agreements on their own. Despite mandates
requiring courts to factor IPV into custody and visitation decisions, studies
indicate they often fail to do so. This study investigates decisions made in
family court settings regarding the custody and visitation of minor children
when IPV has been documented. Using administrative court records of 472 cases
the following questions will be addressed: What are the patterns of IPV
documentation in civil and criminal records, and how is documented IPV reflected
in custody and visitation agreements? When and how is documented IPV associated
with safer custody and visitation agreements? Then, among a subset of 190
divorce cases for which we have self-report data from mothers, we ask: Are self-
reported physical and/or sexual violence and documented IPV associated with one
another? What additional risk and protective factors are associated with custody
and visitation agreements and the safety of those agreements when IPV is
documented? Finally, how do custody and visitation agreements and the safety of
those agreements for mothers with documented IPV compare to those who self-
report physical and/or sexual violence that is not documented in court records?
This study addresses a critical need to narrow the gap between research and
family court practice and policy, and will contribute to the advancement of
theory in several areas, including IPV, custody, courts and decision-making,
legal implementation, and legal impact. In addition, this study can inform the
development of protocols and assessment tools for identifying IPV in family
court practice and, once identified, models for ensuring attention to safety in
custody and visitation agreements.

Phase I of this two-phase study will extract data from four sets of
administrative records for divorce cases: divorce, family court, protective
order, and criminal. The specific aims are to: (1) describe the presence, form,
and timing (i.e., prior to and/or during the divorce case) of documentation of
IPV against divorcing mothers in civil and criminal records, and examine how the
documentation of IPV is associated with custody and visitation agreements and
the safety of those agreements; and (2) among cases with IPV documented prior to
the divorce case, identify parent, child, divorce process, and IPV-related
factors that differentiate whether IPV is or is not documented in the divorce
case file, and among cases with IPV documented in the divorce file, identify
parent, child, divorce process, and IPV-related factors associated with custody
and visitation agreements and the safety of those agreements. In Phase II, the
administrative data from Phase I will be merged with additional variables
collected during a recently completed study of mothers recruited within 12 weeks
of a divorce filing. The aims of Phase II are to: (1) explore the association
between self-reported IPV and presence of IPV documentation in civil and
criminal records; and (2) identify mothers' self-reported perceptual and
attitudinal factors (e.g., hostility, positive attitudes) and indicators of risk
or threat (e.g., severity of IPV, controlling behaviors) that are associated
with custody and visitation agreements and the safety of those agreements.
Differences between mothers with self-reported and documented IPV in the divorce
case file and mothers with self-reported but undocumented IPV will be examined.
Bivariate and multivariate analyses will be conducted to examine patterns of IPV
documentation and factors associated with custody and visitation agreements and
the safety of those agreements. The inclusion of data from a subset of mothers
early in the divorce process provides a unique opportunity to identify self-
report factors that, in conjunction with data from administrative records,
provide a better understanding of custody and visitation agreements in the
context of IPV.