* 1555641
* LTREB Renewal: Experimental tests of alternative states on rocky intertidal shores.
* GEO,OCE
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2023
* Janet Kubler, The University Corporation, Northridge
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 04/30/2023
* USD 447,430.00

Unexpected events that tip an ecosystem from one type of community to another
are poorly understood yet often have serious ecological and economic effects,
exemplified by the sudden collapse of productive grasslands into desert in the
southwestern US. This project will investigate the underlying causes of the
switch between alternative communities, dominated by either seaweeds or mussels,
on sheltered rocky shores in the Gulf of Maine. A unique long-term experiment
will advance general understanding of the resilience of natural communities to
ecological perturbations of different sizes, the extent to which ecological
transitions are reversible when environmental conditions are restored, and the
predictability of ecological communities when perturbed. The research team
includes a high school teacher from Maine who has a long association with this
project. Six to eight of her students will participate in the field research
each year, and the teacher will develop classroom activities appropriate for
high school students and K-12 teachers. Primary data, panoramic photographs of
the experimental plots, and educational activities will be available
electronically, and the investigators will post a YouTube video on data
archiving and management. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers will test
hypotheses that (1) switches between alternative community states of mussel beds
and rockweed stands occur in response to infrequent, large-scale occurrences of
ice scour during winter, (2) the community that becomes established in large
clearings made by ice scour is not predictable, (3) the order of species arrival
during re-establishment drives community development and (4) the alternative
communities are stable. These hypotheses will be tested using a Before-After-
Control-Impact (BACI) design consisting of experimental clearings of different
sizes, uncleared controls that were created in 1996-97, and half of these
controls that were cleared again in 2010-11. In addition to collecting data
characterizing patterns of succession in these developing communities, the
researchers will assay rates of predation on mussels, mortality rates of mussels
in patches of different sizes, and recruitment of juveniles of four key species
annually. Analyses of data will compare outcomes from the first run of the
experiment (1997-2008) with those from the second run (2011-2021) to test if
community development is predictable. The approach of repeating an experiment to
test for alternative community states in a natural ecosystem is unique and has
broad implications for studies of alternative states in other ecosystems.