* 1555290
* CAREER: Symmetry Control in Photonic Nanostructures for Enhanced Optical Properties
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2022
* Sang Eon Han, University of New Mexico
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Lane
* 05/31/2022
* USD 500,000.00

Non-technical Description: Photonic crystals are periodically structured
artificial materials constructed from building blocks that are approximately a
thousand times larger than those in atomic crystals. As symmetry in atomic
crystals affects the electronic properties, symmetry in photonic crystals is a
crucial factor determining the optical properties. However, because the
repeating unit of photonic crystals is much larger than the periodicity in the
atomic crystals, the symmetry in photonic crystals can be controlled by
manipulating the structure of their repeating unit by using nanofabrication
techniques. The research component of this CAREER award is to perform
experimental and theoretical investigations of the symmetry effect on the
optical properties of photonic crystals, aiming to achieve high performance of
optical materials and optoelectronic devices. The research is integrated with
nanoscience education activities at local K-12 schools and a nearby Native
American community in collaboration with elementary school
teachers.&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: The main objective of the research
project is to establish a concrete understanding of how the optical performance
of photonic nanostructures is affected by the structure symmetry. For efficient
control of point group symmetry, a fabrication technique recently developed by
the principal investigator is employed. The technique involves wet etching
processing of silicon wafers. Translational symmetry is broken in a controlled
manner by methods based on colloidal self-assembly. The symmetry effect on
optical properties is investigated for: (i) high efficiency in thin-film organic
solar cells, targeting light absorption that surpasses the conventional
theoretical limit; (ii) high photoresponsivity in Si-based hot-electron infrared
detectors, targeting broader band photoresponsivity than current benchmarks; and
(iii) artificial white coatings mimicking nanostructures in white beetle scales,
targeting thinner scales with stronger light scattering among low-refractive-
index materials. Methods based on colloidal self-assembly are developed to
fabricate such structures with precise control over structural parameters to
determine the relationship between the structure and the optical scattering
properties.