* 1555028
* CAREER: Charge Photogeneration and Transport in Organic Semiconductor Nanowires
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2022
* Jeffrey Mativetsky, SUNY at Binghamton
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Lane
* 06/30/2022
* USD 525,941.00

Nontechnical Description: The ease of processing and mechanical flexibility of
organic semiconductors drive the potential for their broad integration into
disruptive technologies. Such materials, for example, are already being used in
commercially-available curved television and smartphone screens. The research
component of this CAREER award investigates nanometer-scale properties of
individual organic semiconductor nanowires with controlled size, shape and
composition, provides fundamental insight into the factors that influence the
electrical properties of organic semiconductor nanowires, and serves to guide
the development of next-generation electronics, sensing, and energy harvesting
technologies. These research efforts are integrated with educational activities
designed to stimulate interest in science among young Binghamton-area students
and to improve the retention and training of Binghamton University science
undergraduates. The educational initiatives support the science teaching efforts
of school teachers and provide hands-on science activities for students from
low-income and historically underrepresented minority
populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: The electrical
properties of organic semiconductor nanowires have so far been predominantly
assessed at the devices comprising large ensembles of nanowires, providing
limited insight into the nanoscale origins of device performance. Moreover,
systematic study of the relationships between organic semiconductor nanowire
structure and electrical properties has been hindered by a lack of independent
control over nanowire size, shape, and composition. The central research goal of
this project is to elucidate the roles of organic semiconductor nanowire
structure in mediating charge photogeneration and transport at the single
nanowire and single interface level. The project examines the effects of
nanometer-scale spatial confinement on the growth of organic semiconductors, the
dependence of charge transport on internal nanowire structure and nanowire
interfaces, and the influence of nanowire size and composition on charge
photogeneration, recombination, and collection. Organic semiconductor nanowires
of controlled size, shape, and composition are synthesized by using a templated
growth process. Nanometer-scale resolution local electrical measurements are
performed by conductive atomic force microscopy. These experiments provide
insight into the intrinsic electrical performance limits of organic
semiconductor nanowires and inform efforts to integrate these nanomaterials into
low-cost and flexible electronics.