* 1555601
* SBIR Phase II:  An Economic, Sustainable, Green, Gold Isolation Process
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2018
* Roger Pettman, Cycladex
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 04/30/2018
* USD 712,215.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research Phase II project is the potential to change the way gold mining is
carried out by improving the process economics and reducing the environmental
impact of mining operations. Current gold isolation methods involve the
consumption of vast quantities of sodium cyanide, where cyanide is contained in
large tailing dams, posing an environmental threat as exemplified by documented
breaches. In the United States there are gold deposits which have not been
exploited because of technology limitations and environmental concerns. The
technology being developed in this project will improve the profitability of
existing mines, as it can be employed with only minor changes in plant design.
It will also but will also lead to new jobs. Another opportunity is to extract
gold from copper tailings dams. The proposed technology will potentially make
cleanup of these sites profitable and can be applied worldwide. In the longer
term, the process could be adopted in third world countries which still rely on
mercury which pollutes, not only the environment, but also the food chain.

The objectives of this Phase II research project are to (i) scale up the
extraction of gold using both the heap and vat leach processes, (ii) optimize
the crystallization of Au(III) in the presence of the natural product
รก-cyclodextrin, and (iii) isolate the gold. For heap leaching, it is proposed to
operate at the 400-MT level, concentrate the gold salt and crystallize the gold-
cyclodextrin complex. Scale-up will require designing the process to utilize
existing equipment (built originally for the sodium cyanide process) and
introducing new chemicals. For vat leaching, a small pilot system will be built
to accept crushed ore as the feed, and the resulting gold-containing extract
will be taken through the crystallization process. Optimization of the leaching
agent, mass transfer, kinetics and materials consumption will be ongoing.
Regulatory approval for vat leaching, once secured, can be applied on-site
globally to demonstrate the environmental and economic benefits of the process.
This technology has the potential to significantly make existing and new mining
operations more environmentally sustainable.