* 1555220
* CAREER: Optically Programmed Membrane Permeabilization
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2022
* Jonathan Lovell, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing Grant
* Nitsa Rosenzweig
* 04/30/2022
* USD 400,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award by the Biomaterials
program in the Division of Materials Research to SUNY at Buffalo is to develop a
new class of biocompatible vesicles with specialized membranes. Permeability of
these membranes would be programmed and controlled when activated by light. As
part of this project, cargo-loaded vesicles that are sensitive to multiple
wavelengths will be developed such that the release of multiple cargos release
would be discretely controlled by using different wavelengths of light.
Biomaterials that allow for robust external control of membrane permeability
are, at present, constrained by poor stability and/or poor control of
permeability. Lipid-enclosed compartments in living systems play a central role
in serving as the general barrier between external and internal biomolecules and
chemicals. A wide range of protein-based transport systems have evolved in
living systems to permit the movement of molecules through membranes without
destroying the overall membrane integrity. These transport systems are usually
specific only for certain cargo and are not suitable as general-purpose gateways
for natural or synthetic phospholipid-enclosed compartments and
cargos.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Graduate students supported by this award will lead
a cutting-edge materials research on lipid membranes with controllable
permeability. Additionally, this award will assist in solidifying a robust
educational and research training program in the recently established Biomedical
Engineering Department, SUNY at Buffalo. This program is expected to develop
into a vital part of the economic and social fabric of Western New York. In
addition, this research program will provide opportunities for underrepresented
minorities and undergraduate students with a first-class research training
program that will allow them to hone their skills for a lifetime career in
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is to develop a new class of vesicles
with highly programmable and controllable membranes that are permeable when the
vesicles are activated by Near Infrared light. Earlier studies by this
researcher has indicated that porphyrin-phospholipid (PoP) entities can self-
assemble into liposome-like vesicles with unusual biophotonic properties. It was
also determined on how to induce transient permeability of PoP liposomes using
near infrared (NIR) light. This system was later developed to a target cargo-
loaded liposomes by simple aqueous incubation of histidine-tagged peptides with
cobalt-PoP (Co-PoP) liposomes. With this award, this researcher will develop new
biomaterials with exquisite control of when, how and where the light-induced
membrane permeability occurs in liposome-like vesicles. As part of this project,
multiple vesicles with varying lipid compositions will be developed with
different membrane permeability properties such that the release of multiple
cargos from these liposomes can be discretely controlled by using different
wavelengths of light. The main aims of the proposal are: 1) to develop different
porphyrin-phospholipid systems with controlled rates of light-triggered cargo
release; 2) to use multi-channel NIR light to control the release of different
cargos; and 3) to create ligand-targeted liposomes with light-triggered
permeability. In addition to supporting an intensive research and teaching
program, this CAREER award will provide training to both graduate and
undergraduate students.