* 1555206
* CAREER: Finiteness for Hyperkahler Manifolds
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2025
* Justin Sawon, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 05/31/2025
* USD 629,103.00

Hyperkähler manifolds are geometric spaces with special symmetries based on the
quaternions, the four-dimensional analogue of the complex numbers discovered by
Hamilton in 1843. Hyperkähler manifolds are remarkable for their ubiquity in
high energy physics, quantum field theory, and string theory. They arise
naturally as parameter spaces for Yang-Mills instantons, magnetic monopoles,
Higgs bundles, and solutions of many other physical equations. The P.I. will
study the geometry and topology of hyperkähler manifolds. He will construct new
examples of hyperkähler manifolds, and/or their singular counterparts,
hyperkähler orbifolds. He will also establish new restrictions on the possible
topological types of hyperkähler manifolds. This project will contribute to a
better understanding of a class of geometric spaces that lie at the heart of
many physical models, and which also connect different areas of mathematics
including algebraic and differential geometry, topology, and number theory. The
P.I. will mentor PhD, masters, and undergraduate honors students, who will
assist with the research project. He will enhance the training opportunities
available to graduate students at the University of North Carolina by organizing
mini-schools on advanced topics, by promoting student-led seminars, and by
modernizing the geometry and topology courses. At the undergraduate level he
will lead a problem solving seminar to coach students for mathematics
competitions, facilitate research through honors projects, and initiate a new
study abroad summer program for math majors and potential math majors. He will
advocate for diversity by actively recruiting first generation college students
and students from other under-represented groups to participate in these non-
traditional activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The structure of hyperkähler
manifolds, and their applications in physics, are well studied, yet only few
compact examples are known: just two or three deformation classes in each
dimension. At the same time, it is not known how many deformation classes there
might be in each dimension. The P.I. is motivated by the problem of showing that
this number is finite. He aims to show that every hyperkähler manifold can be
deformed to a Lagrangian fibration, a hyperkähler manifold admitting a
holomorphic fibre space structure. He then plans to establish general finiteness
results by refining his earlier results for Lagrangian fibrations. He will
exploit the analogies between compact and non-compact Lagrangian fibrations,
such as Hitchin systems, to find new examples. The P.I. will also demonstrate
general topological bounds on hyperkähler manifolds by exploring the structure
of the cohomology ring. The ultimate goal is a more complete understanding of
the possible topologies of hyperkähler manifolds.