* 1555775
* RUI: Probing the Energy Gap of Clean Magnesium Diboride using High Resolution Tunneling Spectroscopy
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2015,02/29/2020
* Roberto Ramos, University of the Sciences in Philadelphia
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 02/29/2020
* USD 66,930.00

****TECHNICAL ABSTRACT****&lt;br/&gt;This project will investigate sub-structure
in the superconducting energy gap of very clean samples of multi-gapped
superconductors such as magnesium diboride (MgB2) and some iron-based
superconductors. The energy gap is a key feature in the study of these novel
materials and the results of these experiments can help validate existing
theories, provide new data, and contribute to a better understanding of the role
of gap distribution in multi-gapped superconductivity. Experiments will involve
high-resolution tunneling spectroscopy made possible by cooling samples to low
to very low (sub-Kelvin) temperatures and using high-resolution techniques of
data acquisition. Samples will consist of thin film Josephson junctions to be
obtained from several collaborators who are world leaders in the fabrication of
high-quality samples. This research will be carried out at a primarily
undergraduate institution, where undergraduate research is rapidly growing. This
project will support the training of undergraduate and pre-college students and
open physics research opportunities for women and minorities in a liberal arts
environment where majority of students are women.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;****NON-
TECHNICAL ABSTRACT****&lt;br/&gt;This project supports the experimental study of
superconductors in a primarily undergraduate institution. The energy gap of a
superconductor is an important property that enables us to better understand and
apply these novel materials. While many superconductors have only a single
energy gap, this research will probe, to very high resolution, the energy gap of
multi-gapped superconductors such as magnesium diboride and some of the
recently-discovered iron-based superconductors. This will be made possible by
using very clean thin film Josephson junctions obtained from research
collaborators who are world leaders in the fabrication of high-quality samples.
The samples will be cooled to temperatures close to absolute zero and probed
using tunneling spectroscopy and high-resolution data acquisition techniques.
The results will help validate existing theories and provide new data to better
understand multi-gapped superconductivity. This project supports the education
and training of undergraduates in solid-state physics in a liberal arts setting
where sixty-four percent of students are women. Undergraduates will receive
training in low-noise electronics, cryogenics, and materials characterization
skills needed for graduate studies or work in physics and many STEM fields.
Furthermore, the educational component of this research makes possible a three-
day summer science camp for middle school girls. The camp is designed to enhance
the interest in science through interactive experiments and demonstrations of
real-world physics, role-playing activities, laboratory tours, and other hands-
on activities.