* 1555965
* SBIR Phase II:  Barrier Centrifuge for Aluminum Purification
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2016,08/31/2018
* Ethan Schartman, Nova Photonics
* Standard Grant
* Linda Molnar
* 08/31/2018
* USD 733,263.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is in reducing the environmental impact of
Aluminum production. Global production of aluminum from bauxite ore currently
accounts for 1% of global electricity consumption, and 2.5% of CO2 emission.
Over the last 15 years global production has doubled, and is expected to
continue to increase over the next decades with expanded use in automotive
applications. To meet increasing demand while reducing the environmental impact
of production requires cost effective means of removing contaminating metals
such as iron from aluminum. Commercial application of the technologies
investigated here would positively affect the global aluminum industry and
reduce its environmental impact. Applied to conventional primary production, the
technology can be used to increase the yield from bauxite, or allow kaolinite
clays to be used for primary production. The former will reduce the
environmental and economic costs of production, while the latter would allow
domestic producers to reduce their reliance on imported bauxite. If the
technology is applied to primary production using carbothermic reduction, the
impacts on the global aluminum industry would be even greater. Greenhouse gas
emissions could be reduced by up to 50%, and electricity consumption reduced by
up to 20%.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this Phase II SBIR
research is to demonstrate a cost effective barrier centrifuge technology to
remove contaminating elements from aluminum alloys. In the Phase I research we
demonstrated the basic technology using a liquid gallium alloy instead of
aluminum. In Phase II, we will fabricate an apparatus for handling liquid
aluminum and characterize its purification efficiency and costs to own and
operate. Using the barrier centrifuge to purify aluminum in secondary production
would reduce the need for dilution by primary aluminum, thereby reducing the
demand for the primary aluminum with a consequent reduction in electricity
consumption, greenhouse gas production and waste disposal needs from the bauxite
refining process.