* 1555996
* SBIR Phase II:  Innovative Platform Technology for Rapid Three Dimensional Fabrication of Capillary Electrophoresis Chips: Phase II Proposal
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2021
* Eleanor Derbyshire, Hummingbird Nano, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 03/31/2021
* USD 1,406,123.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is in developing a novel method of
manufacturing micro sized parts in three-dimensions without layers at high
volume. With no parting lines, the technology represents a significant
advancement over current state of the art molding and 3D technologies for
certain applications. As this represents an entirely new field of research, not
merely an extension of solid freeform fabrication (SFF) techniques, it opens and
enables wide research areas in engineering and chemical disciplines. More
imminent is using the technology to create capillary electrophoresis (CE) chips
that vastly reduce the amount of reagents, provide previously unattainable
properties, and at a significantly lower price. By doing so, the technology will
accelerate and broaden the adoption of microfluidics which are currently used in
applications such as forensics, genomics, drug making, drug analysis, clinical
diagnostics, biosensors, and environmental testing, among countless others.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project automates and expands a novel
platform technology to manufacture high resolution micro parts. The technology
is focused on a unique and inexpensive method to fabricate microfluidic channels
and wells, which form the basis of all microfluidic chips. The objectives for
Phase II are to: 1) Expand the versatility of the system by inclusion to the
platform system of fiber optic cables, temperature control capillaries,
microfluidic design of static mixer and expansion of molding materials, 2)
Design and construct a pilot automation system to increase control and reduce
variability, 3) Test the automation system, 4) Test chips produced via the
automated system and test additional versatility components from (1), and 5)
Continue to commercialize the products. The technological outcome is an
automated system with expanded versatility that will center on the construction
of capillary electrophoresis chips, with the objective of making the system on
that can manufacture a wide variety of microfluidic chips.