* 1555090
* CAREER: Resolving Past Mysteries, Preparing for Future Discoveries: The Exciting Opportunities of the Short-Baseline Neutrino Physics Program at Fermilab
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2021
* David Schmitz, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* James Shank
* 06/30/2021
* USD 825,000.00

One of the major intellectual achievements of the 20th century was the
development of the Standard Model (SM) of particle physics. This model succeeded
in classifying all of the elementary particles known at the time into a
hierarchy of groups having similar quantum properties. The validity of this
model to date was recently confirmed by the discovery of the Higgs boson at the
Large Hadron Collider at CERN. However, the Standard Model as it currently
exists leaves open many questions about the universe, including such fundamental
questions as to why the Higgs mass has the value it has and why there is no
antimatter in the universe. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the primary areas to
search for answers to these and other open questions about the universe, how it
came to be and why it is the way it is, is to focus on a study of the properties
of neutrinos and to use what we know and can learn about neutrinos as probes of
science beyond the Standard Model. Neutrinos are those elementary particles that
interact with practically nothing else in the universe. They have no electric
charge and were once thought to be massless. Like other elementary particles,
they were believed to have an antimatter counterpart, the antineutrino.
Moreover, the Standard Model predicted that there were actually three different
kinds of neutrinos that were distinguishable through the different interactions
that they did undergo whenever there was an interaction. But recent measurements
have totally changed our picture of neutrinos. We now know that neutrinos do
have a mass and because they do, they can actually change from one type to
another. Detailed measurements of these changes, along with other current
neutrino experiments, form one of the most promising ways to probe for new
physics beyond the Standard Model. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There have been hints
in various experiments of new types of neutrinos, and clarifying these "hints"
is one of the main thrusts of this project. The work itself will be the further
development of the Liquid Argon Time Projection Chamber (LArTPC) technology for
use in neutrino physics as part of the Short-Baseline Near Detector (SBND)
experiment and the MicroBooNE experiment. These neutrino experiments are all
located at the Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory (FNAL). The MicroBooNE
experiment should significantly increase the physics reach toward answering the
important question of whether predicted "sterile" neutrinos exist and resolving
the anomalies in recent neutrino experiments. In addition to the contribution to
the fundamental neutrino physics mentioned above, this research will serve as an
invaluable proving ground for the calibration, reconstruction and analysis
techniques that will be needed to make future experiments, such as the planned
DUNE experiment, a success.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Broader Impact of the
project involves bringing current techniques in high energy physics to the
broader local community. The south side neighborhoods surrounding the UChicago
campus are largely populated with underrepresented groups in STEM fields, and
this project aims to build a program within the Department of Physics that
connects university students with local elementary and middle school children to
introduce them to concepts in physics with the aid of fun, interactive
demonstrations.