* 1555407
* Conference Support for Karst, Groundwater Contamination &amp; Public Health: Moving Beyond Case Studies
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2016
* John Hess, Karst Water Institute
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Torgersen
* 12/31/2016
* USD 29,114.00

Karst terrains, which develop in carbonate rocks, limestone and dolomite, are
common throughout the world and karst aquifers provide approximately 25% of
world's drinking water. The characteristic cave, spring, and sinkhole features
in karst terrains make karst aquifers highly vulnerable to contamination. Public
health impacts stem from the ubiquity of karst terrains, the ease of introducing
contaminants into the subsurface, and the pervasive use of karst aquifers to
provide drinking water. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed conference will bring
together 80-100 scientists and regulators specializing in karst, groundwater
contamination, and public health. The main goals are to bring together
established and developing experts to elucidate current knowledge of karst and
groundwater contamination, understand public health outcomes, and synthesize
perspectives of the diverse disciplines into a new systematic framework for
future research. While much is known separately about the physical hydrogeology
of karst aquifers and the impact of contaminants on human health, there are
significant knowledge gaps about contaminant transport and the direct human
health consequences of contaminated karst waters. This will be the first meeting
to be convened with the express focus of mutual exploration of research needs of
these two scientific communities. The conference will expose young and under-
represented scientific investigators to interdisciplinary study areas that offer
great promise of useful knowledge for the future. Useful outcomes of the meeting
will also include the translation of scientific knowledge from multiple sectors
into information useful to public health and environmental regulators.