* 1555647
* SBIR Phase II:  Novel pharmaceutical manufacturing technologies to deliver more affordable medications to patients faster and with better quality
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2016,02/29/2020
* Salvatore Mascia, CONTINUUS Pharmaceuticals, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 02/29/2020
* USD 1,258,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is to enable the availability of a
revolutionary manufacturing process for pharmaceuticals. The project consists of
the development of novel process technologies, as well as the integration of
these processes into an end-to-end continuous manufacturing line that can
produce drugs continuously (24/7 basis). This is different from the current
methodology that produces large quantities of drugs at discrete time points
(e.g. large batch quantities are produced several times a year). A working pilot
plant of this process demonstrated significant operational advantages with a
marketed drug-production time was reduced from 200 days to 2 days, plant
footprint decreased by 90%, projected costs reduced by 50%, while improving
product quality. The impact on society will be considerable: patients will
receive better quality drugs; drug shortages will be greatly reduced; and
pharmaceutical companies will be able to manufacture and distribute their drugs
in a much more cost-effective and efficient manner, allowing them to reallocate
more capital to Research and Development (new drugs developed). Finally, it will
be possible to relocate manufacturing plants and jobs back in the U.S. (more
efficient processes = lower costs).

The proposed project builds upon a successful Phase I SBIR project, as well as
five years of collaboration between a premier research institution and a leading
pharmaceutical company aimed at developing a novel continuous manufacturing
process to overcome the limitations of the current standard, batch
manufacturing. The first objective of this NSF project is to further develop two
novel elements of a multistep, continuous manufacturing process (i.e.
heterogeneous crystallization and electrospinning for solid dosage forms), so
they run reliably under different operating conditions. This is important
because commercial production requires that they perform consistently and
reliably 24/7. Thus, these novel unit operations will be studied under different
operating conditions and starting materials, while their design is optimized.
Success will be defined when the unit operations achieve: 1) maximal operational
efficiency, 2) industry standard manufacturing capabilities, and 3)
qualification to be used across the Research and Development manufacturing
spectrum. The second objective is to integrate these two units into a broader
end-to-end continuous manufacturing process capable of producing high-quality
pharmaceuticals on a continuous basis. The integrated process will also feature
three unit operations on separation, filtration and drying that were developed
during Phase I of this SBIR project.