* 1555123
* CAREER: Exploring Place-Based Opportunities for Bioenergy Sustainability
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2022
* Pankaj Lal, Montclair State University
* Continuing Grant
* Tom Evans
* 07/31/2022
* USD 450,000.00

NATIONAL SCIENCE FOUNDATION&lt;br/&gt;GEOGRAPHY SPATIAL SCIENCES (GSS)
PROGRAM&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Faculty Early-
CAREER Development (CAREER) award will support research that will contribute new
knowledge regarding how geospatial suitability, socioeconomic uncertainty, and
life-cycle analysis-based environmental impacts can be used to develop place-
based policy solutions for forest and agricultural bioenergy development in the
midwestern and southern United States. The investigator will study the
interactions among climate, soil, topography, bioenergy production conditions,
stakeholder participation, and socioeconomic uncertainty to assess their impacts
on the sustainability and development of bioenergy markets. The project will
provide new perspectives for U.S. energy by assessing the sustainable production
of forest and crop-based biomass dedicated to bioenergy production. Project
results will enhance public awareness of bioenergy and will provide educational
and outreach material about renewable energy resources and their conservation
for elementary and middle school students. The educational agenda of this
project will strengthen the talent pool in science, technology engineering, and
mathematics (STEM) disciplines through mentorship of undergraduate and graduate
students, course development, research, and participation in K-12, public
outreach, and environmental education programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
investigator will perform a comprehensive geospatial analyses for bioenergy
suitability by analyzing biophysical factors and by incorporating variables
assessing human factors, such as stakeholder participation and socioeconomic
uncertainty. A geospatial model will be developed to evaluate bioenergy
suitability, while interviews and surveys will be used to assess stakeholder
participation in bioenergy markets. Feedstock planting and harvest decisions
made under uncertain market conditions will be integrated using a reservation
price approach. This approach will ameliorate negative spatial factors
associated with increased bioenergy crops production and will provide a learning
environment to assess the effectiveness of place-based analyses as a policy
instrument. The insights obtained from this innovative project will be adaptable
to other bioenergy feedstocks and regions and will contribute towards
development of longer-term strategies that benefit the agricultural sector and
support rural economies and within the U.S. and globally.