* 1555535
* Collaborative Research: Moving beyond causation: the ecological consequences of the terminal Pleistocene extinction of North American megafauna
* BIO,DEB
* 05/15/2016,06/30/2017
* Sara Lyons, Smithsonian Institution
* Standard Grant
* Betsy Von Holle
* 06/30/2017
* USD 120,000.00

Biodiversity is being lost from ecosystems worldwide, and when it results in the
loss of large-bodied species (megafauna) it can have major consequences for
entire food webs, and the structure and function of those ecosystems. This study
will examine a past major extinction of megafauna in order to understand the
cascading effects on ecosystems. About 13,000 years ago many species of large
mammals in the Americas became extinct. This research will examine the
consequences of the loss of these large carnivores and herbivores from the food
web to the remaining plant and animal communities. The responses seen at this
long-ago event will be used to develop general concepts relevant to modern-day
changes in plant and animal communities. This project will also make fossil data
more easily accessible and interpretable, will improve museum collections, and
will inform the public through outreach activities conducted by the Smithsonian
Institution. This work will also provide graduate and undergraduate students
with research experience that will strengthen the scientific workforce.

The consequences of the loss of tens of millions of large-bodied mammals about
13,000 years ago on the structure and functioning of ecosystems in the Americas
will be examined in order to address four questions: How did the extinction of
large-bodied mammals influence overall community structure and species
interactions at the terminal Pleistocene; Did surviving species become more
abundant or change their geographic distribution; What changes in morphology, if
any, occurred in species that survived the extinction; Did surviving species
alter their dietary niche in response to the extinction of megafauna? Patterns
of abundance, distribution, diet and morphology in the surviving mammals both
before and after the extinction event will be characterized. Using occurrence
information from fossil database compilations, morphology and size will be
determined by measuring fossil limbs and molars, and diet by using stable
isotope analysis. These data will be integrated with reconstructions of
vegetative communities using pollen databases and regional and global
temperature records. An important ecological baseline for the understanding of
contemporary trophic downgrading will be established by characterizing how
terrestrial ecosystems were influenced by humans at an important point in human
history.