* 1556043
* STTR Phase II:  Novel Ionization Process for Materials Characterization using Mass Spectrometry
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2016,06/30/2019
* Sarah Trimpin, MSTM, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2019
* USD 884,191.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) Phase II project will be the discovery of new ionization
technology for use with mass spectrometry. This technology will enable lower
cost, lower energy use, and reduced user expertise, which may potentially drive
mass spectrometry into large and underserved markets such as medical diagnostics
and field portable instruments designed specifically for use in homeland
security, bedside diagnostics, or bio-threat detection. The new technology
changes the current understanding of ionization processes used in mass
spectrometry and provides opportunities for new innovations to advance science
through improved measurements, impacting fields such as health, safety, and
security. The aims of this Phase II project are to develop interfaces to
incorporate the platform developed in Phase I on most major mass spectrometer
manufacturer's instruments and to develop technologies for rapid automate
analyses even of surfaces. The research of Phase II is aimed to better
understand the fundamentals of this new technology in order to drive commercial
success in high sensitivity rapid analyses at a competitive price. Mass
spectrometers are widely used representing a $4 billion industry of which
ionization technology represents a significant commercial
opportunity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This STTR Phase II project proposes to
revolutionize ionization in mass spectrometry by providing commercial products
that utilize a simple and powerful ionization technology. The newly discovered
process spontaneously converts large and small, volatile and nonvolatile
compounds to the gas-phase ions necessary for analysis using mass spectrometry
without employing currently used high cost lasers or high voltage. The method is
broadly applicable for analysis of compounds such as drugs, lipids, carbohydrate
conjugates, peptides, and proteins directly from bodily fluids or tissue, as
well as synthetic polymers and inorganic catalytic surfaces. This technology is
anticipated to augment or even replace older ionization methods in applications
such as clinical analyses, pharmaceuticals, forensics, environmental, and food
safety. The aims of the Phase II project are to implement the multifunctional
platform developed during Phase I on a variety of manufacturer's instruments,
automate the process to allow lower cost and faster analyses, and provide an
automated surface analysis platform. Besides determining the best sample
preparation methodologies and choice of solvents/matrices, the research
objectives include innovative automated sample introduction technologies that
eliminate the need for a conventional "ion source" while reducing the pumping
requirements, which currently hinder development of small, low-cost portable
mass spectrometers.