* 1556260
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Tool Production And Exchange In A Traditional Society
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2016
* Steven Brandt, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 12/31/2016
* USD 7,045.00

Social scientists continue to explore the processes by which raw materials and
crafted objects move about in complex webs of political economic exchange. The
evolution of exchange networks underscores the need to know how people construct
their identity through consumption. Therefore, there is an increasing interest
within archaeology to explore the presence of pre-capitalist market exchange in
ancient states, and to question how these institutions structured material
value, consumer communities, cities, and states. Situated within this broader
context, the project will investigate the processes of how regional trade, state
exchange, and household identity changed with the advent of marketplaces within
a pre-Columbian urban cityscape in Belize, Central America. Through analyses of
obsidian (volcanic glass) artifacts - a durable and economically vital stone
material - this research will (1) reconstruct and trace their movement from
distant raw material sources into the exchange network of a major urban center;
(2) determine how obsidian was distributed to the population through regulated
or unregulated political controls; and (3) explore how the crafting and exchange
of obsidian helped to construct and concretize a shared local identity that
endured for centuries. As crafted materials circulate, they expose
political/economic/social mechanisms that provision consumers (e.g., market
and/or gift exchange). Archaeology has a unique historicized perspective to
study the cultural and socioeconomic value of certain objects and materials
within different cultural groups as they were exchanged over vast distances. The
data generated will enable the emergence of a comprehensive picture in which a
study of materials exposes different societal dynamics. The research also
encourages an increased collaboration whereby archaeologists as material
analysts can expand technical student training through the open sharing of
research methods and data.

Under the guidance of Dr. Steven Brandt (University of Florida), Dr. Diane
Chase, and Dr. Arlen Chase (University of Central Florida), Lucas Martindale
Johnson will investigate ancient Maya regional obsidian exchange, craft
production, ritual and daily events, and the communities that carried out such
actions at the ancient Maya site of Caracol, Belize. Research at this ancient
Maya city-state provides an ideal setting to demonstrate how a study of obsidian
explores regional connections to distant obsidian-rich locations in the
highlands of modern day Mexico, Guatemala, and Honduras and the economic
mechanisms by which the general population were provisioned. By sourcing
obsidian to chemically unique geological locations, the project will discover
the distance and the different social and physical pathways materials traveled
before arriving at a craft production site. By conducting a sourcing analysis in
which elemental composition is ascertained through the use of a portable X-ray
fluorescence machine, this project will determine trade routes and regional
connections. At a later date within the city of Caracol, local household
consumers obtained obsidian crafts to for use as casual tools and/or ritualized
materials. Caracol's crafting and internal exchange mechanisms will be studied
by mapping artifact distributions at more than 200 ancient Maya households
spread over nearly 170 square kilometers (65 square miles). Through mapping
artifact distributions, this research will explore how crafting and craft
exchange may or may not have been controlled by the politically and economically
powerful, as well as investigate how identities are produced through the
production and use of obsidian artifacts.