* 1556127
* SBIR Phase II:  Evaluating the Feasibility of a fully-automated, on-line, real-time analyzer for simultaneous determination of individual THMs and HAAs
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2016,06/30/2019
* Paul Simone, Foundation Instruments
* Standard Grant
* Linda Molnar
* 06/30/2019
* USD 750,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is in the ability of the haloacetic acids
(HAAs) analyzer proposed here to change how superintendents of drinking water
utilities go about understanding their drinking water treatment plants. The HAAs
analyzer will allow superintendents to continuously map, monitor and then
optimize their drinking water treatment practices using detailed and high
quality measurements on the federally-regulated HAAs, which are carcinogens.
Optimizing of the water treatment practices using the HAAs analyzer will reduce
chemical usage (save money) while simultaneously providing the highest quality
drinking water for their customers by minimizing HAAs. The commercial U.S.
market for Drinking Water chemicals, contract operations,
consulting/engineering, instrument and testing is $19.3 billion. The entire U.S.
Water industry market is $86.4 billion. The major target of this proposal is the
28,643 traditional community water systems serving 90 % of the U.S. population.
Some water systems struggled to meet Stage 1 Disinfection By-Product (DBP)
regulations. Stage 2 of these regulations is stricter. The DBP regulations
address long-term (decades' timescale) exposure to HAAs. Superintendents can use
the proposed HAAs analyzer to understand hourly, short-term variations in their
treatment plants to enhance long-term minimization of
HAAs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will commercialize
the first state-of-the-art instrument for fully automated, on-site process
monitoring of the drinking water disinfection by-products known as haloacetic
acids (HAAs). The HAAs analyzer proposed here has the potential to significantly
reduce the cost of water treatment through reduction of treatment chemical usage
at the water treatment plant while simultaneously improving and stabilizing
water quality with respect to the carcinogenic and federally regulated HAAs.
Currently, most drinking water treatment plants use contract laboratories to
determine HAAs concentrations in the distribution system. This approaches can
take 2 - 3 weeks to return the results at a significant expense for the
equivalent hourly data provided by the proposed HAAs analyzer. The research
objectives for this Phase II SBIR proposal are to develop components for the
HAAs analyzer to enable long-term, maintenance free operation with minimal
operator intervention. Simultaneously, costs will be reduced for both
construction and operation of the HAAs analyzer to establish commercial
feasibility. The anticipated results will be a HAAs analyzer that will provide
water treatment personnel individual and Total HAAs concentrations once per
hour, on-site and automatically.