* 1556705
* SG: Selection in Bottlenecked Populations
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2020
* James Estes, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 03/31/2020
* USD 155,854.00

This study will examine genetic changes in sea otter populations using samples
from Pre-Columbian to Modern times. Many rare or endangered species have
experienced sharp population declines known as population "bottlenecks". These
bottlenecks can have deleterious genetic impacts similar to inbreeding and
affect the probability of species recovery. Understanding and quantifying these
effects in populations allows for more effective management and better
prediction of survival outcomes. A model example of a species that has
experienced population bottlenecks is the sea otter. It was hunted almost to
extinction, with numerical declines of &gt;99% during the course of the 18th
-19th century fur trade. The small number of surviving otters increased over the
20th century under careful monitoring and enhanced protection. In this project,
the researchers will endeavor to determine whether the fur trade decline had
lasting impacts on the sea otter genome that can be observed in extant
populations. The researchers will compare genomes of sea otters that lived
before the fur trade to those living today across the entire geographic range.
Native American rubbish deposits, known as middens, dating back to Pre-Columbian
times will supply the prehistoric and historical samples. The researchers will
use cutting-edge gene sequencing technology to identify deleterious genes and
predict their effect on individuals and populations. The results will inform
future management plans for these populations and provide a new precedent for
research on rare and endangered species. Researchers also will work with the
Monterey Bay Aquarium and Smithsonian Conservation Biology Institute to create
exhibits demonstrating how genome sequencing can aid conservation efforts and
provide new genomic insights into a charismatic species that has an essential
role in maintaining coastal kelp forest ecosystems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will utilize low and high coverage genome sequencing of individuals from
six modern and three ancient pre-bottlenecked sea otter populations to
reconstruct demographic history and quantify patterns of deleterious variation
as a proxy for genetic load. A novel analytical framework will be developed
using genetic variation data across multiple time points to study the
relationship between small population size and patterns of deleterious
mutations. Using forward-in-time simulations, null expectations of how genetic
drift should act on different genomic elements will be developed for comparison
to the empirical genomic dataset, and the importance of natural selection in
preserving and purging deleterious variation will be quantified. The roles of
purifying, relaxed and balancing selection will be examined by testing for
enrichment of deleterious variation across genic regions. This research will
provide a framework for distinguishing between moderately and strongly
deleterious mutations and for evaluating the effects of bottlenecks on natural
selection at the molecular level that can be applicable to other systems. As a
result of this research, a variety of recent demographic events in a species
with a complex demographic history will be detected and quantified, patterns of
deleterious mutations across multiple time points will be compared, and patterns
of genetic load will be predicted. Finally, the ways in which purifying and
balancing selection are affected by small population sizes will be evaluated.
The replication of recent extreme demographic events across sea otter
populations and the abundance of pre-fur trade otter samples in Pre-Columbian
middens provide unprecedented opportunities to isolate the effects of a
bottleneck on deleterious variation and genetic load. The results and methods
developed in this study will be broadly applicable to understanding the biology
of small populations, especially those that are endangered.