* 1556072
* SBIR Phase II:  High-Performance Self-Cleaning, Anti-Reflective Coating for Photovoltaic Glass
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/2016,01/31/2021
* Corey Thompson, WattGlass LLC
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 01/31/2021
* USD 1,298,004.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is to reduce the cost of solar generated
electricity by increasing the efficiency of panels and reducing cleaning and
maintenance costs. This improvement is created using a nanoscale glass coating
that increases transmittance of single side coated solar PV glass and creates an
antifogging and self-cleaning surface. These savings increase with photovoltaic
device efficiencies as well, so as the next generation of solar cells will see
even greater benefit from the proposed innovation. Reducing the cost per watt of
solar generated electricity is one of the grand energy challenges and has
immense societal and governmental impacts. The proposed project is one component
of addressing that challenge. The technical advances made in this project will
also be applicable to additional market opportunities in LED lighting and other
cutting-edge markets.

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project investigates the
deposition of water-based nanoparticle solutions using industrially scalable
methods and results in valuable scientific knowledge that is not currently
available in the field. Nanoparticle-based antireflective glass coatings have
been presented in both the scientific literature and commercial products.
However, most coatings suffer from either high deposition costs, or a trade-off
between durability and performance. In this project, methods to increase the
durability of a low-cost, high-performance nanoparticle that were developed in
the Phase I project are scaled to high throughput and low cost fabrication
methods. The process/structure/property relationships of this novel coating will
be investigated and lead to new scientific knowledge related to the large-scale
deployment of nanoparticle based technologies. The coated glass will be
subjected to industry standard reliability and durability tests. The expected
outcome of this work is the demonstration of this technology at a pilot level
with industry collaborators.