* 1556138
* IDBR:  Type A.  Photovoltaics allow ultra-miniaturized, long-life, wildlife tags
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/2016,09/30/2022
* David Winkler, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 09/30/2022
* USD 554,745.00

An award is made to Cornell University to fund a dramatic increase in the kinds
and numbers of vertebrate species that can be tracked and monitored by the
development of a new generation of lightweight yet highly functional tags. The
work of the TABER (Technology for Animal Biology and Environmental Research)
group at Cornell is like a real-life project team for engineering students. In
the course of this project, the principal investigator and professional
engineers will interact with at least a dozen engineering students, and they
will interact with biologists and professional engineers in designing and
producing devices that will be applied immediately to answer real-world
questions about wildlife biology and conservation. This will give students a
distinctive chance to have their design efforts make a difference outside
Cornell. Because of the structure of the dissemination plan, the roll out of
each new design is part of the research of collaborating scientists around the
world, and this use has broader impacts in both basic and applied biology and
ecology and "word of mouth" circulation among potential users and collaborators
world-wide. A graduate student will be funded to make environmental sensors
available to a very wide audience by producing multi-purpose boards to be
distributed on Seeed Studio, along with instructional materials on sensor design
and construction techniques. News of the project's progress will be passed
whenever possible through a network of highly effective communication colleagues
in the Colleges of Engineering and Agriculture and Life Sciences and the
Education and Multimedia groups at the Cornell Lab of
Ornithology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through the development of a General-purpose
Programmable Tag (GPT) and a Digital Turnstile Tag (DTT), this project will
extend the limits of how small extremely long-lived tags can be. The GPT
functions much like traditional beeper tags, with limited abilities to telemeter
data, but small size (ca. 0.4 g) and a lifespan longer than that of most birds.
Proposed improvements in tag design and antenna placement should dramatically
decrease problems for birds wearing the tags, and the proposed information
infrastructure that will follow the tags from programming to deployment should
make the tag id data highly functional and reliable for all users. This tag has
the potential to revolutionize the real-time monitoring of bird migration and
the study of dispersal. The proposed DTT would decline to as little as 1 g in
mass, and, though it will be optimized to collect solar geolocation data at
first, the same platform could be used for an extremely broad array of sensing
applications in an open-ended Lab-on-a-Bird platform. In its geolocation
function, the DTT would leverage all the progress that has been made recently
with geolocation loggers and extend dramatically the range of species to which
the technology can be applied by removing the requirement for repeat capture for
data recovery in a very small package.