* 1556371
* SG: Is Pollinator Discrimination Among Populations of the Southwestern Desert Creosote Bush Differing in Chromosome Number Promoting Speciation?
* BIO,DEB
* 02/01/2016,02/28/2019
* Diana Pilson, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Jodie Jawor
* 02/28/2019
* USD 149,999.00

This research will investigate the role of polyploidy in flowering plant
diversification by studying pollinator preferences and reproductive interactions
between plants differing in chromosome complement in the desert shrub creosote
bush (Larrea tridentata). Determining the processes by which one species becomes
two is crucial to understanding patterns of biodiversity and the functioning of
ecosystems. Speciation, the process of new species formation, occurs when
barriers to reproduction evolve between populations or groups. However, studying
speciation for flowering plant species with multiple chromosome sets - a
condition known as polyploidy - has proven difficult. Most flowering plants are
polyploid, and groups with different chromosome numbers cannot easily
interbreed, yet they are rarely recognized as different species. Reasons for
this range from the physical similarity between plants with different chromosome
numbers, to whether they have adapted to different environments. Although
creosote bush with different chromosome complements inhabit ecologically
distinct areas, they sometimes co-occur suggesting additional reproductive
barriers are responsible for divergence. By combining DNA analyses, greenhouse
experiments, and field investigations, this project will provide unprecedented
insight into the early stages of speciation for groups of plants with different
chromosome complements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of this
research is to bring polyploid species under the larger umbrella of speciation
research by elucidating the biological significance of genome duplication to
plant diversification. Polyploidy, especially autopolyploidy, where genome
duplication occurs within a lineage rather than through hybridization, poses
many challenges for evolutionary biologists, including understanding the
relative importance of ecological and intrinsic genetic processes to
diversification. Population-level analyses are critical for evaluating how
plant-animal interactions and ecological adaptation influence divergence among
"intraspecific" groups differing in chromosome complement, and whether
diversification of polyploid species is similar to model diploid species.
Moreover, this project, focused on the keystone plant species Larrea tridentata
and its native pollinators in sensitive North American desert biomes, will help
characterize the novel molecular diversity and ecological interactions
comprising the cryptic biodiversity of polyploid species. The taxonomic
recognition of populations differing in chromosome complement could
significantly alter biodiversity estimates for certain parts of the world,
especially temperate biomes, impacting our understanding of major ecological
patterns.