* 1556407
* IRES: International Research Experience for Students on the Behavioral Ecology and Conservation of African Carnivores
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Kay Holekamp, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Anne Emig
* 06/30/2020
* USD 249,999.00

Title: IRES: International research experience for students on the behavioral
ecology and conservation of African carnivores

Nontechnical abstract This international research training program allows
advanced undergraduates and junior graduate students to spend extended periods
conducting field research on free-living African carnivores in Kenya, building
on a strong long-term program of carnivore research in the Masai Mara National
Reserve. Several students each year will undertake projects designed to acquire
new and useful information about the carnivores inhabiting the Mara-Serengeti
ecosystem, and to develop strong, long-lasting professional relationships with
Kenyan scientists. A strong team of American and Kenyan trainers will help
students address a broad array of research questions about the behavior,
conservation and physiology of African carnivores, ranging from the evolution of
their cognitive abilities to the effects of human activity on their stress
physiology. Pairs of undergraduate and graduate students will be linked by
topical research focus, and work closely with local experts. While in Kenya,
students will receive explicit training in science writing, and present their
work at an annual conference on carnivore biology sponsored by the Kenya
Wildlife Service. The research opportunities offered to students here are
unparalleled, not only to investigate the biology of several carnivore species
that remain very poorly understood, but also to make important contributions to
behavioral ecology, stress physiology and conservation biology. The knowledge
acquired in this research should facilitate conservation of African carnivores,
and thus contribute to the economic well-being of Kenya, which is intimately
linked with revenues from eco-tourism. This research program will also
contribute significantly to the professional development of a new generation of
global scientists who are united in their desire to understand and protect the
natural world.

Technical abstract The intellectual focus of this project is the behavioral
ecology, physiology, and conservation of African carnivores. Mammalian
carnivores are critical to the stability and integrity of ecosystems around the
world, largely because they play key roles in regulating such important
ecosystem processes as interspecific competition and predator-prey dynamics.
Despite their importance, however, carnivores are in global decline due to a
combination of habitat degradation and direct human persecution. In fact, today
many carnivore populations are declining even within protected areas. It has
become clear in recent years that our ability to conserve mammalian carnivores,
including most of those in Africa, is limited by a dearth of knowledge about
many aspects of their basic biology. This international research training
program aims to fill these gaps in our knowledge in regard to African
carnivores, and to apply that new knowledge to improving carnivore management;
this program should thus ultimately facilitate carnivore conservation across the
African continent. During the proposed funding period, students will use
experimental and observational methods to test hypotheses suggesting 1)
relationships among social complexity, foraging demands and general
intelligence, 2) endocrine substrates of cooperative behavior, 3) how
anthropogenic activities affect the behavior, physiology and demography of
mammalian carnivores, and 4) best carnivore management practices. This is the
only training program in the United States where both undergraduate and graduate
students can obtain field research experience investigating the biology of free-
living African carnivores. Most past participants in this program have reported
their experiences in Kenya to be life-changing, setting them on trajectories of
professional development they otherwise never would have dreamed possible.