* 1556698
* Collaborative Research: Replicated evolution of leaf form in a neo-tropical radiation of Viburnum (Adoxaceae)
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2016,09/30/2017
* Erika Edwards, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 09/30/2017
* USD 397,253.00

Much remains unknown about the genesis of biological diversity, including the
origin of new species, yet such knowledge is critical to understand evolution
and to make predictions about responses to rapid environmental change. This
research will investigate a striking case in a group of trees and shrubs
(Viburnum) in which rapid differentiation appears to have occurred repeatedly
into two radically different plant forms. Major differences in the leaves of
these plants appear to have resulted from adaptation to adjacent forest types
that differ subtly in environmental variables. The evident replication of this
process in several different mountain regions throughout the New World tropics,
provides a rare opportunity to critically test a model of rapid ecological
speciation. Detailed studies of adjacent plant populations will be carried out
in different mountain regions in Mexico with the aim of identifying the
environmental factors and the nature of the variation within populations that
have favored the rapid evolution of these leaf traits. It should also be
possible to identify genes that underlie these key plant characteristics by
taking advantage of natural hybridization between these species. These studies
will yield general insights into speciation but also into the adaptive
significance of the leaf traits that differentiate related species throughout
the flowering plants. This research will be carried out in collaboration with
Mexican scientists and will involve multiple undergraduate and graduate
students. Outreach activities have been designed to foster interactions between
participants from the United States and Mexico.

This project focuses specifically on understanding the drivers of speciation in
three species pairs in the mountains of Eastern and Southern Mexico. The two
species in each pair differ dramatically in leaf size and shape (large and round
versus small and elliptical), in leaf margins (toothed versus smooth), and in
leaf pubescence (densely hairy versus lacking hairs). The research will focus on
quantifying variation within individual plants, within populations, and between
the species pairs, and on determining the abiotic and biotic factors that differ
between their forest habitats. Hypotheses on the adaptive value of the leaf
variables will be tested using transects between adjacent habitats and a
reciprocal transplant experiment. In areas that have long been disturbed by
indigenous agricultural practices, extensive hybridization has resulted in a
wide array of intermediate leaf forms. Molecular analyses of these hybrid swarms
should allow the identification of the major genes that underlie differences in
leaf form.

This project is jointly funded with the Office of International Science and
Engineering.