* 1556820
* Collaborative Research: Effects of Genetic Diversity, Epigenetic Change, and Root-associated Fungal Colonization on Trait Variation in the Foundation plant Spartina alterniflora
* BIO,IOS
* 02/15/2016,01/31/2020
* Christina Richards, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 01/31/2020
* USD 397,129.00

Issues as diverse as diagnosing human health problems and understanding
organismal response to the environment rely on deciphering how DNA sequences are
translated into important traits. This project focuses on salt marshes,
important coastal habitats that benefit humans by supporting key fisheries and
providing protection from large oceanic storms. It takes advantage of novel DNA
sequencing approaches to examine how different strains of a critical salt marsh
plant react to stressful environmental variation, and how responses to stress
may be facilitated by interactions with an understudied stress-tolerant fungus.
In addition to benefiting salt marshes, this type of understanding is critical
for predicting response to changing environments, managing biodiversity,
developing sustainable crops, and improving treatments for disease. The project
will support the education and training of students at multiple levels,
including undergraduate students from diverse and under-served populations.
Additionally, the project will be led by three female investigators, serving as
role models for women in science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will
examine the relationships among plant genetic and epigenetic diversity, root-
associated fungi, and plant structural and physiological trait variation
(morphology, nutrient content, salt tolerance) across an inundation gradient in
the intertidal foundation plant species Spartina alterniflora. Specifically, the
project combines genomic approaches with field surveys and experiments in the
greenhouse and the field to address the following questions: (1) How are plant
genetic and epigenetic variation, root-associated fungi, and plant structural
and physiological traits related across an intertidal gradient?; (2) Does the
presence and strain of root-associated fungi affect plant structural and
physiological trait response to abiotic variables, and is this effect mediated
by epigenetic change?; and (3) How are candidate genes or gene networks involved
in the structural and physiological response to the biotic and abiotic
environment, and are they epigenetically regulated? The work takes advantage of
a novel reduced representation DNA sequencing epiGBS protocol with bisulphite
treated DNA to measure genetic and epigenetic diversity in S. alterniflora.
Additionally, next generation sequencing of fungal isolates will allow for
documentation of the role of dark septate endophytes in the response of this
critical foundation species to its dynamic salt marsh habitat.