* 1556701
* Collaborative Research: Advancing Bayesian phylogenetic methods for synthesizing paleontological and neontological data
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2021
* Robert Meredith, Montclair State University
* Standard Grant
* Katharina Dittmar
* 04/30/2021
* USD 136,451.00

Combining data from living species and the fossil record provides a rich
perspective for understanding the evolutionary processes responsible for
generating the biodiversity observed in nature. Although methods for combining
these data have made significant advances, these approaches still do not
consider the completeness and sampling of the fossil record or the geographical
distributions of living and fossil species. For this project, the investigators
will integrate statistical models for describing how fossils are sampled over
time and where species are found. These models for estimating species
relationships will be developed in widely used software packages, making them
broadly accessible to other researchers. These new methods will be tested using
both simulated and real datasets. Specifically, two vertebrate groups with rich
fossil records will be studied: penguins and crocodyliforms (crocodiles,
alligators, gharials, and extinct relatives). This work will help to uncover how
rates of speciation and extinction have changed over time for these species. The
methods developed as part of this project will be taught in workshops for
evolutionary biologists. Additionally, results from analyses of data from living
and fossil penguins will be contributed to a public museum exhibit at the Bruce
Museum in Greenwich, CT. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In recent years, advances in
phylogenetic inference methods have provided ways to integrate fossil and extant
taxa. These approaches allow simultaneous estimation of the divergence times and
phylogenetic relationships of extant and fossil species, thus making full use of
morphological and temporal data, rather than just molecular sequence data from
living species. Approaches combining fossil and extant taxa have opened the door
for fully integrative phylogenetic methods that use more sources of biological
data, including stratigraphy, sampling, and biogeography. Thus, there is a need
for comprehensive statistical models and methods that accommodate this
information. The investigators will develop new, Bayesian statistical models,
extensions of stochastic birth-death processes, that will integrate information
about the fossil record and biogeography for use in phylogenetic methods that
consider both extant and fossil taxa. The new models will be implemented in the
program RevBayes. The performance and adequacy of new and previously described
models will be evaluated using simulated and empirical datasets. New methods
will be used to investigate macroevolutionary patterns in two exemplar clades:
Sphenisciformes (penguins) and Crocodyliformes, addressing key hypotheses about
phylogenetic relationships, lineage diversification, and biogeography.