* 1556568
* SG: The role of species interactions and coevolution in speciation
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2020
* Kari Segraves, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 03/31/2020
* USD 156,028.00

Plants and insects are groups with large numbers of species that have big
impacts on both natural and agricultural systems. One reason these groups are
thought to be so diverse is because of their interactions with one another.
Evolutionary change in plants can impact evolutionary change in insects, and
this is likely one mechanism by which new species are formed, a central question
in evolutionary biology research. These reciprocal evolutionary responses might
be caused by two different types of interactions between plants and insects. One
type of interaction, termed mutualism, is mutually beneficial to both species.
For example, insect pollinators move pollen among plants as they gather food,
and both the plants and insects benefit from this type of interaction. A second
type of interaction is antagonism, where one species benefits at the cost of the
other. Insects use of plants as food is an example of antagonism that has led to
the evolution of toxic plant chemicals, many of which are used in medical
applications. One major unanswered question is whether the diversity of plants
and insects observed in nature is mainly the result of mutualistic or
antagonistic interactions. Understanding the relative roles of each is critical
for predicting how plant and insects will respond to each other through time and
will help guide strategies for increasing pollination services provided by
insects and reducing the impact of insect pests. In addition, the research will
be used in creating a workshop for middle school students through hands-on
experiments examining the importance of plant-insect interactions in natural and
agricultural settings. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will use a textbook
example of coevolution and adaptive radiation to test the relative roles of
mutualistic and antagonistic coevolution in generating reproductive isolation
and speciation. The obligate specialized interaction between yuccas and their
yucca moth pollinators has both mutualistic and antagonistic components. Female
moths use specialized tentacular mouthparts to collect pollen and actively
pollinate yuccas, and then deposit eggs near developing yucca seeds that their
larvae eat. The evolution of tentacles has been suggested to be a key innovation
in the mutualism and diversification of pollinator moths. Although previous
research has highlighted trait divergence in antagonistic traits, there has been
no comparative survey of trait divergence in the key mutualistic trait, moth
tentacles, or of pollination behavior. Comparative analyses of mutualistic and
antagonistic traits will be combined with tests of performance of pollinators on
natal vs. non-natal yucca species. Specifically, we will compare the ability of
moths to be effective pollinators and herbivores across many yucca species.
These analyses will be combined with the examination of mating abilities among
host forms of the only generalist moth pollinator species to test if changes in
mutualistic or antagonistic traits are instrumental in promoting the formation
of reproductive isolation. The project will be the first direct test of how
coevolution and the type of species interaction among interacting lineages
translates into reproductive isolation and species diversification linking
microevolutionary processes with macroevolutionary patterns.