* 1556253
* IDBR: TYPE A- The ThruProt Analyzer: Bringing Proteomics to the Field Using a Sample-to-Answer Electronic Multiplexed Platform
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2021
* Paul Falkowski, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 03/31/2021
* USD 344,942.00

An award is made to Rutgers University New Brunswick to develop a battery
powered handheld sensitive instrument whose purpose is to detect panels of
proteins for field based environmental monitoring. A portable device for protein
analysis virtually impacts all fields of biology and also the biomedical
sciences. Protein analysis of environmental samples typically requires
collecting and storing samples and returning weeks to months later in labs to
begin analyzing the data. The proposed instrument will instead allow for point-
of-use on the field analysis of biological samples. The result of this research
will be an instrument that is handheld and generalizable to the needs of
individual biological laboratories. This disruptive tool will be valuable for
basic biology, as well as clinical, biotechnological, and agricultural research.
This tool will also have greater societal benefits including improving
agricultural practices and deeper insights into environmental biology, which is
necessary for protecting the environment. This is multidisciplinary work that
combines engineering, nanofabrication, chemistry, physics, and biology and
provides a great opportunity to educate and train graduate students,
undergraduates, and high school students. One of the important educational
outcomes of the proposed research includes building teaching modules that will
be incorporated into a massive open online course (MOOC) in biosensor and
bioinstrumentation development. Collaborations will be developed with the
Rutgers Office for Diversity and Academic Success in the Sciences to attract
under-represented students to the study of STEM
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed sample-to-answer portable protein
analyzer to be developed will utilize 1) on-chip microfluidic sample
preparation, 2) decoupled digital protein detection for quantification of low
abundance proteins 3) nanoelectronic barcoding of beads for enabling
multiplexing capability, and 4) on-chip magnet based fluidic peristaltic pumping
for maintaining an ultra-compact footprint. Nanoelectronic barcoding works by
fabricating tunable nano-capacitors on the microparticle surface, effectively
modulating the frequency dependent dielectric properties of the particles
allowing one bead barcode to be distinguished from another, potentially on the
scale of 100-fold multiplexing. By using electronic based solutions for all of
the key modules of the proposed instrument, the cost and size of the readout
instrumentation can be significantly reduced, thus truly enabling on-the-field
analysis. The devices will be validated in the field with environmental samples,
benchmarking for detection limit, accuracy, and assay time for a panel of
photosynthesis proteins from the green alga Picochlorum. The results will be
shared with the engineering and experimental biology communities via
presentations at professional meetings and submission to peer-reviewed journals.
The research value of the instrument will be broadly disseminated through
partnerships with the Rutgers BioMAPS Institute for Quantitative Biology and the
Rutgers Center for Integrated Proteomic Research. To prepare for
commercialization of the technology and broad distribution, there will be close
collaboration with the Rutgers Center for Innovative Ventures of Emerging
Technologies and the Rutgers Office of Technology Commercialization.