* 1556186
* IDBR:  TYPE A: Multispectral laser 3D ranging and imaging system for plant phenotyping
* BIO,DBI
* 04/15/2016,03/31/2020
* Harkamal Walia, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 03/31/2020
* USD 534,194.00

An award is made to University of Nebraska-Lincoln (UNL) to develop a multi-
wavelength LASER ranging and imaging instrument for phenotyping plant shoots at
the whole plant level. Producing enough food and energy for a world population
likely exceeding 9.7 billion by 2050 is the greatest challenge facing
agriculture. Compared to modern genomic sequencing technologies, plant phenomics
lags behind in its capacity and throughput. The instrument developed in this
research will alleviate this limitation, allow more efficient genotype-phenotype
analysis, and ultimately catalyze the acceleration of crop improvements (in
terms of yield and stress tolerance) to solve the looming global food security
challenge. The project will foster a collaborative environment where the
postdoc, graduate and undergraduate students will receive interdisciplinary
training in plant biology, biological engineering, and computer science. The
team will develop course materials that allow students in traditional plant
biology to learn the new domain knowledge of sensing, instrumentation and data
processing (this is a perceived gap in university plant biology curriculum).
Discoveries from the project will be presented at international conferences on
plant science and biological engineering and published in peer reviewed
journals. The team will also collaborate with plant scientists at UNL and plant
phenotyping groups around the world for the broad dissemination of the
instrument. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This instrument can simultaneously probe
chemical properties of plants (such as water, nitrogen, and chlorophyll
concentration) through LASER imaging and measure 3D plant structure (such as
size and spatial orientation of individual leaves) through LASER ranging.
Through these measurements, more parameters related to plant physiology and
functions (such as photosynthesis and stomatal activity) can be extracted. All
the parameters will be spatially co-registered, eliminating the need for tedious
data fusion. New algorithms will be developed to process massive 3D LASER point
clouds and reconstruct plant leaf and stem surfaces. The performance of the
instrument will be rigorously validated through a series of experiments
involving stressed versus healthy plants. Taken together, the instrument
provides transformative improvement in both capacity and throughput for plant
shoot phenotyping, which will in turn benefit many fields of basic and applied
plant biology research.