* 1556855
* Epigenetic stability and its evolutionary potential
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2023
* Kathleen Donohue, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 03/31/2023
* USD 1,276,250.00

This study will examine how environmental conditions that alter patterns of gene
expression and are passed to offspring can influence the process of evolution.
Environmental conditions can cause changes in the characteristics of
individuals, including their morphology, physiology, development, and behavior.
Such environmental effects can be ephemeral, or they can persist for whole
lifespans or even beyond a single generation. Studying such effects is central
to our understanding of the process of evolution, especially as it might be
affected by climate change. Epigenetics refers to mechanisms that alter how
genetic sequences are translated into functional gene products, and certain
epigenetic mechanisms have been implicated in environmental effects on the
characteristics of individuals. It has been argued that epigenetic modifications
that are stable across generations can be an important source of genetic
variation upon which natural selection can act, and that such variation may even
be non-random with respect to environmental context and adaptive value. This
hypothesis raises a number of compelling questions. First, which epigenetic
changes are environmentally induced, and do environment-dependent versus
independent changes differ in their stability of inheritance? Second, is the
stability of epigenetic alterations itself heritable? Third, is the stability of
epigenetic modifications adaptive, and if so, under what conditions?
Additionally, this project will train students from high school to graduate
school and promote international engagement by graduate students and post-
doctoral scholars.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The research program will use
Arabidopsis thaliana to test for natural variation in the stability of genome-
wide methylation states within and across generations, to test whether such
stability depends on environmental conditions, and to test whether
environmentally induced changes in methylation state are more or less stable
than methylation that does not respond to environmental conditions. As such, it
tests the prediction that environmentally-induced epigenetic changes can be an
important source of heritable phenotypic variation that can contribute to
adaptive evolution. Second, a QTL analysis of methylation states, their
stability, and their environmental reversibility will test whether methylation
stability has a genetic basis. It will also provide information on the number of
methylation states that are regulated by a given QTL, and it will test whether
loci that regulate methylation stability within and across generations are
genetically associated with loci that regulate their environmental
reversibility/stability. Finally, the research will test whether loci that
regulate methylation states and their stability are also associated with
adaptively significant phenotypes and with fitness itself under constant and
variable environments. This research targets the stability of epigenetic changes
as a key phenotype by testing whether epigenetic stability has a heritable
genetic basis and whether it is adaptive under stable and variable environments.