* 1556121
* SBIR Phase II:  New ingredients technology to enhance the safety, quality, and value of active substances for pharmaceuticals, food, and personal care
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2016,05/31/2019
* Henry Havel, PHYTOPTION LLC
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 05/31/2019
* USD 909,741.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project will be accomplished through a proprietary
technology with its extraordinary capability to enable a large number of high-
value, hard-to-formulate active ingredients for pharmaceutical, food, and
personal care products. In the pharmaceutical and personal care industries, this
technology is able to solubilize and enable poorly water-soluble drug substances
to achieve enhanced therapeutic effect, improved safety profile, and reduced
cost. In addition, it may strongly support the long-term activities of drug
discovery and development through activating potentially efficacious, but hard-
to-handle chemical entities. By supporting new drugs development and reducing
manufacturing cost, this technology will benefit the public health and meanwhile
create commercial values to the industry. In the food and supplement industries,
this technology may enable the industry to replace non-healthy or even hazardous
additives, such as artificial colors and preservatives, with natural and healthy
alternatives, thus greatly contribute to long-term food safety and security as
well as public health. To achieve commercialization success, a solid portfolio
of intellectual properties has been established. Seasoned business leaders will
work with renowned scientists to incorporate cutting-edge technologies into
drug, food &amp; nutrition, and personal care products.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will substantially support the
development of this new technology. The core problem/opportunity this technology
targets is a large number of high-value whereas poorly water-soluble active
ingredients that have been challenging the drug and food industry for a long
time. For example, around 80% of drug candidates identified by modern drug
discovery technologies are poorly water-soluble. For food, a large number of
vitamins, nutrients, antioxidants, and natural colors are poorly water-soluble.
Overall, poorly water-soluble compounds constitute an enormous formulation
challenge. To address this need, this team has created a platform technology
that is highly effective and non-specific. The goal of this project is to
further develop the technology, scale up the synthesis of a core material,
obtain the data on its safety profile, and advance the commercialization
activities by providing prototypes to potential customers. This project will be
conducted through close collaborations among the start-up company, a major
university, and a number of major pharmaceutical, ingredients, food, and
personal care companies. The deliverables of this project include the
specifications of core material, initial safety evaluations, and prototypes
provided to customers. This project will support the start-up company to form a
solid foundation for commercialization and long-term growth.