* 1556385
* IDBR: TYPE A: Development of an Animal Tracking Tag for Biological Research: Refractive Index for Rapid Georeferenced Salinity Measurements over a Wide Dynamic Range
* BIO,DBI
* 05/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Robert Short, SRI International
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 08/31/2019
* USD 611,629.00

An award is made to SRI International to develop small tags which will be
attached to marine animals and acquire data from the ocean environment. The
first prototype tags will be sized for medium to large animals, such as
penguins, turtles, and sharks. These data tags will record information central
to understanding animal migration. In more general applications, the increased
amount of data obtained by the tags will provide valuable information to
scientists and policymakers to help understand the complex properties and
changes in the ocean and other aquatic environments, thus aiding conservation
efforts. Important areas for study include estuarine environments, where rapid
profiling can record dynamic conditions, and low and high salinity areas such as
choked lagoons, coastal isolated lakes, and subglacial lakes. The data will
enhance our ability to understand seasonal variations, changes caused by human
populations and activities, and global climate change. This project will support
three undergraduate student internships (one chemical engineer and two
biologists). The project will also include a lesson plan on ocean salinity
measurements for a local high school with a high percentage of underrepresented
groups to increase interest in science, technology, engineering, and math (STEM)
education, and to encourage young students to consider multidisciplinary careers
in engineering and the sciences with environmental conservation in mind.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sensors in the innovative tags will measure water
temperature, depth, and salinity (the amount of dissolved salts), which are
interrelated indicators of ecosystem health. The data produced will be geo-
referenced; that is, the tag will provide a location of the collected
information. These tags will differ from current commercial devices by measuring
salinity as a function of the optical properties of the water (the refractive
index) by detecting and recording changes in the interaction of light with the
sensor (patent pending). The major advantages of the optical measurement include
fast operation, wide dynamic range, and cost effectiveness for the attainable
resolution. The parameters collected by the tag will provide valuable
information about the marine environment that can be correlated to locations
where specific animals travel to satisfy their basic food and reproduction
needs, and will provide insight into habitat changes linked to declining marine
populations.