* 1556314
* I-Corps: Sensing device to prevent and control glaucoma
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2015,02/29/2016
* Karl Bohringer, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* lydia mcclure
* 02/29/2016
* USD 50,000.00

Glaucoma is a group of diseases that can damage the eye's optic nerve and result
in vision loss and blindness. Half of Americans living with glaucoma are unaware
of their condition. This is because glaucoma sufferers often do not experience
any symptoms until irreparable damage has occurred. Adding to this problem is
the difficulty of professional diagnosis. Patients who attend all recommended
eye wellness exams will see an ophthalmologist every 1-2 years, at which time
they will receive a tonometry exam to check for glaucoma. A tonometry test takes
a single measurement of the eye pressure, but glaucoma may remain undetected if
the patient's pressure happened to fluctuate to the low end during the annual
visit. In addition, irreversible damage and blindness could occur during the
long time span between visits. The cost burden associated with nursing care for
visually impaired and blind Americans amounts to $13.2 billion from government
agencies (Medicare, Medicaid specifically), as well as an additional $1.3
billion from private insurance companies, and $5.7 billion in out-of-pocket
expenses for seniors and their families. This project aims to develop a solution
that offers mobile and continuous monitoring for patients at higher risk of
developing glaucoma by upgrading currently implanted lenses for cataracts.
Monitoring is performed by the patient placing an external readout unit in
proximity to the eye. This simple add-on to an existing product and procedure
will reduce the incidence and extent of blindness in glaucoma patients, and will
decrease the costs associated with irreversible eye damage caused by glaucoma.

The product being developed is a system that is comprised of an intraocular
pressure sensor and an associated reader system that reports intraocular
pressure in real-time. The product is really a two-component system formed of
the pressure sensor and reader. The implantable pressure sensor is solely
fabricated of biocompatible materials that form a resonating structure that
changes in resonant frequency as the pressure in the eye varies. The sensor is
embedded or laminated on current prosthetic lenses used in cataract surgeries.
The sensor contains no power supply or internal circuit, hence it does not
easily fail or get out of date. In addition, no hazardous materials are
introduced in the eye. The associated reader remotely interrogates (pings) the
resonant sensors by emitting a low power radio frequency (RF) signal and
monitors the reflected signal from the sensor. Changes in pressure will cause
the reader to read different response frequencies. The reader system will track
pressure variation frequently to provide trends and will alert the patient
and/or physician if the pressure increases to levels that can permanently damage
the optic nerve. The intent is to create a simple reader that can be a
standalone device, an add-on piece of hardware using smart phones, or a sub-
system addition to wearable health monitoring systems. The scope of this
proposal is to complete the development of mass producible pressure sensors,
development of a reader prototype, and robustness testing of the system, most
notably identifying limitations on the RF link, sensor implant reliability, and
potential sensor drift or calibration issues. This product is the first of many
potential systems for remotely monitoring conditions in the body using the
passive RF sensors and with external readers.