* 1556128
* SBIR Phase II:  Encased Cantilevers for Ultra-Sensitive Force and Mass Sensing in Liquids
* TIP,TI
* 04/15/2016,03/31/2019
* Dominik Ziegler, Scuba Probe Technologies
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 03/31/2019
* USD 797,007.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will improve the
performance of encased atomic force microscopy (AFM) cantilevers, reduce their
fabrication costs, and optimize their properties for next-generation scanned
probe microscopy technologies. Atomic force microscopy is a workhorse technique
for providing nanometer-scale information of materials, but its performance is
compromised by viscous damping when operated in fluid. The encased cantilevers
to be developed in this project significantly reduces damping, leading to high
force sensitivity and performance which is identical to AFM imaging done in air.
This aids quantitative interpretation of data and simplifies instrument
operation. Encased cantilevers are a drop-in replacement, permitting the
transformation of existing instruments into cutting-edge tools simply by
exchanging the probe. The impacts of these products will be felt in fields from
biology to clean energy to materials science.

The first technical objective of this research is to create new cantilever
geometries that push the performance of our devices to the theoretical limits.
The Phase I research resulted in a novel low-cost technique to fabricate encased
cantilevers, thanks to the development of specialized semi-automated processing
and quality control tools. The next technical objective of Phase II research is
to further reduce fabrication costs by improving yields, increasing batch size,
and implementing more manufacturing automation. We expect to demonstrate low-
cost processing methods in which many high quality probes are fabricated
efficiently. The third technical objective is to optimize these devices for
next-generation scanned probe technologies including quantitative nanomechanical
mapping, high-speed imaging and promising novel techniques such as photo induced
force microscopy. At the end of the project period we will have optimized
products specifically targeting these high growth applications.