* 1556208
* LTREB Renewal: High-amplitude midge fluctuations and the ecosystem dynamics of Lake Myvatn, Iceland
* BIO,DEB
* 03/15/2016,02/28/2023
* Randall Jackson, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Kari Segraves
* 02/28/2023
* USD 517,324.00

Dramatic 'outbreaks' of organisms - locusts, lemmings, insects - draw public
attention to the natural world, in part because scientists do not completely
understand the causes for these population surges. This study will investigate
midges in Lake Mývatn, Iceland, and why their abundance fluctuates over 4 orders
of magnitude in irregular cycles lasting 4-7 years. Adult midges that emerge
from the lake die on shore. During high-midge years, the weight of midges that
are deposited in the surrounding heathland is equivalent to 10 humpback whales,
providing food for predators and scavengers, nutrients for plants, and the basis
for local agriculture. By synthesizing results from field samples and
experiments over several population cycles, this project promises new insights
into fundamental scientific questions about the causes and consequences of
population outbreaks. The project will engage graduate and undergraduate
students who will work at Mývatn each summer, providing them exposure to extreme
biology as well as to educational diversity, as they work in both the lake and
on the shoreline under the tutelage of an interdisciplinary group of scientists.
The public will learn more about midge outbreaks through an ongoing 'Smidge of
Midge' blog.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ecosystems that show huge changes through time
can reveal the ecological forces that stabilize or destabilize natural dynamics.
This project involves both long-term data collection in aquatic and terrestrial
systems and targeted experiments to test specific hypotheses. The aquatic data
collection will build and expand on an existing database that dates back to the
1970s. The project has added weekly monitoring of many additional variables,
including midge larvae density, benthic primary production, and pelagic
nutrients. The collection of terrestrial data has continued with the monitoring
of midge infall and arthropod communities along transects around the lake that
were established in 2008. A suite of targeted experiments will address a wide
range of research questions such as (i) the role that midges play as ecosystem
engineers, changing benthic conditions to favor large-bodied epibenthic
cladocerans over small-bodied infaunal species, (ii) the mutualistic effect that
midge larvae have on algal growth, and (iii) the importance of midge adults for
the flowering of carnivorous plants. These experimental projects are led by
graduate students as part of their PhD theses, and by undergraduate interns as
independent projects. This combination of aquatic and terrestrial experiments
together with regular sampling will test hypotheses about how the lake and
shoreline ecosystems are linked together. The research will examine whether the
instability of the lake ecosystem could drive instability of the surrounding
ecosystem on land.