* 1556559
* Collaborative Research: Survey and Analysis of the Angolan Herpetofauna
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2021
* David Blackburn, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Katharina Dittmar
* 05/31/2021
* USD 317,664.00

Angola is among the largest countries in Africa, and its landscapes vary from
arid desert to equatorial rainforest. This landscape diversity results in high,
but poorly documented, levels of biodiversity in many groups, including
amphibians and reptiles. This project will increase understanding of the
diversity and evolution of Angola's amphibians and reptiles by analyzing
species' distributions, abundances, genetics, and anatomy. Based on these data,
undocumented species will be identified, characterized and formally described.
Two major hypotheses will be tested: whether arid-adapted species of S.W. Angola
are descended from East African ancestors that migrated during periods of dry
climate, and whether species restricted to the Angolan highlands are ancient
descendants of formerly widespread ancestors. Researchers will also test how
climate factors affect the degree to which malaria-causing parasites specialize
on particular lizard species. This project will also train students in field and
laboratory methods, as well as data dissemination and analysis. Public outreach
efforts will include development of short video documentaries and English- and
Portuguese-language guides to Angola's amphibians and reptiles.

Surveys of the Angolan herpetofauna will be informed by current knowledge gained
from the less than 8,000 specimens that currently exist in museums worldwide. A
total of six expeditions throughout Angola will be undertaken over a period of
three years, with each focusing on a region identified as poorly sampled based
on the provenance of extant museum specimens or as key sampling areas for
addressing taxonomic problems. Specimens obtained in survey efforts will be
subjected to collection and analysis of ecological, genetic, and morphological
data. Molecular systematic analyses of the genetic data will identify cryptic
species and targeted high-throughput sequencing will be used to test
biogeographic hypotheses. Morphological data collection will include external
morphological examination as well as high-resolution CT scanning to identify
diagnostic internal anatomical features of species under study. Ecological niche
modeling of species' ranges will be used to explore patterns of faunal turnover
and identify conservation priorities. All biodiversity data generated in the
course of the project, including point localities, DNA sequences, and CT scans,
will be made available to the broader scientific community. Results of the
research will be disseminated in numerous publications focused on taxonomic
revision, biogeography, morphological diversity, and/or parasite evolutionary
ecology of the Angolan herpetofauna.