* 1556325
* The Impact of Dynamically Changing Information on Decision Processes
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2015,07/31/2019
* Jennifer Trueblood, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Jeryl Mumpower
* 07/31/2019
* USD 365,532.00

In the course of everyday life, people encounter numerous situations in which
they must make decisions where the available information changes over time. The
simple act of changing lanes on a busy highway is an example. While at first,
the lane looks clear, the next moment another car may have pulled in from the
other side. In order to avoid a collision, the decision maker must be able to
analyze and respond to the new information. In the past, much of the research on
human decision-making has focused on decision-making when information is
constant and unchanging. This project takes a joint experimental and
computational modeling approach to study the influence of dynamic information on
decisions. The work has relevance in day to day life and offers potential
benefits for society. Past research has shown that people's decisions are often
sensitive to context (e.g., adding a worse option can make another option look
better than before). Advertisers can exploit such effects to promote products
that may or may not be good for people. This project investigates how dynamic
presentations of information can influence context effects and possibly de-bias
these decisions. This project also supports increasing diversity in the
quantitative social sciences through the promotion of gender equality in
mathematical psychology.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The research goal of this project
is to expand our understanding of how people integrate dynamically changing
information. Three key questions are addressed: (1) How quickly do people adapt
to new information? (2) How is new information integrated into the decision
process? (3) Are there commonalities in how decision makers respond to changed
information across different paradigms? Or, is adaptation and integration of new
information domain specific? To address these key questions, we will examine a
range of cognitive models that encode different hypotheses about underlying
decision processes. New approximate Bayesian computation methodologies will be
developed to integrate these cognitive models with data and compare models
encoding different hypotheses. Empirically, the project involves a series of new
experiments that will contribute significantly to what is known about how people
make decisions under changing information. These experiments span a wide range
of paradigms from simple perceptual tasks to high-level preferential choice
tasks involving multiple alternatives. Collectively, they will provide valuable
insight into how changing information affects decisions across different
domains.