* 1556968
* Plexin-A4 Signaling Regulates Diverse Cellular Morphologies in the Developing Nervous Ssystem
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2016,02/28/2022
* Tracy Tran, Rutgers University Newark
* Standard Grant
* Evan Balaban
* 02/28/2022
* USD 674,894.00

During development, neurons grow structures called axons and dendrites that are
specialized for carrying signals. The number of these structures and their
shapes give each neuron a particular appearance, and allow neurons to form
specific connections with each other that result in the nervous system's ability
to function properly. Currently, the ways in which particular combinations of
molecules regulate axon and dendrite morphology in the developing nervous system
of mammals are not well understood. Previous scientific work has found a family
of molecules called Semaphorins that control both axon and dendrite morphology
by binding to molecules on the outer membrane of nerve cells (called receptors).
This project will investigate what happens inside developing nerve cells after
Semaphorin molecules bind to their receptors, in order to provide invaluable new
details about the molecular control systems inside cells that ultimately
determine the proper formation of neuronal connections and signaling functions.
In addition to this scientific goal, this project will integrate research,
mentorship and education for minority high school, undergraduate and graduate
students through their joint involvement in STEM enrichment opportunities. Due
to a unique collaboration between the principal investigator and a scientist at
the Weizmann Institute of Science in Israel, an exchange program will also be
established to provide female scientists with broader exposure and training
experiences at both the national and international level. Data generated from
this study will be disseminated in the form of presentations at
national/international scientific meetings, and will be published in peer-
reviewed journals that can be accessed by other scientists and the general
public. New reagents and resources generated from this study will be freely
shared with the broader scientific community and will be sent to archiving
databases and repositories. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Neurons exhibit diverse
morphologies, and developmentally acquire the unique axonal and dendritic
arborizations necessary for their specific functions. Cell surface receptors are
known to control this complex process, mainly by eliciting attractive/permissive
or repulsive/inhibitory cellular responses in distinct neuronal populations.
However, the intracellular mechanisms underlying these multi-functional
responses to receptor-initiated signaling events are still poorly understood.
The Plexin-A4 receptor that binds the Semaphorin-3A ligand is known to collapse
growth cones on the axons of sensory neurons, while it promotes dendrite
formation in cortical neurons. The specific aims of the present project are to
1) elucidate the mechanistic logic underlying these disparate functions of the
Plexin-A4 receptor; and 2) to determine whether the Plexin-A4 cytoplasmic
domains activate similar or different intracellular signaling cascades during
axon collapse and dendrite formation. Novel mouse genetic tools generated for
this project will be used to determine which signaling cytoplasmic domains of
Plexin-A4 are required for these disparate functions. One candidate Plexin-A4
downstream interactor that may play key roles in both axon growth cone collapse
and dendrite elaboration will be examined following semaphorin activation of
Plexin-A4 signaling in sensory versus cortical neurons. High-throughput,
morphology based siRNA screening will be performed to identify additional novel
downstream components of the Plexin-A4 signaling cascade that regulate dendrite
and growth cone behaviors. The results will provide key mechanistic insights
about how neurons establish their unique cellular morphologies, explain how
Plexin-A4 regulates axon and dendrite behavior, and identify novel molecules in
the Semaphorin-3A signaling pathway that impact the formation and organization
of neuronal connections during nervous system development.