* 1556258
* RAPID: Synergistic Impacts of Corrosive Water and Interrupted Corrosion Control on Chemical/Microbiological Water Quality: Flint, MI
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2016
* Joseph Falkinham, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* William Cooper
* 08/31/2016
* USD 49,999.00

1556258&lt;br/&gt;Edwards&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Flint, MI, is currently suffering
from a "perfect storm" attributable to out-of-control corrosion of its aging
potable water distribution system. The hypothesis is that these circumstances
will also create severe chemical/biological health risks for Flint residents,
including elevated levels of lead and opportunistic premise plumbing pathogens
in drinking water. Preliminary data collected has revealed extraordinarily high
levels of lead, with average concentrations over 20 minutes of water use
exceeding 2,000 ppb (&gt; 200 times the World Health Organization allowable
levels for lead in potable water).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main objectives of
this research are to: 1) compare levels of chlorine, iron, fecal indicator
bacteria, opportunistic premise plumbing pathogens, and corrosion-inducing
bacteria present in water mains of a distribution system with uncontrolled
corrosion (Flint) versus surrounding cities/counties still using non-corrosive
water, 2) profile opportunistic premise plumbing pathogens occurrence in hot and
cold potable water systems at these same locations, and 3) determine if there is
evidence of elevated lead in Flint homes, and, if so, forensically determine the
links to iron corrosion in the distribution system. The elements of the "perfect
storm" currently include: under-appreciation of the role of corrosion control in
sustaining urban potable water systems and increased corrosion due to higher
chloride in Flint's new source water. The high rates of corrosion occurring in
Flint are releasing high levels of iron to water and consuming chlorine
disinfectant, which our most recent laboratory testing has indicated will
increase lead release to water and growth of opportunistic premise plumbing
pathogens in cold and hot water plumbing systems. The unfortunate but unique
opportunity offered by Flint's current situation, provides an ideal opportunity
to field test our recent discoveries regarding potentially adverse consequences
of iron corrosion on chemical/microbiological water quality at field rather than
laboratory scale. The general results and approach used herein can inform
residents and managers of other U.S. cities, who will soon be dealing with
similar problems associated with failing potable water infrastructure
exacerbated by increased chloride in water due to excessive use of road salt and
rising sea levels.