* 1556093
* CAREER: Catalytic C-C Bond Formation and Cleavage at Cobalt: Mechanism, Origins and Application
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2015,03/31/2019
* Wesley Bernskoetter, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* George Janini
* 03/31/2019
* USD 626,635.00

In this CAREER award funded by the Chemical Catalysis Program of the Chemistry
Division, Professor Wesley Bernskoetter from Brown University is investigating
the mechanistic pathways and origins of selective two-electron, carbon-carbon
bond transformations at earth abundant metals. In particular, strong field
cobalt complexes that mediate carbon-carbon bond reductive elimination and
oxidative addition reactions necessary for catalytic applications are being
targeted. These fundamental studies examine factors such as ligand field
strength, spin state interconversion, and coordination geometry, which may
influence the rate and selectivity of these transformations. This research will
further the utilization of base-metals as surrogates for platinum group metal
catalysis in reactions ranging from cross-coupling to carbocyanation. In concert
with the research endeavors, this project is enhancing the training of
undergraduate students through peer mentoring and tutorials as well as through a
discovery-based introduction to physical sciences for pre-college students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A variety of manufacturing industries rely on metal-based
catalysis to produce chemicals and materials in an energy efficient and cost-
effective manner. The past decades have witnessed a significant growth in the
number of important new catalytic reactions promoted by metal catalysts;
however, the metals employed in these discoveries have largely come from a group
of expensive, rare, and toxic metals. This research project seeks to develop
routes to accomplish some of the same important catalytic reactions using metals
that are much more abundant, less expensive, and potentially less toxic. Future
impacts of the work could include the development of more economical and
sustainable manufacturing technologies. This project will also include
professional training for the next generation of research scientists and
opportunities for pre-college students to discover the important place of
science in society.