* 1556442
* I-Corps: Materials for CO2 Capture
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2016
* Reza Foudazi, New Mexico State University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 08/31/2016
* USD 50,000.00

CO2 appears as a contaminant or impurity in gas mixtures in oil industries, and
because of the environmental impacts of CO2 emissions, lawmakers are beginning
to require the separation of CO2 from combustion products. Consequently, CO2
separation is an issue in power plants, heavy industries, hydrogen production,
natural gas sweetening, and air purification plants, among other industries.
However, the currently available options for CO2 separation are limited and
uneconomical. One contemporary method is absorption, a well-matured but energy-
intensive and expensive approach. For example, the benchmark for chemical
absorption based on monoethanolamine (MEA), a widely used absorbent, currently
imposes costs of over $70 per metric ton of CO2 due to the high cost of solvent
regeneration; overall, capturing CO2 emissions from power plants using
conventional technologies requires 20-30% of the plant's energy output. This
high cost is the single largest obstacle for the widespread industrial adoption
of CO2 capture technologies. Therefore, industry has an urgent need for the
development of high-performance and low-cost technologies and materials that
enable capital-efficient CO2 capture. A promising alternative process for CO2
capture is adsorption by porous materials: candidate adsorbents for CO2
separation should selectively adsorb CO2 from gas mixtures and have large
surface areas to accommodate CO2 molecules into the pores. Based on a novel,
suitable adsorbent recently developed by members of the proposed I-Corps team,
the aim of this project is to commercialize a new series of adsorbents (zeolitic
imidazolate frameworks, or ZIFs) that exhibit superior selectivity for
separating CO2 from other gases and that have significant surface area to store
it. This technology has been developed at a critical time for the CO2 capture
market. Strict emission standards have been imposed by the U.S. government and
several other countries and entities such as Canada, China, and the European
Union, but there is not yet an optimal or even existing product available to
meet the required needs. The proposed ZIF, with its outstanding capability for
high-selectivity CO2 capture, therefore provides a revolutionary solution at a
time of severe market need. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Metal-organic frameworks
(MOFs) are hybrid porous materials constructed from organic linkers and metal-
containing nodes. The typical specific surface areas - and hence, gas adsorption
capacities - that MOFs provide are an order of magnitude higher than those of
zeolites. ZIFs are a subfamily of MOFs. They have an M(Im)4 zeolite-type
framework in which tetrahedral elements, M, are transition metals bridged by
imidazolate (Im) moieties. ZIFs can adsorb CO2 emissions and store five times
more than existing adsorbents before requiring regeneration. For example, each
unit volume of ZIF-69 can store up to 83 times its volume in CO2. Moreover, ZIFs
can exhibit high chemical and thermal stability, and therefore can be robust
processes for CO2 capture. In this comprehensive study, we propose the synthesis
of a new subclass of ZIFs that, as indicated by Monte-Carlo-based simulation,
have a 100-fold-increased CO2 capture capacity compared to the isostructural
ZIFs. This increase in CO2 capture capacity was accompanied by only negligible
changes in capture capacity for CH4, H2, and N2; therefore, the uptake ratio of
CO2 to the other gases increased significantly, indicating very high selectivity
for CO2 separation in our novel ZIFs. This set of abilities could significantly
reduce the cost of carbon separation and capture at combustion-based power
plants, heavy industries, natural gas processing, and hydrogen production
companies.