* 1556094
* SBIR Phase II:  Ambient-Pressure Plasma Degassing for Low Cost Vacuum Glass
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2016,11/30/2018
* Peter Petit, V-Glass LLC
* Standard Grant
* Linda Molnar
* 11/30/2018
* USD 723,552.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is in significantly reducing global carbon
emissions using vacuum insulating glass. Vacuum glass is like a flat and
transparent thermos bottle for windows. Vacuum glass has three times less heat
loss than triple pane glass but costs no more to manufacture. This disruptive
value proposition will drive rapid market penetration, regardless of energy
price, and without the need for government subsidy. This project will produce
vacuum insulating glass that will enable R-10 windows, consistent with the goals
and schedule of the DOE Windows Roadmap. Immediate benefits include improved
occupant comfort and reduced heating bills without thermostat setback.
Furthermore, vacuum windows will be condensation-free and fog-free forever. The
potential impact is huge. Buildings represent 40% of total U.S. carbon
emissions. Near-universal use could reduce total U.S. energy use by 3% (about 3
quadrillion BTU/year), while adding no cost to building infrastructure. Germany,
Japan, Australia, China, and Russia have vacuum glass development programs; a
successful development under this project will ensure that the U.S. stays at the
scientific and technological forefront of this technology, and participates in a
large and growing
market.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
develop the use of plasma degassing to achieve a vacuum life beyond 20 years, a
condition for private investment. Without adequate degassing, moisture attached
to internal surfaces is trapped at the time of seal-off. Trapped moisture
molecules will later outgas, causing vacuum decay. Traditional high-temperature
bakeout is too costly for affordable vacuum glass. Bakeout takes hours, but
plasma degassing takes minutes. A German vacuum glass development effort tried
plasma degassing under vacuum, which is inefficient. In contrast, this project
will use atmospheric pressure plasma degassing, which is both faster and
cheaper. Building on lessons learned during the Phase I project, a plasma
treatment protocol will be developed to produce VIG panes as large as 25% of the
average residential window size. Working in parallel, Lawrence Berkeley National
Laboratory will work to optimize the insulating performance of the design to
enable an R-10 window for the DOE Windows Roadmap. Thereafter, an integrated
pilot line will be assembled, able to produce vacuum glass units suitable for
meaningful retrofit projects. Finally, the National Renewable Energy Laboratory
will conduct accelerated life testing. Independent life data, combined with a
successful operating pilot line, will help secure private investment for
commercialization.