* 1556037
* A Collaborative Leadership Development Workshop for Emerging Leaders in Science and Society; Bainbridge Island, WA - Jaunuary 14-18, 2016
* EHR,DGE
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2016
* Mark Frankel, American Association for the Advancement of Science
* Standard Grant
* John Weishampel
* 08/31/2016
* USD 49,954.00

Complex societal challenges require synthesis of expertise from many academic
disciplines and collaboration across multiple institutions. Graduate Ph.D.
programs that develop disciplinary experts do not generally provide the context
or training for applying narrow expertise in a broader context. This limitation
of traditional graduate education programs has created an opportunity to devise
programs to prepare PhD students for a range of careers in which STEM expertise
is needed for working in broad rather than highly specialized contexts. To
address this need and opportunity, the American Association for the Advancement
of Science (AAAS) is piloting a novel model of professional development for
graduate students called Emerging Leaders in Science & Society (ELISS), building
a network of collaborative STEM leaders by recruiting graduate students from
multiple campuses and disciplines to participate in a 15-month service
leadership program. These students collaborate with mentors and community
leaders to catalyze new connections between the university and broader community
and bring relevant research to bear on a timely challenge. This project is
supporting the 2016 ELISS Collaborative Leadership Workshop that will introduce
the knowledge, skills, and attitudes necessary for collaborative approaches to
problems that cross disciplines, institutions, and geographies. This workshop
will convene 22 graduate students from seven campuses for a 4.5-day workshop
that will build capacity in the context of planning a "think tank" project that
will bring relevant research to bear on pressing challenges in their
communities. Materials and results of the network will be shared with an ELISS
mentor network at participating campuses and through the AAAS network to make
collaborative leadership training available to graduate students more broadly.