* 1556300
* Collaborative Research: Risk and reward of high mutation rate: why large populations favor mutators while small populations inhibit them
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2016,02/28/2022
* Daniel Weinreich, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 02/28/2022
* USD 801,235.00

Genetic variation, the raw material for evolution, is ultimately generated by
mutation. The rate of mutation is influenced by particular genes, e.g. for DNA
replication and repair enzymes, which can themselves be altered by mutations.
Some variants of those genes, known as mutators, increase the genomic rate of
mutation. Even when mutators have no direct effect on survival and reproduction
of the individual, they can experience indirect selection via genetic linkage to
beneficial and deleterious mutations that occur elsewhere in the genome. This
proposal explores a novel hypothesis that population size may have an effect on
indirect selection experienced by mutators. Understanding the role of population
size and spatial structure in shaping the evolution of mutation rate may resolve
a longstanding empirical puzzle: why mutators frequently emerge in well-mixed
microbial laboratory populations, yet are only sporadically found in nature.
This project has important implications for understanding both natural and
directed genetic changes in basic, health, conservation, and agriculture
research. For example, this research may illuminate the role of mutators during
disease progression of cancer tumors. The investigators will also work directly
with K-12 teachers and students to improve their understanding of genetics and
scientific inquiry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Building on several of their previous
publications, the applicants present preliminary calculations and experimental
results suggesting that large populations enrich for mutators and small
populations inhibit them. In specific aim 1, the applicants propose to extend
their calculations by developing computer simulations and mathematical analysis
to model the evolution of mutators in complex and realistic scenarios, including
spatially structured environments. In specific aim 2 the applicants propose to
experimentally test their predictions in the laboratory by competing mutator and
non-mutator strains of Saccharomyces cerevisiae yeast. Competitions will be
monitored by fluorescence and conducted across a range of population sizes and
spatial structures.