* 1556884
* The Paradox of Coexistence: The Evolution of Ontogenetic Interactions
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2020
* David Reznick, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Betsy Von Holle
* 05/31/2020
* USD 996,888.00

How do two species coexist when each has a negative impact on the other? When a
new species invades a habitat, how can we predict whether it will coexist with
the native species, drive one or more of them extinct, or be driven to
extinction itself by the natives? This research will investigate whether
coexistence is an evolved property of species interactions. This will happen if
species that could not coexist on first contact can act as agents of natural
selection on each other's features in a way that enables them to evolve rapidly
to coexist. Understanding when and how this evolution occurs can have a profound
effect on our ability to predict the results of invasions, species re-stocking,
and habitat alteration on biodiversity. This research will engage undergraduate
researchers, as well as engaging the public with an outreach
website.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research focuses on one of the most
challenging of species interactions, which occurs when the adults of two species
compete with each other for food but each preys on juveniles of the other. This
research will examine how Hart's killifish and Trinidadian guppies, which
interact in this manner, somehow coexist in higher elevation streams in
Trinidad. Typically, guppies encounter killifish when guppies invade locations
that have held only killifish. This research exploits the fact that comparisons
can be made among killifish populations that coexist with guppies and
populations that have never encountered guppies, along with comparisons between
guppy populations that have not invaded killifish-only locations, populations
that have been introduced into those locations in recent experiments, and
populations that have coexisted with killifish for decades. The work includes
experiments in artificial streams that mix and match these populations to
examine how fitness of each species depends on the combinations of its own
genetic background and that of the other species. It also includes experiments
in natural pools that remove one species to measure its net effect on the other.
The researchers will also be documenting the fates of guppies and killifish in
experimental introductions to assess how much evolution is actually occurring.
There will also be laboratory experiments that pair individuals of different
body sizes within and among species to understand how competition and predation
depend on relative body sizes of interacting individuals. Finally, the research
will synthesize these results with computational models that describe the
ecological and evolutionary trajectories, which can be used as tools for
understanding the fate of biodiversity in a variety of contexts.