* 1556417
* IDBR: Type A - An unmanned aerial radio tracking system for monitoring small wildlife species
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2022
* Paul Flikkema, Northern Arizona University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 03/31/2022
* USD 601,895.00

An award is made to Northern Arizona University to develop a new Unmanned Aerial
Vehicle (UAV) system that integrates a radio telemetry receiver and data
processing system for efficient detection and localization of tiny wildlife
radio telemetry tags. The complete design, including parts, assembly plans,
software, and training modules for the UAV-­RT system will be open sourced for
widespread adoption of the technology, with dissemination and outreach by a user
community website and demonstrations at wildlife conferences. The UAV-­RT system
will also be disseminated to the public via media outreach, participation in
community events, and collaboration with the Upward Bound Program at NAU to
engage low-­ income rural high school students. The development goals of this
program target rapid and widespread adoption of the technology by the biological
and ecological research communities to enable new paradigms of field research
with small wildlife species. The technology will benefit both scientific
research and society by quickly improving the ability to understand the
geographic distributions and habitat needs of many animal
species.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current methods of locating and tracking small
tagged animals are hampered by the inaccessibility of their habitats. The high
costs, risk to human safety, and small sample sizes resulting from current radio
telemetry methods limit the understanding of the movement and behaviors of many
species. UAV-­based technologies promise to revolutionize a range of ecological
field study paradigms due to the ability of a sensing platform to fly in close
proximity to rough terrain at very low cost. The new UAV-­based radio telemetry
(UAV-­RT) system will dramatically improve wildlife tracking capability while
using inexpensive, commercially available radio tags. The system design will
reflect the unique needs of wildlife tracking applications, including easy
assembly and repair in the field and reduction of fire risk. A team of engineers
and wildlife ecologists from Northern Arizona University and Cornell University
will design and build the prototype system and conduct field deployments to
demonstrate and improve its performance.