* 1556109
* SBIR Phase II:  Collaborative Subsea Manipulation Interface
* TIP,TI
* 04/15/2016,12/31/2020
* Fredrik Ryden, BluHaptics Inc
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 12/31/2020
* USD 1,396,184.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project results from the
advancement of telerobotic control technology for subsea operations. As humans
deploy and maintain ever more complex underwater hardware, conduct subsea
scientific sampling and exploration and develop natural resources in hostile,
deep and remote locations, the need for ROVs (Remotely Operated Vehicles) is
increasing. ROVs have transitioned from basic transport and inspection tools to
mission critical machines for construction, maintenance and intervention.
Despite advances in sensing and machinery, significant challenges persist which
have plagued the industry with high costs and unacceptable downtime, as well as
safety risks. Limited situational awareness, data deluge and inadequate manual
operator controls combine to create high rates of equipment breakage,
unpredictable and inefficient task completion and high mission overhead. This
work is developing innovative products for 3-dimensional visual awareness and
computer assisted control systems for subsea teleoperated robots. Divers can be
replaced in hazardous situations by telerobots using this technology. The rate
of untoward incidents and their severity will be reduced for a large range of
subsea activities. Economic benefits include reduced costs, new employment
opportunities, competitive advantages and contributions to the national
technological infrastructure in subsea operations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase 2 project will address
fundamental challenges of connecting higher-dimensional data from remote
environments to intuitive controls. Its intellectual merit is the refinement of
a collaborative approach to command and control allowing ROV pilots to
communicate seamlessly with each other and the robotic system. This will be done
by developing several foundational innovations that, separately, enhance
capabilities (and may become individual products), and that together derive
immense value to the customer. These technologies are in the areas of: (1) Pilot
Interface/Control room software; (2) Sensor fusion and processing; (3) Task
assistance and workflow management; and (4) Manipulator and vehicle control.
Successful implementation of visualization, sensor fusion, control methods, and
haptic virtual fixtures serves as an excellent demonstration example of these
technologies. With these technologies combined into a single software platform
and integrated with a robotic system, increased performance, predictability, and
safety can be achieved in a way that surpasses what is currently possible for
purely automated or manual robotic systems. Although this work is focused on
underwater operations, it can also be extended to terrestrial applications, such
as industrial assembly, welding and machining, nuclear maintenance and robotic
dredging and excavation.