* 1556539
* Legal Integration and Rule of Law:  A Comparative Analysis
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2016,06/30/2019
* Susan Hirsch, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Reginald Sheehan
* 06/30/2019
* USD 149,955.00

The growing religious diversity in contemporary democracies makes the peaceful
integration of religious minorities a policy and humanitarian imperative, and
legal integration initiatives are an increasingly important avenue toward this
goal. Yet limited consideration of rule of law exists in studies of the legal
integration of religious minorities. Moreover, popular and scholarly accounts
tend to depict the intersection of state law and religious law as highly
oppositional and generative of contentious public debate. To better understand
how rule of law might underpin or emerge from legal integration initiatives,
this research explores the following questions: Do legal integration initiatives
promote or produce a particular orientation to rule of law? Do they enhance
perceptions of rule of law among minority and majority populations or otherwise
shape legal consciousness and, in particular, rule of law consciousness? In
short, do legal integration initiatives produce more discourse about, more
understanding of, and more opportunity for the rule of law? By building
theoretical understanding of the relationship between legal integration and rule
of law, the research has the potential to contribute to scholarly and policy
discussions of legal integration taking place
worldwide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research questions that guide this project
will be examined through a cross-continental comparative analysis of legal
integration initiatives, specifically the role played by family law in the
integration of religious minorities. Field-based research (including interviews,
discourse analysis, and focus groups) will be used to develop in-depth
ethnographic studies of legal integration initiatives in two sites, Malta and
Kenya. The proposed comparative analysis offers a comprehensive treatment of
legal integration initiatives through family law, including their dimensions,
variance, and effects, and two case studies illuminate these effects in detail,
including the experiences of religious minorities. Anticipated project outputs
include 1) scholarly publications and 2) a report on legal integration and
family law designed for policy audiences.