* 1556323
* SG: Phylogenomic analyses of goldenrods (Solidago, Asteraceae) using herbarium specimens
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2019
* James Beck, Wichita State University
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Weeks
* 03/31/2019
* USD 149,011.00

Goldenrods are a widespread, yet taxonomically challenging group of plants with
an estimated 150 species that mainly live in North America. Previous attempts to
determine how many species there are and how they are related have failed
because of the large number of potential species involved, extensive
hybridization among these species, and the seemingly recent evolutionary
divergence of species within the group. The limited understanding of goldenrod
biodiversity has slowed progress in plant evolutionary ecology. Goldenrods have
emerged as a critical study system for many important processes including
species formation, invasive species biology, nutrient cycling in soils, and
pollination biology. This research will reconstruct evolutionary relationships
in the group by using large amounts of DNA sequence data. Project participants,
including three undergraduate researchers, will sample tissue from specimens
representing all 150 putative goldenrod species under the guidance of a project
collaborator who is the global expert on goldenrod taxonomy. This approach will
allow the genealogy of this large genus to be reconstructed rapidly and
economically, and will provide an essential evolutionary framework for other
goldenrod researchers.

This project will employ an anchored phylogenomics approach to capture DNA
sequence data from 1200 locations across the genome of goldenrods (Solidago,
Asteraceae). Multiple samples from each species will be obtained exclusively
from herbarium specimens, which have been shown to harbor DNA of sufficient
quantity and quality for this genomic technique. Sampling will focus on the
>4200 Solidago herbarium specimens for which the research team and collaborators
have previously obtained a chromosome count, with the cytotype of additional
samples estimated using a highly-accurate microsatellite allele number approach.
Both diploids-only and combined diploid/polyploid species trees will be
reconstructed in order to establish both divergent and reticulate evolutionary
events. Phylogenetic, taxonomic, and methodological results stemming from this
research will be disseminated in scientific journals and more broadly through a
Solidago-focused website maintained by a project collaborator.