* 1556342
* I-Corps: Intraocular Pressure Sensor
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2016
* Frank Talke, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 08/31/2016
* USD 50,000.00

The objective of this project is to develop a novel optical-based pressure
sensor that allows for monitoring of intraocular pressure (IOP) on a frequent or
continuous basis. Elevated IOP continues to be the primary risk factor for
glaucoma due to its association with optic nerve damage and irreversible
blindness. For approximately 60 million people worldwide suffering from this
disease, careful monitoring and lowering of eye pressure are essential to
mitigating further loss of vision and optic nerve deterioration. Current
standard care, which involves routine IOP measurements during office visits, can
only provide snapshots of the patient's IOP profile. Such infrequent
measurements are inadequate to fully represent and characterize the patterns of
the disease. In order to improve glaucoma care and determine the effectiveness
of therapeutic treatments, there is a need for continuous and reliable IOP data
to better understand the relationship between elevated eye pressure and optic
nerve damage. Overall, the investigated technology will allow physicians to
optimize and personalize treatment plans for patients and provide researchers
with improved understanding of the natural history of
glaucoma.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scope of the project involves designing a
sensor for direct measurement of intraocular pressure on a regular or continuous
basis. The implantable device being developed utilizes changes in light
reflectance to sense pressure. A camera is used to capture the sensor response
to pressure variations and the obtained images can then be analyzed to determine
the pressure profile using image-processing algorithms. A direct correlation
between the sensor's optical appearance and applied pressure has been observed
in preliminary benchtop results. Resolution of the pressure reading as low as 1
mmHg has been obtained from initial experimentation in a simulated pressure
environment. With improved material selection for sensor components, it is
likely that the sensitivity of the sensor will continue to increase as the
design is optimized. The specific goals of the project include: (1)
miniaturization of the sensor to sub-millimeter size using MEMS
(microelectromechanical systems) fabrication, (2) evaluation of sensor
performance in ex-vivo models and (3) development of image-processing
algorithms. These goals involve an iterative design approach to optimize the
sensor design parameters and validate reliability, fabrication methods and
results through rigorous testing. Ultimately, with the ability to capture IOP
fluctuations, the technology developed in this project will contribute to
advancements in the diagnosis and treatment of glaucoma.