* 1556400
* Pa-231 and Th-230 in the Western North Atlantic: Disentangling the Effects of Boundary Scavenging and Ocean Circulation
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2019
* Olivier Marchal, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Simone Metz
* 03/31/2019
* USD 553,437.00

Boundary scavenging is the increased adsorption of radionuclides such as
thorium-230 (Th230) and protactinium-231 (Pa231) onto particles in ocean margin
areas; however, this process is not well understood. The sediment record of
231Pa/230Th has played a crucial role in interpreting past ocean circulation and
sediment transport, and therefore, it is important to constrain the boundary
scavenging component of these radionuclides. A researcher from Woods Hole
Oceanographic Institution plans to develop a numerical model of ocean
circulation, sediment transport, and particle scavenging to determine the
processes that control the distribution of these two radionuclides in the
Western North Atlantic. This study is particularly timely, since model
observations will be tested using data collected as part of the ongoing
GEOTRACES program. The results of this research will be incorporated into
coursework taught at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology-Woods Hole
Oceanographic Institution Joint Program in Oceanography, and the project will
involve a graduate student. The computational codes will be disseminated in such
a way that they can be useful to other researcher in the ocean sciences
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current understanding of boundary scavenging
processes on the cycling of particle-reactive elements in the ocean is poor.
Simple box models are generally used, which cannot account for the boundary
scavenging effects. This research will apply a high spatial resolution, regional
model, taking into account ocean circulation, sediment transport, and chemical
scavenging. The model will be used to constrain the processes that control
oceanic distributions of Th-230 and Pa-231, two radionuclides the ratios of
which have been extensively used in studying past ocean circulation. The model
will be compared to GEOTRACES data for comparison and to help refine the model,
placing the project in line with two of the overriding goals of the GEOTRACES
program. The results from this project will be widely applicable to global ocean
biogeochemical models that must account for boundary scavenging.