* 1556227
* Collaborative Proposal: Understanding Supreme Court Decision-making Through Conference Note Transcription
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2016,02/28/2019
* Timothy Johnson, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Brian Bornstein
* 02/28/2019
* USD 239,656.00

U.S. Supreme Court justices cast votes in complete secrecy during weekly
meetings, which only justices are allowed to attend. During these meetings, the
justices discuss, deliberate, and make initial decisions on cases they have
heard. The written notes the justices themselves take during these meetings
provide the only record of what has been said, and by whom. This project will
gather these notes from archives across the country, utilize the power of
citizen-scientists to transcribe them, and, most importantly, publish them
online in an archive of searchable text documents that will be widely
disseminated to researchers, teachers, journalists, lawyers, and the public.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The resulting data will include almost 45,000 digital
documents spanning 49 years, 6900 cases, and approximately 10 million words. To
transcribe these documents the project utilizes Zooniverse, an NSF funded web-
based platform that engages the public in crowd-sourced scientific research
projects. This project therefore directly involves the public in social
scientific research, which will enhance citizen understanding of social science
generally and of the inner workings of the U.S. Supreme Court specifically.
These data will be immediately accessible to a diverse range of audiences.
Researchers will be able to apply text analysis techniques to the computer-
readable text files. Lawyers, teachers, journalists, and the general public will
be able to easily use the online archive to explore and learn from what was said
by justices during their secret conference discussions. Ultimately, these data
will reveal the inner workings of the most secretive aspect of the federal
government?s most secretive institution, the U.S. Supreme Court. In so doing,
this project will fundamentally transform scholarly understanding of how the
Court sets national legal policy.