* 1556064
* SBIR Phase II:  Enzymatic Synthesis of Insect Pheromones
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/2016,01/31/2018
* Mike Chen, Provivi Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 01/31/2018
* USD 737,990.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research Phase II project is a breakthrough in insect control for the
agricultural industry. Provivi, Inc. intends to develop biosynthesis technology
for producing insect pheromones, with a dramatic reduction in the cost of goods
sold compared to existing syntheses. This will enable the use of pheromones
beyond niche markets such as fruits and nuts: the target market for Provivi?s
pheromone products are large acreage row crops. By introducing pheromone-based
control as an inexpensive alternative in these markets, we are meeting a growing
demand as conventional insecticides are becoming increasingly incapable of
protecting crops due to insect resistance, regulatory constraints, and
detrimental effects on beneficial insects. The societal and environmental
benefits of using pheromones are numerous: pheromones are considered the safest
possible insecticides with respect to human food consumption as well as
environmental impact. The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency has characterized
them as low risk. Our pheromone products will benefit consumers by creating a
safer food supply with lower chemical residues, growers by introducing an
effective and novel pest control solution and the environment by reducing the
chemical exposure to the ecosystem.

The objectives of this Phase II research project are to improve the selectivity
and productivity of our prototype biocatalyst to target commercial performance,
and to demonstrate pheromone synthesis from a cheap feedstock using this
biocatalyst. PRovivi's proprietary biocatalyst utilizes a novel monooxygenase to
catalyze a reaction not found in nature. The research product of this project
will expand the scientific knowledge for this class of biocatalysts.
Additionally, since this class of biocatalysts has not been optimized for
commercial viability for the specific reaction of interest, this research
program could provide impactful research learnings to achieve target commercial
performance. These learnings include but are not limited to changes in the
biocatalyst physiology, metabolic pathways and potential stress responses. This
research could provide valuable knowledge for both commercial and academic
biocatalysis research that utilize this class of biocatalysts.