* 1556080
* SBIR Phase II:  Footwear Fitting System for Online Retailers
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2016,09/30/2018
* Alex Villanueva, Eclo, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Linda Molnar
* 09/30/2018
* USD 912,514.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is in online retail industry for garments,
orthoses and prostheses. Each human body is unique, and the fitting approach is
often reduced to trying on products in-store or in-clinic. While this approach
works to some level, increasingly more purchases are made online, and a similar
trial and error method leads to a high return rate for retailers and a
significant time burden for customers. The fitting system Eclo is developing
will dramatically reduce the shipping costs for online retailers and increase
the convenience for online shoppers. Additionally, the virtual fitting
technology will help remove the dependency of companies on brick-and-mortar
stores and to reduce the cost of goods by half in some cases. Furthermore, the
technology proposed is the key for mass manufacturing of custom garment since
all geometric properties of the body will be readily using smartphones. The
databases of body scans could also be used for designing better products.
Lastly, the shoe scanner in this project requires a small scanner head design
for internal volumes; this technology can be tailored to making endoscopes for
medical or rescue applications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will prepare a virtual fitting system for commercial use in online shoe retail
and address a 25% return rate. The virtual fitting system will give online
shoppers a size recommendation based on scans of their feet. A foot scanner
allows users to obtain a 3D model of their feet by taking a video with a
smartphone. This process will be made simple, robust, and user-friendly with the
aid of augmented reality. Using smartphone sensors and strategically selecting
images from videos will make this process fast and accurate. A shoe scanner
scans the inside of shoes and will be upgraded to also scan the outside of
shoes. A fitting algorithm will be developed to detect important features on
feet and shoes to make size recommendations. A custom device will be made to
measure the material properties of shoes to give online shoppers a description
of comfort and support levels of shoes. Online shoppers will be given a size
recommendation and an in-depth fit description with visual graphics.