* 1556541
* Fate of foreign genes in experimental evolution
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2016,02/29/2020
* Mark Eiteman, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 02/29/2020
* USD 704,515.00

The transfer of DNA between bacteria in the environment has important
consequences. When DNA is passed from one organism to another in a fashion that
does not involve a parent providing genetic material to its offspring, the
process is called horizontal gene transfer (HGT). This type of inheritance
contributes significantly to human health, biotechnology, and fundamental
mechanisms of evolution. For example, HGT underlies the serious problem of
bacterial resistance to antibiotics. Beneficial aspects of HGT include the
ability of bacteria to detoxify pollutants. HGT also holds exciting promise for
applications that enable bacteria to produce useful compounds, including fuels.
This project focuses on the fate of foreign DNA after it has been transferred to
a new bacterial host. A novel experimental system will facilitate investigations
of HGT to improve understanding of how genetic material functions and adapts in
diverse contexts. These studies will be used to develop and improve techniques
that accelerate the success of biotechnology applications. The researchers have
a successful history of training students at all levels and in enhancing
diversity and inclusiveness in the scientific community, including training of
students with disabilities. This project will be used to augment such
activities. Furthermore, this project involves collaborations with researchers
at the National Renewable Energy Lab to develop applications in bioenergy
production. Training opportunities will enable students to visit and conduct
research at this national laboratory.

An accelerated approach to experimental evolution will be used to follow the
fate of foreign genes after their insertion into the chromosome of a soil
bacterium, Acinetobacter baylyi. These genes will be amplified in a tandem array
to enable copy number of the repeated segment (amplicon) to increase or decrease
spontaneously. This process of expansion and contraction allows evolution of
rudimentary control of the expression of newly acquired genes. This experimental
system mimics the natural interplay between HGT and gene amplification. Gene
dosage can increase a weak but beneficial function provided by foreign DNA. As
mutations accrue within the amplicons, gene copies that are less fit will be
lost and alleles that are more fit may increase via selection. This project
exploits gene amplification to accelerate the evolutionary process so that gene
divergence can be the focus of experimental study. Additional studies will alter
the genetic content of the foreign DNA, changing synonymous codon usage, G+C
content and chromosomal location. It will then be possible to test how these
alterations affect the amelioration and retention of the genes. Strains will be
grown under continuous culture in controlled environments. Copy number, mRNA,
protein and DNA sequence changes will be analyzed.