* 1556038
* STTR Phase II:  Advanced Hybrid Piezoelectric Energy Harvester
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2016,09/30/2018
* Tian-Bing Xu, PolyK Technologies, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 09/30/2018
* USD 755,860.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is to manufacture an
advanced hybrid energy harvester that can enable broad deployment of wireless
sensor networks. Self-sustainable uninterrupted low-cost power supply with small
size is in urgent need for internet of things, portable electric devices,
wireless sensor networks, infrastructure health monitoring, active control, and
battleground soldier support. Scavenging ambient energy from environment to
power these devices can eliminate the cost of replacing batteries, particularly
in remote environment. The hybrid energy harvesters developed in this project
will significantly improve the power output and response dynamic frequency,
therefore provide sufficient power to many such devices. The high power density
will also enable more frequent data acquisition and transmission of such sensor
networks, and promote more ubiquitous deployment of advanced sensor networks.
The automatic manufacturing process will enable their adoption by various
customers including internet of things.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business
Technology Transfer Research (STTR) Phase 2 project will develop manufacturing
processes for advanced hybrid energy harvesters. Although piezoelectric energy
harvesters have found broad applications, their power density and mechanical-
electrical conversion efficiency are still low, with values at microwatts to
milliwatt and &lt;10%, respectively since they primarily operate at the d31 mode
of the piezoelectric transducer and the mechanical impedance mismatch between
the vibration source and the harvesting device. The Phase I project successfully
demonstrated that the advanced hybrid energy harvesting device can provide
significantly higher power density at &gt; 100 mW and conversion efficiency at
&gt; 40% by using the more efficient d33 piezoelectric mode and with reduced
stiffness in a curved structure that can efficiently transfer the energy from
the vibration source to the active piezoelectric materials. The Phase II project
will be focused on developing low-cost innovative automatic manufacturing
process to enable their practical applications in commercial and industrial
market.