* 1556133
* SBIR Phase II:  Second Skin: 3D Microfluidics-Enabled Technology for Perspiration Management
* TIP,TI
* 03/15/2016,02/28/2018
* Siyuan Xing, Atacama, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 02/28/2018
* USD 766,078.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is in increasing the comfort of people, such as
athletes during their high intensity workouts and competitions, warehouse
workers who require protective clothing in hot and humid environments, and
safety (e.g. firemen and first responders) and military personnel who must
endure extreme working conditions. Our revolutionary moisture management
technology utilizes a novel 3D microfluidic transport principle to move sweat
from the skin to the outside of clothing, where it can drip away or be
controlled. Compared with conventional moisture wicking products which are based
on capillary absorption, our technology allows fabric and apparel products to
remain lightweight, always dry, highly breathable and never-saturated. ATACAMA?s
technology is designed to provide the wearer an improved regulation of body
temperature and comfort level during high intensity activities, contributing to
both performance and safety.

This project aims at solving the current problems of moisture-management
products that are inadequate when dealing with large amount of moisture (e.g.
sweat). In high sweat or high heat situations, apparel can become quickly
saturated with moisture, leading to a wet, heavy, sticky feeling that impacts
the performance of the wearer. Our proposed research aims to develop a broad
range of textiles that can continuously transport moisture, so that fabric
remain dry, breathable and lightweight during high intensity physical activities
in hot and humid environment. Utilizing the large-scale manufacturing process
developed in Phase I, ongoing research efforts will focus on the implementation
of the technology on a broad range of fabric materials (e.g.
polyester/polyurethane blends, cotton). As well, scientists at ATACAMA will
optimize designs of the fluidic channels based on body sweat mapping research
and will further enhance the robustness of the fluidic network. A series of
breakthrough textile products (e.g. fabrics and apparel) integrated with
optimized and robust 3D microfluidic-enabled moisture management technology will
result from the completion of Phase II.