* 1556767
* Collaborative research: A landscape resistance mapping approach to understanding species invasion patterns
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2021
* Rodney Dyer, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Standard Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 06/30/2021
* USD 472,167.00

Global changes to natural communities are threatening biodiversity and ecosystem
structure worldwide. Large numbers of species are transported globally through
international trade and human traffic. Non-native species invade myriad habitats
that include natural areas, agricultural landscapes, and timber forests,
altering natural ecological communities, reducing ecosystem services, and
causing economic losses that are estimated at up to billions of dollars
annually. Damages and costs increase further as invasive species spread across
larger regions. Understanding the conditions that facilitate and prevent range
expansion are critical to both predicting the spread of invasive species and
informing species conservation efforts. At species range edges, natural and
human-assisted movement interplay with local population dynamics in complex ways
to determine spread dynamics. This project centers on a fundamental question:
What are the drivers of species range expansion and how do multiple processes
interact to shape invasion patterns? Researchers will address this question by
studying the invasion pattern of an infamous North American invader, the gypsy
moth. The gypsy moth periodically defoliates large tracts of hardwood forest,
negatively affecting ecological communities, timber production, and recreational
activities. The gypsy moth invasion front stretches from Minnesota to North
Carolina and is expanding at an average rate of approximately 10 kilometers per
year. Knowledge gaps filled by this project will inform management and
conservation strategies to ultimately reduce the environmental and economic
costs of non-native invaders and maintain biodiversity in the United
States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers will use an exhaustive
spatiotemporal dataset that annually quantifies the 2000 km long range edge of
the gypsy moth. This project combines cutting-edge landscape genetics with
detailed analyses of local population dynamics to inform model simulations used
to elucidate how local population processes, landscape connectivity, and
anthropogenic movement of this species interact to drive spread patterns. The
proposed research tests hypotheses associated with three main objectives: 1)
quantify effects of landscape features and spatial covariance on the dynamics of
low-density populations, 2) use spatial genetic lineages to understand how
landscape features and human traffic patterns affect genetic structure and
movement, and 3) integrate demographic and genetic information to determine how
landscape features, human movement, and local population processes drive large-
scale invasion patterns by simulating invasion on layered maps of population
dynamic and movement parameters.