* 1556778
* SG: Collaborative Research: A genomic analysis of the impact of genetic divergence, and chromosomal rearrangement in introgression in replicate Fundulus hybrid zones
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2016,11/30/2017
* David Duvernell, Southern Illinois University at Edwardsville
* Standard Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 11/30/2017
* USD 120,264.00

Hybridization occurs when members of different species attempt to reproduce.
While hybridization has traditionally been viewed as normally inconsequential to
species integrity and the speciation process (hybrids were assumed to be
inviable for some reason), there is growing evidence it may actually be
beneficial and accelerate speciation under some circumstances. Understanding the
origins of biodiversity requires more thorough knowledge of mechanisms that may
alter the outcome of hybridization. One such mechanism is the rearrangement of
chromosomes that may change the genomic structure of species in a way that
limits the potential for hybridization. This project will study a model fish
species, topminnows, in order to understand how divergence and chromosomal
rearrangements may interact to determine the dynamics of naturally occurring
hybrid zones. The research will also be used in development of high school
curricula to teach evolutionary concepts and to provide research experiences for
undergraduates. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Topminnows in the Fundulus notatus species
complex have broadly overlapping ranges throughout much of the Mississippi River
basin and northern Gulf of Mexico drainages. Earlier work with these species
identified a number of replicate hybrid zones where the hybridizing species and
populations differ in levels of divergence and, in some cases, chromosome
number. The researchers will use modern genomic tools to quantify the amount of
hybridization and patterns of introgression in eight replicate hybrid zones.
Artificial breeding experiments in the laboratory will produce progeny that will
facilitate the production of genetic maps of hybridizing populations. Genetic
maps will elucidate spatial patterns of gene flow in replicate hybrid zones.
Experimental hybrid zone trials will also examine mate choice dynamics and the
viability of hybrid offspring.