* 1556294
* CAREER:Novel Nanoelectronic Reconfigurable Synaptic Memory Devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2015,12/31/2019
* Rashmi Jha, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 12/31/2019
* USD 394,231.00

Intellectual Merit: The ability to perform low-power, extreme-scale, robust
neuromorphic computing, inspired by a biological brain, has eluded the
scientific community for a long time. A major roadblock lies in achieving the
stringent power vs. area requirement for nanoelectronic devices to implement
biologically inspired computational paradigms manifested by biological synapses
on a silicon chip. The proposed research aims to develop ultra-low power
synaptic memory devices based on doped transition metal oxide that can mimic the
transient and steady-state dynamics of a biological synapse. This objective will
be accomplished by executing the specific aims including: (1) development of
synaptic memory devices based on doped HfO2 stacks, (2) development of
bidirectional selector diode, and (3) study of integrated synaptic crossbar
networks with Complementary Metal Oxide Semiconductor (CMOS) neurons as well as
biological neurons. This research will present a platform device technology to
achieve dynamic synaptic response in two-terminal devices fabricated using HfO2
by selective defect engineering through controlled doping, provide a fundamental
understanding of the characteristic of defects responsible for synaptic behavior
and device models, and extend the application of these device for synaptic
computation and learning in neural circuits, neurophysiology, and finally the
neuroengineering. The successful completion of this project will have
transformative impact towards enabling low-power extreme-scale computing
inspired by the massive parallelism of a biological-brain that has been
identified as a scientific grand challenge by the US Department of Energy and
National Academy of Engineering.

Broader Impacts: This project will strengthen collaborations with local small
businesses and Semiconductor companies, which will have a significant impact on
graduate and undergraduate training, workforce development, transition of
research into advanced technology product, and regional economic growth. On
educational front, the proposed research will train graduate and undergraduate
students in the areas of micro/nano-electronic device fabrication, electrical
testing, and data analysis and involve high-school girls in research through
summer internship programs. The research findings will be tightly integrated in
existing courses at graduate and undergraduate levels, and in the new course
titled 'NanoScience for Electronic Era' that will be developed. As a part of
this course, a teaching module on memristive devices will be developed with
hands-on experiments that will be implemented in relevant courses at the
University of Toledo and at Ohio Northern University which is primarily an
undergraduate program school, and also made available openly for use at the
other universities. The participation of women in engineering will be encouraged
through programs like 'Women in Science Day of Meeting (WISDOM)', and
participation of other underrepresented groups in engineering will be encouraged
by interacting with Toledo Public Schools and programs like 'Engineers for a
Day' and 'Excel' at the University of Toledo. To reach out to the
underrepresented groups of students (mostly Hispanic) in Ohio's rural
communities, the PI will continue her involvement in the course titled 'Using
Sustainable Engineering Activities to Teach Science', a distance-learning course
that provides professional development and training to the teachers in rural
Ohio who then teach mathematics and science to the children of migrant farm
workers in Ohio. The results will be promptly disseminated to the scientific
community through publications in peer-reviewed journals and conference
presentations, and presented to general community through educational TV channel
Plugged-In and YouTube videos.