* 1556421
* Thermal Landscapes and Animal Communication: Understanding the Role of Temperature in Female Spider Mate Choice
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2021
* Damian Elias, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Jodie Jawor
* 06/30/2021
* USD 510,000.00

Temperature is an important determinant of existence for "cold-blooded" animals
such as reptiles, frogs, insects and spiders which cannot regulate their own
temperature. These animals face daily, seasonal, and annual fluctuations in
temperature which will affect their ability to survive and find mates.
Communication between males and females is especially challenging in this light.
Successful communication requires coordination between them, yet male and female
behavior may change independently with the surrounding temperature. Because
communication is critical to the lives of most animals, understanding the
effects of temperature on communication is necessary to understand animals in
natural environments. Using a combination of laboratory and field studies, Dr.
Elias' project will evaluate how temperature in natural environments changes,
investigate how temperature affects different aspects of communication in "cold
blooded" spiders, and experimentally test how predicted shifts in temperature
will affect species interactions. Dr. Elias' project joins two existing fields
of study, thermal physiology and animal communication, to investigate a basic
yet under studied phenomenon common to most animals. This project will also
serve to predict potential impacts of changing environmental conditions on
animal communication. Dr. Elias will use his research to raise awareness on the
utility of basic research using a multimedia website, collaborations with
artists, and various social media outlets. In addition, Dr. Elias will design
video games aimed at educating the public in aspects related to animal
communication and behavioral theory.

There has recently been a shift in mate choice research towards approaches
integrating environmental heterogeneity. One aspect of environmental
heterogeneity that has been relatively ignored is thermal heterogeneity. This is
particularly interesting in the context of mating as temperature is known to
affect multiple aspects of these behaviors. The goal of Dr. Elias' project is to
integrate studies of thermal ecology with mating behavior to understand patterns
of selection in the field and predict impacts of environmental change. To
describe the ecological context, Dr. Elias will first quantify thermal
environments, species distributions, and make observations on species across
thermal habitats. Secondly, Dr. Elias will perform experiments to calculate
thermal performance curves for species in different thermal environments. Using
these data, Dr. Elias will test the hypothesis that thermal tolerances shape
community structure and perform mate choice studies across a range of
temperatures. This work will be the first to examine how communication dynamics
may change as a result of environmental change. Understanding selection
landscapes is a key goal in behavioral ecology, and Dr. Elias will be able to
address the role of temperature and temperature variation in shaping selection.
Finally, Dr. Elias will investigate the role of temperature on species
hybridization which has the potential to weaken species boundaries and hasten
extinction. This work will be one of the first to propose and test this
potential consequence of environmental change and as such be important in plans
to mitigate its effects.