* 1556563
* I-Corps Teams: Membrane Adsorbers for Biologics Purification
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2015,02/28/2017
* Scott Husson, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 02/28/2017
* USD 50,000.00

Rising rates of chronic conditions such as cancer and cardiovascular diseases
are driving the demand for biologic drugs used to treat them. Currently, there
are over 130 biologics approved for use in the US, with a market exceeding $140
B. Over 900 new biologics targeting more than 100 diseases are under
development. New product commercialization will require significant expansions
in production capacity and improvements in manufacturing flexibility to meet
future market demands. In addition, the emergence of biosimilars, biobetters,
and increasing competition will apply economic pressure on biomanufacturers to
innovate new drug manufacturing technologies to lower production costs.
Innovations are especially needed in downstream drug purification, which often
limits the production capacity and contributes 30-40% of the overall
manufacturing cost. This I-Corps team is developing a platform (PuriTM
membranes) to dramatically enhance production capacity and flexibility in the
downstream purification of biologic drugs. The disposable nature of the PuriTM
platform is expected to reduce biomanufacturing production costs significantly.

This project is expected to accelerate market entry of PuriTM membrane
innovations by developing the entrepreneurial knowledge and skills of the
I-Corps team that are needed to translate the innovation from the academic
laboratory to the industry sector. PuriTM adsorptive membrane modules are
single-use membrane products that purify biologic drugs. They are characterized
by high drug binding capacity, high selectivity, and high tolerance to feedstock
conditions. Laboratory research has demonstrated that the firstgeneration PuriTM
membranes specifically address all of the known customer pain points. Through
customer interviews and use of the business model canvas, the team will test the
proposition that these single-use adsorptive membrane innovations will derive
commercial value from their abilities to increase the production capacity and
flexibility of biomanufacturing facilities and lower the manufacturing cost of
biologics. Identification of early acceptance customers also is expected as an
outcome of the project. The team will develop alpha prototypes and work closely
with potential customers on external validation of these prototypes. Completion
of external validation will provide additional opportunities for the team to
understand customer needs and test assumptions about the product utility and
design. It also will provide vital data to attract external investors and new
customers. A validated business plan and minimum viable products are expected at
the end of the I-Corps program.