* 1556313
* Collaborative Research: IDBR: Type B: An Open-Source Radio Frequency Identification System for Animal Monitoring
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2020
* Eli Bridge, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 09/30/2020
* USD 344,148.00

An award is made to the University of Oklahoma to develop a highly adaptable,
low-cost Radio Frequency Identification (RFID) system for monitoring animals.
RFID refers to a form of simple, short-distance wireless communication between
small uniquely-identifiable transponder tags and an interrogator or reader. When
a tag is attached to an animal, strategically placed readers can detect and
record an animal's presence at key locations such as nests and food sources. The
new RFID system is based on an existing design currently in use by dozens of
researchers around the world that has enabled several new insights into the
ecology and behavior of both free-living and lab animals. With improvements to
this existing system, the research and development team will create a device
that is highly customizable yet accessible to non-engineers. More specific
improvements include capacity for wireless data transfer, accommodations for a
wide array of additional sensors and actuators that can greatly expand the
utility of the RFID system, and an online tool for designing customized antenna
coils to meet specific user needs. The RFID system will be made available to
users through multiple avenues, including online instructions, user-assembled
reader kits, and fully constructed units, all of which will cost less than $50
per unit. With these low-cost self-assembly options, the RFID system will serve
not only as a data collection tool for biologists but also as a vehicle for STEM
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the development of this instrument changes to
the existing RFID hardware will include a more sophisticated microcontroller and
a new RFID integrated circuit (to replace a device that has become obsolete).
The firmware for the device will be rewritten and transferred from a proprietary
language (Picbasic Pro) to Energia, which is a freely available open-source
development environment based on the same framework used in many hobbyist
electronic systems, like Arduino. Data output from the RFID reader will be
configured for direct uploading into the ETAG database, which has been
established by the development team with funding from the Advances in Biological
Informatics program at NSF. The project will support several student-led
projects that involve both testing the RFID system and creating accessory
devices, such as electronic balances or infrared motion detectors, that can
interface with the RFID system to provide additional data-collection
capabilities. Ultimately, the new system will eliminate all barriers to the use
of RFID technology in biological research. The sum total of the system
improvements will give rise to an instrument that is affordable in the context
virtually any serious research effort, customizable to an extent that allows for
a wide range of field and lab deployment scenarios, accommodating to additional
forms of data collection, and accessible to non-engineers such that biologists
are able to establish systems themselves.