* 1556779
* NSFDEB-NERC: Collaborative Research: Informing population models with evolutionary theory to infer species' conservation status
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2016,10/31/2019
* Holly Kindsvater, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 10/31/2019
* USD 777,482.00

Marine species are very hard to census. This is especially true of large, high
value fishes that are vulnerable to overfishing because of their biology. For
example, one third of shark and ray species are known to have declined in recent
history, but it is unknown whether most of the remaining two-thirds are also
declining, or if they are stable. Likewise, population sizes of predatory fishes
such as groupers and tuna have decreased substantially due to intense fishing,
yet little is known about the extent of decline and risk of extinction for some
of these species. This project uses the evolutionary history of well-studied
related species to provide estimates of basic demographic properties of little-
studied species of fisheries and conservation importance. This knowledge
provides important information to guide management efforts, such as limits on
catch and trade, until more direct research can be carried out. The researchers
will also engage in educational outreach on mathematical biology for
undergraduates and on marine biodiversity science for the general public.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scientists often have some knowledge of individual traits
such as reproductive behavior, lifespan, and metabolic rates of many related
fish species, even in the absence of population-level information. Evolutionary
theory can predict the co-evolution of these unique trait combinations of
various groups. This theory can be used to infer demographic rates and project
species' status, but previous efforts have not incorporated the unique details
of each species' biology. This project will develop comprehensive theory linking
the evolution of these traits to species status projections for tunas, groupers,
and sharks and rays. Modern statistical methods will allow information from
models of data-rich species, which have formal assessments, to be shared with
poorly studied species in similar habitats, or with relatives. With this new
understanding of population trajectories, the team will produce recommendations
for use by organizations like the International Union for Conservation of
Nature, as well as managers and scientists.