* 1556643
* Collaborative Research: Bioavailabilty of soil phosphorus in tropical forest soils: Is slowly cycling phosphorus accessible to plants and soil biota?
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2022
* Cory Cleveland, University of Montana
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 07/31/2022
* USD 399,759.00

Rates of plant growth in tropical forests are among the highest on earth. As
they grow, tropical plants take up large amounts of carbon dioxide from the
atmosphere during photosynthesis, and store a substantial proportion of that
carbon in their biomass and ultimately in soil. In addition, there is some
evidence that plant growth will accelerate in the future with rising atmospheric
CO2 concentrations, taking up and storing more carbon. However, it is unclear
whether other plant nutrients are sufficiently plentiful in tropical forest
soils to allow plants to grow as much as is predicted. In the tropics, soil
phosphorus (P) concentrations are generally very low and such low P
concentrations could strongly limit plant growth in the future. This research
will explore how plants acquire phosphorus from soil, and which forms of
phosphorus are actually accessible to plants. Experiments will explore how plant
roots, bacteria and fungi "mine" nutrients from the soil, and will identify the
specific microorganisms capable of accessing soil P. This work will be among the
first to explore relationships between tree growth and different forms of soil
P, it will improve understanding of the controls on biological P availability,
and it will shed light on how pervasive P limitation is to plant growth in
tropical soils. In addition, the project will enhance our ability to predict
future rates of tropical forest productivity and could lead to improvements in
how soil fertility is managed in tropical agricultural soils. Finally, the
research will involve student training as well as promoting interaction between
scientists and environmental journalists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Knowledge of the
true extent of nutrient limitation of plant primary production in the tropics
remains incomplete, in large part reflecting our poor understanding of what
forms of soil P are actually available to biological organisms. The proposed
research will address the following overarching question: Are forms of soil
phosphorus (P) that have traditionally been considered biologically unavailable
actually available to plants and microorganisms? In the highly-weathered soils
that dominate the lowland tropics, only a small fraction of total soil P resides
in forms that are traditionally considered biologically available; the vast
majority resides in more chemically and/or physically protected P pools that are
presumed to be unavailable to plants and soil microbes. However, if plants and
soil microbes can effectively overcome low soil P availability by accessing
these recalcitrant forms of P that, until now, have been thought to be
unavailable, then the extent of P limitation in the tropics could be less than
current biogeochemical theory predicts. The proposed research includes a set of
field, laboratory and greenhouse experiments conducted in a set of tropical
forest sites in Panama. Together, the planned experiments have been designed to
test the working hypothesis that P forms that have traditionally been viewed as
unavailable are actually biologically available. Building on the experimental
data, the research will culminate in a set of synthesis and modeling activities
designed to explore how variations in soil P availability may affect future
rates of NPP at ecosystem to global scales.