* 1556241
* IDBR: TYPE A; Optical Microresonators as Platforms for Probing Single Metalloproteins in Action
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2019
* Randall Goldsmith, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 03/31/2019
* USD 656,962.00

An award is made to the University of Wisconsin Madison to enable measurements
on individual metal-containing enzymes. The remarkable catalytic activities of
enzymes frequently derive from the properties of a metal atom within the enzyme.
Typically, studies of how these metalloenzymes function rely on trapping the
enzyme in different intermediate states, a process that cannot always reveal the
entire enzyme mechanism. Single-molecule measurements, i.e. studies performed on
one molecule at a time, are powerful tools for understanding function because
they allow one to acquire "molecular movies" of chemical behavior. However,
metalloenzymes cannot be examined by state-of-the-art single-molecule
techniques, necessitating the development of a new instrument. The use of
optical microresonators, devices that confine light to a small microvolume, will
enable the measurement of time-resolved behavior and deduce the mechanism of an
individual working metalloenzyme. The results of this work will be a new tool
capable of providing unique information on a broad range of enzymes critical for
biological and industrially relevant chemical transformations. Simultaneously,
the educational experience for participating students will be highly
multidisciplinary, incorporating elements of photonics, instrumentation,
nanofabrication, and bioinorganic chemistry. This project will also include the
development of biophotonics teaching modules, participation of undergraduate
students under-represented in STEM fields, and undergraduate students at a PUI.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This purpose of this project is to develop a spectrometer
capable of measuring time-resolved electronic absorption spectra of individual
biomolecules. The proposed research will benefit the large scientific community
studying metalloenzymes. Enzymes are the biological machines that support nearly
all metabolic activity in biological organisms. At the heart of nearly half of
these machines is a metal ion that facilitates protein function. These
metalloenzymes go through multiple individual kinetic steps in order to carry
out their function, including electron transfer events and ligand binding and
dissociation. It is of immense mechanistic interest to establish the nature and
timescale of these individual events in the enzyme's catalytic cycle. Single-
molecule measurements offer the unique ability to construct 'molecular movies'
of enzymes performing their natural functions. These measurements are extremely
powerful for enabling a greater understanding of how enzymes function since each
step can potentially be observed. However, even as modern single-molecule
techniques have enabled critical details of many enzymes to be unraveled,
current methods for performing measurements on individual molecules fail to
provide useful information about the metal site in metalloenzymes, essentially
remaining blind to the most important mechanistic details of metalloenzyme mode
of operation. This proposal concerns the development of a new technique to allow
single-molecule investigation of the active sites of metalloenzymes.
Specifically, we will develop optical microresonators as highly sensitive
thermometers capable of measuring the heat released from a single photoexcited
biomolecule. Once this heat is quantified, one can infer how much light was
absorbed, allowing the construction of the electronic absorption spectrum of the
active site. This spectrum, which varies as a function of time as the
metalloenzyme carries out its function, contains a tremendous amount of
information about the changing nature of the metal site, including its redox
state and coordination environment. This new technique will open up a
substantial fraction of a critical biomolecule class to be probed at the single
molecule level, enabling new opportunities for a large community of researchers.