* 1556041
* SBIR Phase II:  Production of Bio-adhesive from Animal Waste
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2019
* Daniel Oldham, Bio-Adhesive Alliance Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 04/30/2019
* USD 337,500.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will develop a
technology to transform swine manure into sustainable alternatives for
petroleum-based adhesives, with a first opportunity in the asphalt market. This
project builds on a successful Phase I effort as well as a prior Innovation
Corps award. The major socio-economic impact of the technology will be in rural
areas, as it will allow pig farmers to alleviate the burden of manure management
and create a new revenue stream. This project also offers a novel approach to
develop low-cost, durable, and eco-friendly construction adhesives, reduce the
cost associated with manure management and lagoon maintenance, create new
manufacturing and engineering jobs, and reduce our dependence on petroleum
resources. Current practices for handling manure release carbon to the
atmosphere, either from manure storage or anaerobic digestion of manure. In
contrast, the proposed technology sequesters carbon in bio-adhesives, while
passing nutrients to the effluents, bio-char, and grey water, which can then be
used as fertilizer. The Phase I research results have shown that bio-adhesive is
more durable, lower in cost ($0.50/gallon, as compared with $2.00/gallon) and
more eco-friendly (lower volatile organic compound levels) than many petroleum-
based adhesives.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The core technology to be developed
further in this effort uses thermochemical liquefaction to convert swine manure
to bio-oil, followed by the polymerization of bio-oil to produce bio-adhesives.
This technology will eventually enable use of the six billion gallons of swine
manure that are generated annually in the U.S. to supply about 88 million
barrels of bio-adhesive. As a result of the Phase I effort, a study of the
effects of heating rate on the yield and quality of bio-adhesive was completed;
this in turn, helped ensure that the conversion process takes place
successfully, thereby addressing one of the main scale-up challenges. The
resulting data were used as an input for the design of a pilot bio-reactor,
including central heaters and a heat exchanger. After the design phase, the team
began the fabrication and assembly of this bio-reactor, and followed up with
multiple trials. In the Phase II project, building on these successful trials,
we will complete the troubleshooting of the bio-reactor while finalizing the
design and construction of the oil separation and polymerization column, and
sampling valves. These items will permit a fully-realized pilot plant by the end
of this project.