* 1556885
* Collaborative Research: The role of species dominance in mediating biodiversity-ecosystem function relationships across spatial scales
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2021
* Neal Williams, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 04/30/2021
* USD 35,637.00

Ecosystem services, or the benefits that nature delivers to people, include many
functions essential to life on earth such as carbon storage, water purification,
and pollination. Two decades of ecological experiments and theory have clearly
demonstrated that biodiversity plays an important role in ecosystem functioning,
such that biological communities containing more species have higher levels of
ecosystem function. However, virtually all of this research has been conducted
at small scales and under experimentally controlled conditions that may not
represent real-world ecosystems. This project will bridge the gap between the
extensive knowledge scientists have developed about the biodiversity-ecosystem
function relationship at smaller experimental scales, and the largely unknown
role of biodiversity in driving ecosystem services at the scale of real-world
landscapes. The researchers will study the pollination delivered to native
wildflowers by wild insect pollinators, to determine how many pollinator species
are required to provide sufficient pollination to all study sites as spatial
scale increases from a single plant community to an entire landscape.
Specifically, they will test contrasting predictions about how the number of
species required to provide adequate ecosystem services in the real world could
be either more, or fewer, than that found in experiments. The results of this
study will have important applications for the management of ecosystem services
as well as for biodiversity conservation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This will be the
first study to investigate how two well-known features of communities, turnover
in species composition across space, and species dominance (the prevalence of a
few common species and many rare ones), jointly determine the importance of
biodiversity to ecosystem services at real-world scales. In order to measure
real-world complexity while simultaneously controlling real-world noise, the
researchers will use experimental, multi-species arrays of native plants placed
throughout a 1600 km2 area as a standardized method for sampling wild pollinator
communities and the pollination function they provide. Rarefaction models will
be used to determine how the number of pollinator species that are important to
pollination changes with increasing spatial scale, and null models will be used
to remove, and thus quantify, the effect of dominance relative to that of
species turnover.