* 1556327
* Collaborative Research: Evolution and Systematics of the Neotropical Plant Clade of Schefflera (Araliaceae)
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2024
* Porter Lowry, Missouri Botanical Garden
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Balakrishnan
* 07/31/2024
* USD 491,774.00

A major goal of botanists is to describe and name the vast diversity of plant
species found on our planet and to understand how, when, and where plants
evolved. This is particularly challenging for groups with very large numbers of
species, especially when they are difficult to observe because they grow in hard
to reach places. Tropical tree genera with many species are among the most
under-studied plant groups, creating a significant gap in our knowledge. To
overcome this gap, an efficient and effective strategy is needed to discover,
describe, understand and conserve this large and important part of the world's
biodiversity. This research project will develop a streamlined strategy, using
the genus Schefflera (a member of the ivy family, Araliaceae) in tropical
America as a model group. More than 400 species of Schefflera occur in this vast
region, especially in the very mountainous areas of the northern Andes. Many of
these species have only been seen by scientists once or a few times, and almost
half do not yet have scientific names. Moreover, very few tools are available to
recognize and identify these ecologically important plants, and we know almost
nothing about how they evolved into so many different forms, or how they were
able to adapt to the wide range of habitats. The strategy of this study, which
includes field work in four Andean countries (Bolivia, Colombia, Ecuador and
Peru), aims to improve our understanding of these evolutionary processes. It
will also focus on identifying and naming the species that occur in a limited
number of places and are most threatened with extinction (mostly by tropical
deforestation) so that they can be targeted by conservation efforts. The
information generated by the project will be made available on-line to a wide
range of users, both within and beyond the scientific community. To help develop
the next generation of plant systematists, 12 undergraduate students will be
given an opportunity to learn about this important yet under-appreciated branch
of botany through two 6-week summer internship programs at the Missouri and New
York Botanical Gardens, and 12 more advanced students in botany or biology will
participate in a tropical field botany program, joining the project scientists
to gain hands-on experience during field work in South
America.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will involve constructing phylogenies
for the species of Andean Schefflera using DNA-based evidence, taking advantage
of recent advances in technology, especially high-throughput approaches to DNA
sequencing. The phylogenies will provide a greater understanding of the major
lineages of these 400+ species, which in turn will provide a framework for
classifying and naming them, and for understanding their evolutionary and
geographic relationships. A streamlined 'green-listing' approach to assessing
conservation status of the species that are most likely to be threatened will
inform priorities for naming and conserving new and rare Andean members of
Schefflera. Intensive herbarium studies will provide sources of geographic,
morphological, and molecular data, and will guide field work in the countries of
the central and northern Andes, targeting sites with the highest concentration
of species that remain unsampled, and focusing on areas in southern Ecuador and
northern Peru where the group appears to have undergone exceptional
diversification. Time-dated phylogenies will be used to explore biogeographic
scenarios and to test for correlations among morphology, ecology, geography and
evolutionary history, providing insights into the evolution of plant diversity
in the Andes. These studies will be conducted with the collaboration of local
botanists and students from each of the four South American countries where
field work will be done. This will promote a long-term network of international
researchers capable of sustaining the long-term goals of fully documenting and
understanding the tremendous diversity of Schefflera in the tropical Andes.